A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/54/136
10 February 2000

Fifty-fourth session
Agenda item 109
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/54/598 and Corr.1 and 2)]
54/136. United Nations Development Fund for Women
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 39/125 of 14 December 1984, in which it decided to make the United Nations
Development Fund for Women a separate and identifiable entity in autonomous association with the United
Nations Development Programme, as well as its resolution 52/94 of 12 December 1997,
Recalling also the Platform for Action adopted by the Fourth World Conference on Women,1 which
recognizes the special role of the Fund in the promotion of the empowerment of women,
Noting the importance of the work of the Consultative Committee on the United Nations Development
Fund for Women in policy and programme directions, as stipulated in the annex to resolution 39/125,
Welcoming the contributions the Fund has made in supporting initiatives of Member States, United
Nations organizations and non-governmental organizations to formulate and implement activities that
promote gender equality and the empowerment of women, concentrating on three thematic areas:
strengthening women’s economic capacity, engendering governance and leadership and promoting women’s
human rights and the elimination of all forms of violence against women,

1

Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.

00 27139

/...

A/RES/54/136
Page 2

1. Takes note with appreciation of the note by the Secretary-General on the activities of the United
Nations Development Fund for Women;2
2. Emphasizes the important work that the Fund undertakes within the framework of the Platform for
Action of the Fourth World Conference on Women 1 and in supporting the implementation of
recommendations related to the empowerment of women and gender mainstreaming from other United
Nations world conferences, such as the World Conference on Human Rights, held at Vienna from 14 to
25 June 1993, the International Conference on Population and Development, held at Cairo from 5 to
13 September 1994, and the World Summit for Social Development, held at Copenhagen from 6 to 12 March
1995;
3. Notes the progress achieved in the implementation of the Fund’s strategy and business plan,
1997–1999, adopted in 1997;
4. Encourages the Fund to cooperate with other partners of the United Nations system, Governments
and non-governmental organizations in assessment activities at all levels that will contribute to the five-year
review of the Platform for Action, including efforts to improve capacity in the collection and dissemination
of sex-disaggregated data and accountability mechanisms at the country level;
5. Commends the Fund for its leadership role in convening United Nations inter-agency campaigns
to end violence against women in Latin America and the Caribbean, Africa and Asia and the Pacific
throughout 1998 and continuing in 1999 and beyond, and the United Nations inter-agency global
videoconference entitled “A World Free of Violence against Women”, which was held on 8 March 1999;
6. Recognizes the progress achieved by the Fund in increasing the size and impact of its Trust Fund
in Support of Action to Eliminate Violence against Women and the importance of incorporating a learning
component to extract and share good practices in eliminating violence against women, and reiterates the call
to Governments, non-governmental organizations and the public and private sectors to consider contributing
or increasing contributions to the Trust Fund;3
7. Encourages the Fund to continue to assist Governments in implementing the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women4 in order to advance gender equality at all levels,
including by reinforcing the cooperation between Governments and civil society, especially women’s
organizations;
8. Requests the Fund, in conjunction with other relevant United Nations agencies, to continue the
activities that it is undertaking to raise awareness about and strengthen the capacities of women in situations
of armed conflict and to contribute to promoting the integration of a gender perspective into all peacebuilding activities, including through support to the full and equal participation of women at all levels, in
all forums;

2
3
4

A/54/225.
See Economic and Social Council resolution 1998/12, sect. I.B.
Resolution 34/180, annex.
/...

A/RES/54/136
Page 3

9. Also requests the Fund to continue its efforts to mainstream a gender perspective in United Nations
operational activities, in particular through its leadership of the Sub-Group on Gender of the United Nations
Development Group and its convening of United Nations inter-agency thematic groups on gender to support
the resident coordinator system;
10. Commends the Fund and the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations
Population Fund and the United Nations Volunteers as its collaborating partners for developing innovative
mechanisms to expand the gender expertise available to the United Nations resident coordinator system at
the country level, and encourages other United Nations organizations to develop similar initiatives that make
use of the expertise and experience of the Fund in gender mainstreaming and the empowerment of women;
11. Recognizes that the Fund has been able to secure increased contributions for its work, and expresses
its appreciation to Member States and private organizations, including the United Nations Foundation, and
other foundations, whose increased contributions demonstrate their commitment to the issues on which the
Fund is working;
12. Urges Member States, non-governmental organizations and members of the private sector that have
contributed to the Fund to continue to contribute and to consider increasing their financial contributions, and
invites others to consider contributing to the Fund.
83rd plenary meeting
17 December 1999
