S/PV.8192

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8192nd meeting

Tuesday, 27 February 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Alotaibi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kuwait)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Alemu
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Temenov
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Mr. Clay
Ms. French

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Special report of the Secretary-General on the renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (S/2018/143)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-05347 (E)
*1805347*

S/PV.8192

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Special report of the Secretary-General on the
renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (S/2018/143)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of South Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Bintou
Keita, Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations; and His Excellency Mr. Ismail Wais,
Intergovernmental Authority on Development Special
Envoy for South Sudan.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/143, which contains the special report
of the Secretary-General on the renewal of the mandate
of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan.
I now give the floor to Ms. Keita.

27/02/2018

and DFS, as well as agencies, funds and programmes,
and was led by an independent expert, Mr. Kevin
Kennedy, former Under-Secretary-General for the
United Nations Department of Safety and Security.
The team initially undertook a conflict analysis
and consultations at United Nations Headquarters
before proceeding to South Sudan, where it received
detailed briefings and held extensive consultations
with UNMISS and the United Nations country team,
the Transitional Government of National Unity,
the diplomatic community and non-governmental
organizations. The team also visited Addis Ababa and
engaged with regional partners and opposition figures.
The special report therefore comprises the main
findings of the review team and the observations and
recommendations of the Secretary-General, to feed into
deliberations on the renewal of the UNMISS mandate.
UNMISS was established in 2011 as a capacitybuilding tool to assist a Government that lacked
the capability to deliver services to its people.
However, following the December 2013 outbreak of
violence, UNMISS evolved into a Mission in which
the protection of civilians, including from national
security institutions, has become the main focus.
This requirement unfortunately remains valid. The
situation in South Sudan continues to remain a cause
for grave concern for everyone. Tens of thousands of
civilians are estimated to have been killed since the
conflict began in December 2013. More than 4 million
have been displaced, half of whom are now refugees in
neighbouring countries.

Ms. Keita: Mr. President, I thank you for the
opportunity to brief the Security Council. Special Envoys
Wais and Haysom as well as Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Shearer will brief on the peace
process and the situation on the ground, respectively.
I will thus focus my remarks on the special report of
the Secretary-General on the review and renewal of
the mandate of United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) (S/2018/143).

As documented once again by the Human Rights
Council Commission of Inquiry, which published
its report last Friday, human rights violations and
abuses, including horrific incidents of sexual violence,
have reached alarming levels, and impunity for these
crimes remains the norm. Moreover, more than
200,000 internally displaced persons continue to be
protected on UNMISS bases, with the assistance of
humanitarian partners.

In line with the Secretary-General’s agenda for
reforming the peace and security pillar, the SecretaryGeneral directed the Under-Secretaries-General for the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and
the Department of Field Support (DFS) to undertake
independent reviews of eight major peacekeeping
operations. The independent review of UNMISS was
conducted from November 2017 to January 2018 by an
integrated team that included representatives of DPKO

Since May 2017, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD), supported by the African
Union and the United Nations, has been working to
revive the political process. A high-level revitalization
forum on the peace agreement was convened on
18 December 2017 and delivered a new Cessation of
Hostilities Agreement on 21 December. Since the new
Agreement came into force on 24 December 2017, it
has been breached repeatedly by the parties in various

2/12

18-05347

27/02/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

parts of the country. Special Envoys Wais and Haysom
will brief the Council on the progress made during
the second phase of the revitalization forum, but let
me just echo here the message of the African Union
Peace and Security Council, as expressed in its most
recent communiqué, dated 8 February. If violations
of the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement and attacks
against civilians are to end, we need to ensure that
the signatories are held accountable and also deprived
of the means to continue fighting. Without criminal
accountability for the crimes committed and an end to
the supply of weapons and ammunitions to the warring
parties, the suffering of the South Sudanese populations
is unlikely to end.
Meanwhile, we need to be aware that the economic
situation in South Sudan is also expected to continue
deteriorating. The army and security agencies have
not received salaries for several months. Criminality
is increasing and adding to the prevailing insecurity.
Civil servant arrears are accumulating and many
public-sector employees are no longer reporting to
work. South Sudan is ranked 181 of 188 countries on
the Human Development Index. The survival of the
population will therefore require massive levels of
international assistance for the foreseeable future.
The review found that the protection of civilians
sites continue to dominate UNMISS protection
of civilians activities. Managing and providing
humanitarian assistance to those sites — a collective
effort between the Mission and the humanitarian
community — is a major and difficult undertaking.
Some sites have become highly politicized, witnessing
the activities of competing gangs and smuggling
of goods — a level of criminality that is extremely
difficult to manage with existing resources and
without the cooperation of the Government, despite
sustained efforts to improve security in its midst. The
protection of civilians sites remain a continuing point
of friction with the Government, which claims that it
provides refuge to elements of the armed opposition
and is refusing to investigate and prosecute crimes
perpetrated on its premises. Despite UNMISS efforts,
and in the absence of criminal prosecution, sexual and
gender-based violence has become a serious problem at
some of them, where approximately 80 per cent of the
population is comprised of women and children.
The review found that largely over 50 per cent of the
Mission’s uniformed personnel are currently devoted to
protecting those sites. While the vast majority of the

S/PV. 8192

people in the protection of civilians sites are there for
their physical protection, and the protection of civilians
sites will remain the responsibility of the Mission
until the hosted population feel safe enough to leave
them, those sites only represent a fraction of the South
Sudanese civilians in need of protection. There are
no easy answers to that dilemma. There will never be
enough troops both to protect the protection of civilians
sites and to extend the UNMISS protection footprint
to other areas of large displacements in a country as
large as South Sudan and with 2 million displaced.
Increasing the effectiveness of protection efforts beyond
the protection of civilians sites will need to continue
being a major priority of the Mission, notably through
the development of an integrated and people-focused,
system-wide protection approach, aimed at filling
existing gaps, generating synergies and removing
duplication, and thus possible wastage of resources.
With respect to the Regional Protection Force
(RPF), since resolution 2304 (2016) was adopted on
12 August 2016, the security conditions in the capital
have changed substantially. Today, while the risk of
instability and violence remains, the threat of military
conflict in Juba has considerably diminished. The
current environment in Juba therefore may call for some
adjustment of the RPF mandate as currently scripted.
Following the review, the Under-Secretary-General
for the Department of Peacekeeping Operations has
ordered the conduct of a military and police capability
study to explore how fewer troops can be dedicated
to the protection of civilians sites and more deployed
throughout the country to protect other civilians under
imminent threats of violence. The capability study will
also need to address the configuration of the RPF, as it
is likely to have to support revised transitional security
arrangements, to be agreed upon during the High-Level
Revitalization Forum.
South Sudan came into being with extremely
limited institutional capacity in all areas of governance
and Government services, with the exception of
military forces. That situation has not improved in
subsequent years. Poor governance and economic
collapse have compromised already weak rule-oflaw institutions. In the current political and security
environment, the review found that a full-scale return
to capacity-building for rule-of-law institutions is not
warranted. An increase in the training of national
security institutions in international human rights and
humanitarian law and support to the investigation and

18-053473/12

S/PV.8192

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

prosecution of sexual and gender-based violence are,
however, necessary, consistent with the requirements
of the human rights due diligence policy. That should
be undertaken with existing resources and in close
collaboration with the United Nations country team to
avoid a duplication of effort.
It is our considered judgment that the most effective
way to protect civilians in a sustainable way is to reach a
political solution to the conflict. A sustainable political
resolution of the conflict is also the only avenue to
chalk out a viable exit strategy for UNMISS. The fourpillared mandate of UNMISS remains valid, albeit with
some adjustments, but the focus of the Council and the
region should undoubtedly be on its fourth pillar, which
is to support to the political process. Without progress
in the political process, the Mission is likely to have
to be deployed for a considerable amount of time, at
a considerable cost to the international community.
Moreover, in order for UNMISS to deliver on its mandate
effectively, the Mission will need to gain unfettered
freedom of movement and the full cooperation of the
Government, both of which remain insufficient today.
I once again urge the Council to pronounce itself
against the repeated violations of the Status of Forces
Agreement, as well as the restrictions and impediments
imposed on humanitarian partners. In addition, while
the Mission has delivered satisfactorily on its task
of creating conditions conducive to the delivery of
humanitarian assistance, the safety and security of aid
workers remain a serious concern that the Government
must address urgently. Ninety-two aid workers have so
far been killed since the conflict began, and of those 25
were killed in 2017. The safety and security of people
whose sole purpose is to provide assistance to the most
vulnerable of South Sudanese should be a common cause
for all in general, but for the Government in particular.
As communicated by UNMISS on 24 February,
an allegation of sexual exploitation involving several
police personnel belonging to a Ghanaian formed police
unit in Wau was documented at the Wau protection
of civilians site. In that respect, let me reaffirm that
Headquarters and the UNMISS leadership are fully
committed to implementing the United Nations zerotolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse. As
soon as the preliminary results of the investigation
came through, the Mission took immediate action and
removed the entire unit of 46 police officers from duty
within the protection of civilians site and transported
4/12

27/02/2018

them to Juba. That was done to protect witnesses
and victims.
The Office of Internal Oversight Services has
already begun its investigation into the allegation and,
in cooperation with the police-contributing country
responsible, all efforts will be made to hold those
found to have engaged in sexual exploitation or abuse
accountable in line with the existing procedures. On
the whole, the Ghanaian peacekeepers and police
officers serving in UNMISS have made an excellent
contribution to the protection of civilians and to
the building of durable peace in South Sudan. It is
very disappointing that the behaviour of some police
officers risks staining that record of service as well as
the Mission’s reputation.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that only
a political solution can bring an end to the conflict in
South Sudan. There is no military solution. I would
urge the Security Council, as well as the African Union
and members of IGAD, to use all possible leverage on
the parties to reach a viable political agreement so that
the people of South Sudan can finally see the peace
dividend that has eluded them since independence
in 2011.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Ms. Keita
for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Wais.
Mr. Wais: First of all, allow me to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your able leadership of the work
of the Security Council during this month.
It is with great pleasure that I brief the Security
Council today on the status of the ongoing HighLevel Revitalization Forum on the Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan, led by the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD). The briefing is aimed at keeping
the Council abreast of the status of implementation of
the Revitalization Forum. It will include a review of the
mandate of the Forum, the achievements attained during
its recent phase, key observations and recommendations
for the attention of the Security Council.
The Council will recall that since the July 2016
fighting in Juba, South Sudan, the political, economic
and security situation in South Sudan has significantly
changed. The emergent realities in the country’s political
landscape have impeded the effective implementation
of the 2015 peace agreement. The Council will further
18-05347

27/02/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

recall that, as a result, at its thirty-first Extraordinary
Summit, held in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, on 12 June 2017,
the IGAD Assembly of Heads of State and Government
decided that the Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan should be
urgently revitalized.
The stated objectives of the revitalization are
threefold, namely, to restore the permanent ceasefire, to
resume the full and inclusive implementation of the 2015
peace agreement, and to develop revised and realistic
timelines and an implementation schedule towards a
democratic election at the end of the transitional period.
At the launch of the Revitalization Forum, we sought
to pursue the directives of the IGAD leaders highlighted
above, including a review of the implementation and
oversight mechanism for a revised peace agreement, as
well as resource mobilization for its implementation.
The latter are consequential issues pertaining to
the effective implementation of the revitalized 2015
peace agreement.
IGAD successfully launched and concluded the first
phase of the Revitalization Forum, which was convened
from 18 to 22 December 2017. The parties deliberated
and eventually signed the Agreement on Cessation of
Hostilities, Protection of Civilians and Humanitarian
Access on 21 December 2017. As a follow-up, a workshop
on the cessation of hostilities was convened in Addis
Ababa from 24 to 25 January to assist the parties and
the Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
Monitoring Mechanism (CTSAMM) with the requisite
tools to implement the critical provisions of the
Agreement. To that end, specific modalities that would
enable the full implementation of the Agreement on
Cessation of Hostilities were developed.
The guiding principle of silencing the guns ahead
of the commencement of the talks of the second phase
was to establish the necessary conditions for the South
Sudanese stakeholders to discuss substantive issues of
the revitalization. It was also intended to contribute to
confidence-building among the parties to the Agreement
on the Cessation of Hostilities, on the one hand, and the
South Sudanese citizenry awaiting the return of peace
to their beloved country, on the other hand.
The second phase of the Revitalization Forum was
convened from 5 to 16 February at the headquarters of
the Economic Commission for Africa in Addis Ababa.
Its main goal was to deliberate and to agree on ways
to restore the permanent ceasefire, to resume the full

S/PV. 8192

implementation of the peace agreement, and to develop
revised and realistic implementation schedules towards
a democratic election at the end of the transitional
period. In the course of the 11 days, however, the
Forum focused on a declaration of principles and on
revitalizing chapters I and II of the peace agreement,
and achieved the following outcomes.
The parties constructively deliberated on a
declaration of principles intended to guide the discussion
on the revitalization of the 2015 peace agreement.
The declaration of principles was signed by all the
parties except the Transitional Government of National
Unity. The parties also constructively deliberated and
agreed on some provisions of governance during a new
transitional period and on most of the provisions of the
chapter on the permanent ceasefire and transitional
security arrangements. Where the parties achieved
consensus on the provisions of chapters I and II of the
2015 peace agreement, the heads of delegation duly
initialled those articles.
Although the majority of the issues on governance
discussed within the specific articles were agreed
upon, there were divergent views on the sharing
of responsibilities in the revitalized Transitional
Government of National Unity, particularly in
the executive, legislature and judiciary, including
governance arrangements at the State level.
On the permanent ceasefire and transitional security
arrangements, the parties agreed on several articles,
including the permanent ceasefire, the composition and
restructuring of the Ceasefire and Transitional Security
Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism, and the new
structure for the command and control of forces during
the transitional period. However, the parties had
significant differences on articles 5 and 7, regarding
transitional security arrangements and the unification
of forces, respectively. The opposition groups would
like to see practical measures that guarantee their
security if they return to Juba even if that security is
provided by a third party.
Despite the facilitation’s best efforts, in view of
the divergent opinions put forward by the parties and
the inability to achieve consensus on some articles, the
facilitation suspended the adoption of the outstanding
issues to allow the parties more time to consult and to
re-evaluate their respective positons. The facilitation
will continue to engage the parties bilaterally to
ensure that they reach some realistic consensus sooner

18-053475/12

S/PV.8192

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

rather than later. As for the pending provisions of
the contentious articles, including on the sharing of
responsibilities, the facilitation will present them for
further deliberation and agreement in the next phase
of the Forum.
On the status of adherence to the Agreement
on Cessation of Hostilities, Civilian Protection and
Humanitarian Access, I regret to inform the Council
that fighting incidents have continued to be reported
in South Sudan, even as the second phase of the
Revitalization Forum was ongoing. Worse still, those
incidents disrupted the Forum for a day, as one of the
parties protested the continued alleged violations of the
Agreement on Cessation of Hostilities by walking away
from the talks.
Related, provocative statements also continued to
be made against the ceasefire monitoring body and its
personnel. Those incidents are unacceptable and clearly
demonstrate the lack of good will and compliance with
the agreement by the individuals and parties involved
in those violations. Although those incidents are
being investigated by CTSAMM to identify violators,
it is imperative that the Council, in cooperation with
the region and the African Union Peace and Security
Council, consider urgently needed and appropriate
measures for holding accountable violators and spoilers
of the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement whose identity
has been verified by CTSAMM. Such measures would
be in line with and include the decision of the twentyeighth Extraordinary Summit of IGAD Heads of State
and Government of 7 November 2014, which clearly
spelled out consequences for violating the Cessation of
Hostilities Agreement. The Council may recall the third
IGAD Assembly resolution, which prescribes penalties
for such violators. It states that:
“Any violation of the cessation of the hostilities
by any party will invite the following collective
action by the IGAD region against those responsible
for such violations, which will include, but are not
limited to: (a) the enactment of asset freezes; (b) the
enactment of travel bans within the region; and (c)
[the] denial of the supply of arms and ammunition,
and any other material that could be used in war.”
I commend the Council for demonstrating its
unwavering support to the ongoing revitalization
process and for the strong statements that it has issued
in the quest for sustainable peace in South Sudan. As I
conclude, I would like to pose the following questions
6/12

27/02/2018

for the Council’s consideration: How can the Council
make non-compliance with the Cessation of Hostilities
Agreement and implementation of the revitalized peace
agreement costly to the spoilers and violators; How
can we guarantee the security of the opposition in Juba
upon its return and the inclusive implementation of the
peace agreement; and how can we avoid a repetition of
the July 16 fighting in Juba? Those questions demand
policy decisions that would prevent a relapse into armed
conflict in South Sudan.
Lastly, I reiterate my appeal to the Council for its
continuous support for both the region and the continent
in ensuring that the Revitalization Forum process
reaches a successful conclusion that restores peace and
stability in the Republic of South Sudan.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Wais
for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): The Republic of Equatorial Guinea expresses
its gratitude to the presidency of the Security Council
for convening this meeting and for the briefings we just
heard by Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations Bintou Keita and the Special Envoy for
the Sudan of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), His Excellency Mr. Ismail Wais,
which have given us a clear picture of the situation in
South Sudan.
The Government of my country is closely following
with much concern the developing situation in South
Sudan since, according to the available reports, the
political and security situation continues to be delicate
and fragile, and the challenges facing the country remain
substantial. Equatorial Guinea is bound to South Sudan
by ties of particular affection. It was no coincidence
that the proclamation of the independence of South
Sudan coincided with His Excellency Mr. Obiang
Nguema Mbasogo’s term as President of the African
Union. He personally participated in the historic event
in Juba on 9 July 2011 and made his contribution to
the process. Since that time, we have followed events
in that brotherly country, for which I want to reiterate
our support concerning the peace process and our
commitment to stability and prosperity of South Sudan.
Equatorial Guinea believes that support for the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
18-05347

27/02/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

African Union and other regional and subregional
organizations is key to continuing mediation efforts
among the opposing parties in South Sudan. The
international community as a whole must step up its
efforts to promote the political process in the country,
which, given recent events, is the only realistic way to
find a just and lasting resolution to the crisis facing a
nation with certain economic potential. It is important
that the parties to the conflict refrain from taking
actions that could worsen the situation, and that they
take measures to implement and honour the signed
Cessation of Hostilities Agreement, which entails the
cessation of hostilities, the protection of civilians,
access to humanitarian aid and an immediate return to
the negotiations table.
Accordingly, the joint statement on the situation
in South Sudan by the Secretary-General and the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission on
12 January deserves the support of Equatorial Guinea.
Moreover, the outcome of the trilateral meeting among
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
the Chairperson of IGAD and the Secretary-General
on January 27 in Addis Ababa merit the support of
Equatorial Guinea. The Government of South Sudan
must assume a leadership role in the political process
in the country and continue its efforts to end clashes
together with all other actors. We are all aware that,
without the resolute support of the international
community, it will be difficult to overcome the impasse
in South Sudan.
To that end, we believe that the international
community must continue to support current mediation
efforts, especially those of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and the African Union, and
look for ways to ensure the success of the new phase of
the High-Level Revitalization Forum process.
The Security Council must speak with one voice
in situations like the that in South Sudan, as well as
in difficult situations in which people are critically
suffering. We must speak with one voice. We must
provide constructive assistance to South Sudan. The
members are convinced of the need to adopt harsh
measures, but, as I said in my statement in January
(see S/PV.8166), we must also pursue other parallel
actions, such as the trip to Juba in December initiated
by Ambassador Nikki Haley. Such actions must be
persistent and continuous. The data concerning the
humanitarian situation are worrying. It is therefore
extremely important that humanitarian aid reach those

S/PV. 8192

who need it the most, and all parties to the conflict must
allow such access without restrictions. That situation,
combined with the massive number of internally
displaced persons fleeing to neighbouring countries,
presupposes the acute suffering of a vulnerable civilian
population who are enduring violations of all kinds.
Lastly, I would like to convey Equatorial Guinea’s
support for and acknowledgment of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan. We highly appreciate its efforts
and contributions to bringing peace and stability in
South Sudan in very difficult and complex conditions,
in which its personnel’s lives are put at risk as they are
exposed to potentially fatal attacks.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation thanks
Assistant
Secretary-General
for
Peacekeeping
Operations Bintou Keita for her introduction of the
special report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/143).
Likewise, we also welcome the presence of the Special
Envoy for South Sudan of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), His Excellency
Mr. Ismail Wais. We thank him for his briefing today
and take this opportunity to express our delegation’s
full support for the work he has been doing to make it
possible for dialogue and the negotiation of a political
settlement in South Sudan to succeed.
We would like once again to express our concern
about the difficult security situation, the slow progress
in the process of political dialogue and, above all, the
precarious humanitarian conditions in South Sudan,
all of which compounds an already difficult economic
situation. Against that complicated backdrop, we are
aware that it is very difficult to find an immediate
solution, especially in the light of the deep divisions
between the parties. It is necessary for regional
organizations, the United Nations and the international
community to unify their efforts and work in the same
direction with clear objectives in mind. We in the
Security Council have agreed that the only way out of
this conflict will be through a process of inclusive and
sincere political dialogue among the parties that leads to
compliance with the 2015 Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan.
Accordingly, we welcome IGAD’s leadership and
commitment to the people of South Sudan. Despite the
difficulties that lie ahead, IGAD continues to strive to
bring the Government and the opposition groups to the
table for dialogue. It is clear that this kind of process

18-053477/12

S/PV.8192

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

will not produce positive results until the parties take
their commitments seriously and demonstrate genuine
political will to see them implemented.
We welcome the progress that has been made in the
second phase of the High-level Revitalization Forum
on the peace process in South Sudan. We emphasize
the inclusiveness of the process and encourage the
parties to continue to follow that path. While there
are differences on key issues such as governance and
transitional security arrangements, the parties need to
engage constructively with the process, which we hope
will resume as soon as possible. In the same vein, we call
for compliance with theagreement on the cessation of
hostilities, the protection of civilians and humanitarian
access, which is fundamental to the continuation of the
second phase of the Forum.
Furthermore, the humanitarian situation remains
alarming. The data presented by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) show
us a very difficult reality, in which around 60 per cent
of the population will need humanitarian assistance
in 2018. Millions of refugees and internally displaced
persons face a lack of basic services, food insecurity
and the outbreak of diseases such as cholera, together
with the potential threat of famine in some parts of
the country. We are also concerned about the many
challenges that lie ahead this year. We call on the
international community to cooperate with OCHA
to ensure the provision of humanitarian assistance in
South Sudan.
Similarly, we believe that it is essential that
a good operational environment be provided for
humanitarian workers and the United Nations Mission
in Southern Sudan (UNMISS). We call on Government
and opposition forces to guarantee security for
humanitarian actors throughout the country and allow
for unrestricted access for humanitarian aid. We also
welcome the conclusions of the special report of the
Secretary-General on the renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan.
We believe that we must give priority to
strengthening the political process in the country,
support humanitarian access, take measures to prevent
violations of the status of forces agreement, fight
impunity and support the establishment of the Hybrid
Court for South Sudan under the leadership of the
African Union. We also believe that the possibility of
adopting a more efficient model that takes advantage of
8/12

27/02/2018

the full capabilities of United Nations staff in the field
should be explored. We must also review the mandate
of the Regional Protection Force in order to adapt it to
the current environment.
In conclusion, we would like to express our sincere
thanks to the United Nations team, UNMISS and
humanitarian actors for their dedicated and committed
work in the difficult environment of South Sudan.
Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): I join previous
speakers in thanking Assistant Secretary-General
Bintou Keita and Special Envoy Ismail Wais for their
comprehensive briefings and commitment to seeking a
solution for the crisis in South Sudan. My delegation
would like to make the following comments on
three issues.
First, on the humanitarian situation, the continuing
military actions, widespread violence and economic
decline have resulted in escalating a humanitarian
crisis in which more than 5 million people are suffering
from severe food insecurity and 4 million South
Sudanese have been displaced. Timely and effective
humanitarian assistance is therefore extremely critical.
Despite the presidential decree of 9 November, which
ordered free movement for humanitarian actors, there
is still no tangible improvement in humanitarian access
to those in greatest need. At the same time, aid workers
continue to be attacked and killed in different parts of
the country. We therefore call on all signatories to the
agreement of 21 December 2017 to immediately cease
all hostilities and facilitate humanitarian access in
accordance with that greement and strictly adhere to
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
Secondly, on the political process, Kazakhstan
praises the efforts of the United Nations, the African
Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) to implement the Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan, which is the only way to achieve stability and
progress in the country. We welcome the conduct of the
second phase of the IGAD’s High-level Revitalization
Forum, which took place from 5 to 16 February, and
hope that the Forum will result in the conclusion of
a political agreement. It is of critical importance that
the Council remain united in supporting the Highlevel Forum and in encouraging the parties to act in
good faith. Furthermore, the support of South Sudan’s
neighbours is equally important if the Forum is to
succeed. To be more effective, the political negotiations
18-05347

27/02/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

should be bolstered by intercommunal reconciliation
and confidence-building among local populations,
as well as comprehensive strategies in economic
development and resilience-building, with the full
engagement of women and young people.
Thirdly, on the upcoming reconfiguration of the
United Nations Mission inSouth Sudan (UNMISS),
including the Regional Protection Force (RPF),
Kazakhstan highly appreciates UNMISS for
implementing its mandated tasks under very difficult
circumstances. We support the recommendations of the
Secretary-General’s independent review of UNMISS,
which asserts that the current mandate of Mission
remains relevant, but that it should be modified to
strengthen capacity-building and training of the armed
forces and State institutions through a long-term
security-sector reform programme.
We note some progress achieved in deploying
the Regional Protection Force, which will enhance
the capacity of UNMISS to protect civilians and
improve the security environment. At the same time,
we agree with the conclusion of the special report
that the concept, mandate and configuration of the
RPF need to be adapted to the current political and
security environment.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank the President for convening today’s
meeting and for the briefings of Ms. Bintou Keita
and Mr. Ismail Wais. We also wish to highlight the
important work they are doing.
We are dismayed by the extent of the humanitarian
crisis in South Sudan, as well as the ethnic violence and
atrocities reported in the first report of the Commission
on Human Rights in South Sudan, which includes
perverse and systematic practices of sexual violence
against women and children. It is urgent to put an end to
those crimes and punish those responsible. At the same
time, the parties must comply with the cessation of
hostilities agreement and commit to the revitalization
of the South Sudanese peace process.
Peru supports efforts to revitalize that process
and reiterates that the only way to achieve sustainable
peace is through a political solution, which can be
achieved only with the resolute determination of
all parties. The parties to the conflict must be made
aware of the opportunity to put an end to the conflict
presented by the involvement of the international
community, in particular the regional actors. We note

S/PV. 8192

that that opportunity could be ruined by the South
Sudanese parties’ lack of responsibility. In that regard,
we stress the importance of the efforts made by the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
the African Union and the United Nations to contain
violence, end the suffering of the South Sudanese
people, find a balanced solution to the conflict and
alleviate regional tensions.
We support the call by IGAD and the African Union
for the parties to be held accountable for violations of
their own agreements. It is also essential that they be
held accountable with regard to their responsibility
for the heinous crimes committed, in accordance with
international law and international humanitarian law.
In that context, we believe that the African Union and
the Government of South Sudan must accelerate the
establishment of the Hybrid Court for South Sudan,
as agreed by the parties in the 2015 Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. We must urgently protect witnesses.
In conclusion, we wish to express our support for
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan in its efforts
to protect the population, which is facing numerous
difficulties. We support the recommendations of
the Secretary-General aimed at strengthening the
Mission’s ability to do so. We trust that a new mandate
for the Mission that includes the support and training
for Government and security institutions regarding
issues relating to international humanitarian law and
the investigation of grave violations of human rights
will lead to adequate conditions for achieving the
sustainable peace that South Sudan needs.
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke
in French): Côte d’Ivoire thanks Ms. Bintou Keita,
Assistant
Secretary-General
for
Peacekeeping
Operations, and Mr. Ismail Wais, Special Envoy for
South Sudan of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), for their briefings on the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) and on the
political process in that country.
My intervention will focus on the following points:
the political process initiated by IGAD through the
second phase of the High-level Revitalization Forum of
the 2015 Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan, the humanitarian
and human rights situation and the renewal of the
UNMISS mandate.

18-053479/12

S/PV.8192

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Côte d’Ivoire commends all IGAD-led initiatives
in the political process and welcomes the successful
holding of the second phase of the High-level
Revitalization Forum on the peace agreement, despite
persistent tensions. The level of participation by the
various actors in the South Sudan conflict in the second
phase, as well as the intense consultations that took
place in Addis Ababa, point to the gradual ownership
of the political process by all parties.
My delegation is gratified that the parties have
agreed on some adjustments to the 2015 peace
agreement and encourages them to continue discussions
on governance and security issues under the auspices
of Special Envoy Wais, as part of the upcoming
resumption of the second phase of the Forum. Côte
d’Ivoire reaffirms its support for a political solution to
the South Sudan crisis, and we welcome the renewed
commitment of the parties to respect the cessation of
hostilities agreement of 21 December 2017.
My country remains concerned about the precarious
humanitarian situation and calls on the international
community to support the efforts of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs with a view to
ensuring that funding needs are met and that people can
benefit from humanitarian assistance.
With regard to the human rights situation, my
country is concerned about allegations of massive
violations and abuses by the parties involved, including
gender-based sexual violence and violence against
children, as indicated in the report of the Human Rights
Council Commission of Inquiry on South Sudan. My
country urges the South Sudanese authorities to shed
light on those allegations, to identify the parties
responsible and to bring them to justice.
In that regard, my country joins the call by the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union, at
its 751st meeting, for the South Sudanese Transitional
Government of National Unity and the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union to urgently
sign a memorandum of understanding on establishing
the Hybrid Court and its swift integration into the
country’s legal framework. Côte d’Ivoire remains
convinced that the setting up and operationalization
of the Hybrid Court will contribute to calming social
tensions and fostering reconciliation among the South
Sudanese people.
With regard to UNMISS, my country deplores
the obstacles to the implementation of the Mission’s
10/12

27/02/2018

mandate, in violation of the status of forces agreement,
as my delegation believes that the presence of UNMISS
contributes to stabilization and and helps protect many
South Sudanese civilians. It is therefore important
to ensure the optimal operation of the Mission in a
secure environment.
In that regard, we endorse the recommendations
of the Secretary General’s report (S/2018/143) on the
renewal of the Mission’s mandate and on capacitybuilding for the South Sudanese Government and
its security institutions on important issues such
as violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law.
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the progress made in
the deployment of the contingents of the Regional
Protection Force and calls on the Government of South
Sudan to remove the remaining obstacles that slow
down the effective operationalization of the Force.
In conclusion, my delegation welcomes the
Secretary-General’s initiative on assessing the police
and troop capacity of UNMISS, and hopes that the
results of that review will help the Mission adapt its
operations to the needs on the ground.
Côte d’Ivoire calls on all warring parties in
South Sudan to accept that a military solution cannot
be the answer to the conflict in their country. Only
political negotiations with the participation of all and
an agreement reached by all parties can put an end to
the conflict they face, which is tearing their beautiful
country apart and only serves to prolong the suffering
of the South Sudanese people.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Sudan.
Mr. Malok (South Sudan): Allow me to congratulate
you, Mr. President, for your leadership of the Security
Council this month and to acknowledge the role of
your predecessor in leading the Council last month. I
would also like to thank Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
and Ambassador Ismail Wais, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) Special Envoy for
South Sudan, for their briefings.
The Transitional Government of National Unity
takes note of the special report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2018/143)on the renewal of the mandate of
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
18-05347

27/02/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV. 8192

and would like to thank Mr. Kevin Kennedy and the
entire UNMISS review team for their time and efforts.

more coherent manner in order to avoid duplication of
effort and to maximize the resources at their disposal.

I would be remiss if I did not thank Mr. David
Shearer, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, the troop-contributing countries and all the
men and women of the UNMISS in the civilian, military
and police components for their tireless and courageous
efforts in executing their mandate.

The Transitional Government of National Unity
is working to build confidence among the civilian
population through initiatives such as a national
dialogue, so that people feel safe enough to return to
their homes. We should also be mindful of those in
protection-of-civilians sites who do not seek shelter
because of insecurity, but rather to advance their own
political and economic agendas.

The Transitional Government of National Unity
acknowledges that its primary responsibility is to
protect its own population. However, it cannot exercise
that responsibility while being constrained by voices
calling for an armed embargo and sanctions and
denying external support to the country.
The report acknowledges that South Sudan
came into being with extremely limited institutional
capacity in all areas of governance and Government
services. The situation in South Sudan is not black
and white. Development is achieved in a country over
time — something that South Sudan did not have
because it fell into conflict less than three years into its
statehood. Instead of equating South Sudan with other
countries whose development evolved over decades,
we call upon the international community to view
the Transitional Government of National Unity as its
partner in order to facilitate meaningful development.

The Transitional Government of National Unity
is deeply concerned and alarmed about the allegations
of sexual misconduct perpetrated by UNMISS police
in Wau and hopes they are just isolated cases. It is
unfortunate that UNMISS police took advantage of
women in a vulnerable situation who were under their
protection. We welcome the steps taken by the leadership
of UNMISS to withdraw the accused contingent and
launch an investigation into the matter. We hope that
the investigation will be credible so as to protect the
long-standing good reputation of the Blue Helmets.
I would like to point out that the Government
decided not to sign the declaration of principles during
the second phase of the High-level Revitalization
Forum, because it was optional.

The protection-of-civilians sites approach was
never designed as a long-term endeavour. It is therefore
paramount that a way forward be found. Certain
areas enjoy relative calm and stability, and we would
therefore encourage the voluntary repatriation of the
internally displaced to such areas. We welcome the
readiness of UNMISS to explore lessons learned from
the closure of the Melut site and hope that such lessons
will soon be applied in the other protection-of-civilian
sites. The sites have long been a source of friction
between the Government and UNMISS. We therefore
welcome UNMISS measures to ensure that sites are
weapon-free, among other things, and encourage much
more to be done in that respect.

With regard to the constraints faced by UNMISS
when patrolling certain areas, the Government would
like to suggest joint patrols and assistance in building
the capacity of local security personnel, while helping
to maintain peace and security in patrol areas. The
Government has always called for the reinstatement of
capacity-building in the UNMISS mandate. We note that
the report recommends some form of it, but we disagree
with the notion that capacity-building may contribute to
the conflict. On the contrary, strengthening institutions
such as the police, army and the judiciary by building
their capacity in international law, humanitarian law
and all other relevant law would help to promote and
professionalize the rule of law.

The Transitional Government of National Unity
stands ready to fully cooperate with UNMISS and
various humanitarian actors, through the Ministry of
Humanitarian Affairs and all relevant Government
institutions or organs, to ensure that people in need
receive the attention they so deserve. We also encourage
UNMISS and various humanitarian actors to work in a

In connection with the calls for an adjustment of
some elements of the current Regional Protection force
mandate, and in the light of the improved security
situation in Juba, the Transitional Government of
National Unity would like to suggest the deployment
of the Regional Protection Force in other areas that are
currently experiencing instability.

18-0534711/12

S/PV.8192

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The Transitional Government of National Unity
approached the High-level Revitalization Forum
in good faith and with the willingness to reach an
amicable agreement with all the parties. However, the
unrealistic demands made by opposition groups in the
previous session of the Forum are unhelpful and seek
to push us further from the quest for a sustainable
peace agreement.
The Transitional Government of National Unity
strongly reaffirms its commitment to the peace process
and to working with UNMISS and the international
community as a whole. South Sudan continues to deeply
appreciate the support that the international community
provided for our liberation struggle, as well as the
goodwill continuously demonstrated by many friendly
nations and by the United Nations. We also appreciate

12/12

27/02/2018

the efforts under the auspices of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, which culminated in the
signing of the 2015 Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan and the recent
High-level Revitalization Forum initiative.
In conclusion, we hope and trust that there will
be greater improvement towards a more effective and
constructive dialogue with the Security Council in
shaping the vital UNMISS mandate, and with UNMISS
in its implementation thereafter.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no more
names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 4.20 p.m.

18-05347
