Resolutiom adopted on the reporta of the Second Committee

3. Authorizes the Board of Governors to convene a
pledging conference on the United Nations Special
Fund in 1976;
4. Requests the Board of Governors to examine at
its second session the establishment of a target figure
of $1 billion far the United Nations Special Fund;
5. Decides that, far the time being, the administrative expenses of the United Nations Special Fund should
be borne by the regular budget;
6. Agrees to the arrangements for the transfer of
monitoring operations, envisaged in section X of General Assembly resolution 3202 (S-VI), made betweeo
the Secretary-General and the President of the Board
of Govemors, in pursuance of the decision taken by the
Board at its firsit session. 55
2436th plenary meeting
11 December 1975
3461 (XXX). Technical co-operation among
developing countries

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and
3202 (S-VI) of 1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment
of a New International Economic Order, and resolution 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development and intemational economic co-operation,
Reaffirming its resolution 3251 (XXIX) of 4 December 1974 on technical co-operation among developing countries,
Recalling the consensus of 1970 adopted by the Goveming Council of the United Nations Development
Programme at its tenth session56 and the decision taken
by the Goveming Council at its twentieth session conoeming new dimensions in technical co-operation, 57
Recalling further Economic and Social Council resolution 1963 (LIX) of 30 July 1975,
Noting with satisfaction the decisions taken at the
eighteenth and twentieth sessions of the Governing
Council of the United Nations Development Programme
concerning technical co-operation among developing
countries,58
RecogniiJng that technical co-operation among developing countries should be seen as an integral part
of over-all co-operation for development as highlighted
by the Working Group on Technical Co-operation
among Developing Countries in its final report, 59
Conscious that technical co-operation among developing countries constitutes one of the most effective
channels far promoting economic co-operation among
developing countries, to enable them to achieve collective self-reliance,
Noting with satisfaction the statement made on behalf of the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme at the 1666th meeting of the
Second Committee60 in the introduction of the item,
1111 Ibid., Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 21 (A/10021),
annex l.
116 Resolution 2688 (XXV), annex.
li7 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council Fiftyninth Session, Supplement No. 2A (E/5703/Rev.l),
S4.
118 Ibid., Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 2A (E/SS43/
Rev.1), para. 224; and ibid., Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement
No. 2A (E/5703/Rev.1), para. 332.
r. 9 DP/69.
60 O/ficial Records of the General Assembly Thirtieth Session, Second Committee, 1666th meeting, para;, S-16.

para.

59

l. Requests the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme, in view of the importance
of technical co-operation activities among developing
countries, to integrate those activities through the work
of the Special Unit far Technical .Co-operation among
Developing Countries into the regular framework of
the Programme, including the activities and projects
carried out by the organizations of the United Nations
development system financed by the Programme, and
to give them due priority;

2. Emphasizes the need far the speedy implementation of the recommendations contained in the final report. of the Working Group on Technical Co-operation
among Developing Countries by all Governments, by
the United Nations Development Programme and by
the participating and executing agencies as the prerequisite far the review of those recommendations envisaged by the Governing Council of the Programme
~n the ligh! of the experience gained in the process of
1mplementmg the final report of the Working Group;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, together with
the Administrator of the United Nations Development
Programme, to prepare a study on the existing rules,
reg~lations, procedures and practices fallowed by the
Umted Nattons development system in recruiting
experts, subcontracting, procuring equipment and providing fellowships, which would include the consequences far the Programme of giving preferential
treatment to the developing countries in the abovementioned areas, in arder to promote self-reliance in the
developin~ countries through the support of technical
co-operatton among developing countries in a manner
consistent with the maximum effectivene~s of the Programme, and_ to submit _that study, together with concrete suggesttons and recommendations far their improvement, to the Governing Council of the Programme
at its twenty-third session;
4. Requests the Administrator of the United Nations
Development P~og~amme, far t!ie purpose of achieving
a pract1~al apphca!1on of t~chmcal ~o-oper~tion among
developmg countnes, to g_1ve special cons1deration to
the recruitment of experts, consultants and subcontractors from developing countries and to purchase
suitable and competitive equipment and material that
can be supplied by developing countries;
5. Requests the United'Nations Development Pro~ram~e and _the participating and executing agencies to
mtens1fy th'!;r efforts to achieve full utilization of na!ional institutions in developing countries and the buildmg-~p of new caJ?acities in those countries, in the promot10~ of techmcal co-operation among developing
countnes;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
necessary funds under the regular budget of the United
Nations to cover the cost of providing conference servicing facilities far the four intergovemmental regional
~eetings and far the_ conferenc~ on technical co-operatton among developmg count~es to be organized and
conducted by the United Nations Development Programme;
1. Invites the Govemments of the developing countries o~ each region, in view. of the preparatory nature
of the mtergovemmental regional meetings for the conference, to participate in those meetings along the lines
suggested by the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme at the twentieth session of the

General Aiisembly-Thirtieth Session

60
61

Governing Council of the Programme and to include
the consideration of items on arrangements for interregional co-operation and on the interrelationship between technical and economic co-operation among developing countries and financia! arrangements for the
promotion of technical co-operation among developing
countries, envisaged in the final re]'ffl't- -of the Working
Group; Governments of other Member States may also
participate in these meetings in order to prepare themselves for the conference;
8. Invites the intergovernmental regional meetings
to include in their reports conclusions and recommendatiohs for consideration at the conference;
9. Takes note with appreciation of the offer made
by the Government of Argentina to act as host of the
conference in 1977 and requests the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme to
submit recommendations on the organization of the
conference, through the Economic and Social Council,
to the General Assembly at its thirty-first session;
10. Stresses the need for closer co-ordination of the
activities pertaining to technical co-operation among
developing countries; to this end, Governments, the
specialized agencies, the regional commissions and
other organizations of the United Nations system
should co-operate fully with the United Nations Development Programme in the promotion of such activities;
11. Requests the Administrator of the United N ations
Development Programme to ensure that the Special
Unit for Technical Co-operation among Developing
Countries in the Programme establishes close collaboration with schemes of co-operation among developing
countries that are taking place outside the United
Nations system;
12. Decides, in conformity with paragraph 10 of its
resolution 3251 (XXIX), to include the item entitled
"Technical co-operation among developing countries"
in the provisional agenda of the regular sessions of the
General Assembly.
2436th plenary meeting
11 December 1975
3486 (XXX). lmplementation of the Charter of
Economic Rights and Duties of States
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974 by which it adopted the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States,
Recalling also that, in its resolution .3362 (S-VII)
of 16 September 1975, it reaffirmed that the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 62 as well
as the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States,
lay down the foundations of that new order, the consolidation and development of which are imperative
for the strengthening of international security and
friendly relations and co-operation among States,
Reaffirming the importance of article 34 of the
Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States, which
provides that the General Assembly shall carry out periodically a systematic and comprehensive consideration
of the implementation of the Charter, covering both
progress achieved and any improvements and additions
which may become necessary, taking into account all
61 See DP/121.
62 Resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI).

the economic, social, legal and other factors related to
the principies and purposes of the Charter,
Taking into account the fact that the General Assembly, for the appropriate discharge of such functions,
must have the full co-operation of its competent organs,
Bearing in mind the role assigned to the Economic
and Social Council, which is to define the policy framework and co-ordinate the activities of all organizations, institutions and subsidiary bodies within the
United Nations system for the -implementation of the
Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order,

l. Solemnly reiterates the united determination to
strengthen and develop the new international economic
order, which is based on the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order, adopted by the General
Assembly at its sixth special session, and on the Charter
of Economic Rights and Duties of States, adopted by
the Assembly at its twenty-ninth session;
2. Invites Member States to take all appropriate
measures for the prompt achievement of these aims;
3. Decides to en trust the Economic and Social Council with the task of reviewing the implementation of the
Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States with
a view to preparing adequately its systematic and comprehensivei Gonsideration by the General Assembly, as a
separate item, as provided in article 34 of the Charter,
and requests the Council to report on the progress
achieved to the Assembly at its thirty-second session;
4. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
include an item on the Charter of Economic Rights and
Duties of States in the agenda of its summer sessions
in arder to discharge the task assigned to it in paragraph 3 above;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to give the widest
dissemination to the Charter of Econornic Rights and
Duties of States, recognizing the importance of world
public opinion, in arder to facilitate the observance of
its provisions;
6. Requests the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization, the specialized agencies,
the International Atomic Energy Agency and the regional commissions of the United Nations to continue
to study the progress achieved in the implementation
of the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States
and to report to the General Assembly through the
Economic and Social Council.
2439th plenary meeting
12 December 1975
3487 (XXX). ldentification of the least developed
among the developing countries
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind its resolution 2768 (XXVI) of
18 November 1971, in paragraph 4 of which it approved the list of hard-core least developed countries,
and in paragraph 5 of which it requested the Economic
and Social Council to instruct the Committee for Development Planning to continue, in close collaboration
with the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the review of criteria for the identification of
the least developed among the developing countries,

~
