S/PV.8243

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8243

rd meeting
Wednesday, 25 April 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Popolizio Bardales . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Peru)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Córdova Soria
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Amon-Tanoh
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Haspels
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. Wallström
Mr. Allen
Ms. Eckels-Currie

Agenda
Peacebuilding and sustaining peace
Report of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding and sustaining peace
(S/2018/43)
Letter dated 9 April 2018 from the Permanent Representative of Peru to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2018/325)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-12338 (E)
*1812338*

S/PV.8243

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.

in several ways. I thank the Council for taking this
opportunity to take a long-term view of peace and
security challenges.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peacebuilding and sustaining peace
Report of the Secretary-General on
peacebuilding and sustaining peace (S/2018/43)
Letter dated 9 April 2018 from the Permanent
Representative of Peru to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2018/325)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the following briefers to participate
in this meeting: His Excellency Mr. Dan Neculăescu,
State Secretary for Regional Affairs and Multilateral
Global Affairs in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of
Romania, as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission;
and His Excellency Mr. Smail Chergui, Commissioner
for Peace and Security of the African Union.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/43, which contains the report
of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding and
sustaining peace, and document S/2018/325, which
contains a letter dated 9 April 2018 from the Permanent
Representative of Peru to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note
on the item under consideration.
I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, and give him
the floor.
The Secretary-General (spoke in Spanish): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening today’s briefing on
peacebuilding and sustaining peace — key aspects of
the work of the Security Council and the entire United
Nations system.
(spoke in English)
Peacebuilding and sustaining peace are first and
foremost about enhancing our strategic coherence to
support the efforts of national Governments and their
people to prevent the outbreak, escalation, continuation
and recurrence of conflict. The Council can contribute
2/25

25/04/2018

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace require strong
partnerships beyond the United Nations in support
of nationally owned solutions. We need a broad and
inclusive approach to such partnerships, while working
closely with host country authorities, regional and
subregional organizations, international financial
institutions, including the World Bank and other
multilateral donors, the business community, civil
society and local actors. I am pleased to see Mr. Chergui,
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union, which is our most relevant partner in the area
of peace and security in the world, with which we have
exemplary cooperation.
The Peacebuilding Commission can bring far
greater strategic coherence to international efforts,
by providing a platform for complementarity and
partnership across the pillars of the United Nations.
It also brings national and local voices to the table.
The Security Council has already benefited from the
Commission’s support, including in the Sahel. I urge it
to build on that example to achieve greater operational
and policy coherence in other contexts and situations.
Sustaining peace requires support for inclusivity,
in particular of those who are frequently marginalized
and excluded. That means women and girls, the elderly,
the young, people with disabilities and minorities of
all kinds. Women’s empowerment through meaningful
participation is a proven way to deepen the effectiveness
and sustainability of peacebuilding. The Council has
the means to ensure greater inclusion and success by
more consistently applying its own robust agenda on
women and peace and security.
Earlier this week in the Chamber, members heard
at first-hand about the important role young people can
play in sustaining peace (see S/PV.8241). Young women
and men are key peacebuilders. We must work with
them and for them far more effectively. Most critically,
building and sustaining peace requires addressing the
roots of conflicts and crises, which often lie in poverty,
exclusion, inequality, discrimination and serious
violations of human rights. The human and financial
cost of focusing our efforts on responding to crises is
unsustainable. I have been outspoken in my support for
prevention — the foundation of building and sustaining
18-12338

25/04/2018

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

peace. Investment in prevention pays off in human
lives, financial savings and development gains.
Sustainable, inclusive development, deeply rooted
in respect for all human rights — economic, social,
cultural, civil and political — is not only an end in
itself, but it is also the world’s best preventive tool
against violent conflict and instability. The 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development is our common
global blueprint to tackle those root causes and create
more peaceful, stable and resilient societies, founded
on fair globalization.
The reinforcement of the Peacebuilding Support
Office will enable it to play a stronger role in
connecting our efforts on peace and security with our
work to support sustainable development. My peace and
security reform proposal includes a 50 per cent increase
in regular posts in the Peacebuilding Support Office at
no extra cost, based on gains in efficiency in other areas.
At the same time, my envoys and the United Nations
special political missions are dedicated to facilitating
political processes, mediating and preventing the
eruption of open conflict. The High-Level Advisory
Board on Mediation will build on the expertise of
skilled diplomats and strengthen our relationships with
regional organizations, non-governmental groups and
others engaged in that critical activity for peace.
United Nations peacekeepers have a particularly
critical role to play on the front lines of our efforts.
We owe them an enormous debt for their service
and sacrifice. The twin resolutions of 2016 (General
Assembly resolution 70/262 and Security Council
resolution 2282 (2016)) recognize and welcome
the contributions of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. Their overriding objective is to create the
space for a political process. They have a vital role
in containing violence and protecting civilians while
giving political solutions time to take hold.
In order to create peacekeeping operations that are
fit for the challenges we face, I launched the Action
for Peacekeeping initiative in the Chamber last month.
Action for Peacekeeping will refocus United Nations
peacekeeping in three key areas. It aims to set realistic
expectations for our operations, make them stronger
and safer and mobilize more support, both for political
solutions and for well-structured, well-equipped and
well-trained forces and their mission.
We need peace operations that are better able to
respond to the specific needs and contexts of the

S/PV. 8243

countries where they operate, adapt to evolving
conditions on the ground and leave when their job is
done. Key conditions for success will be clear and
defined with more focused mandates, a long-term
view and adequate exit strategies. Smarter investment
in peacebuilding and sustaining peace should reduce
the costs of peacekeeping. That in turn will enable
us to provide more support so that our peacekeeping
and political missions can fulfil their mandates
more effectively.
(spoke in French)
My report on peacebuilding and sustaining peace
(S/2018/43) outlines several options to increase,
restructure and better prioritize funding dedicated
to United Nations peacebuilding activities, for the
consideration of Member States. These options
include assessed and voluntary contributions and
innovative financing.
The Peacebuilding Fund is a key instrument to
drive coherence across all our peacebuilding activities
and partnerships, and a catalyst for others to take
action. I reiterate my call for a quantum leap in Member
State support for the essential work of the Fund and
look forward to further discussion on those options. I
look forward to the adoption of a General Assembly
resolution following up on my report and outlining our
joint path ahead.
The past two days have seen rich and engaging
discussions on how we build and sustain peace, ranging
from mediation to conflict resolution, to peacekeeping
and support for effective and accountable institutions.
We can build on our success. I believe that Côte
d’Ivoire was our most recent success story. I take this
opportunity to extend my sincere condolences to the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Côte d’Ivoire on the
death of our great friend and colleague, Ambassador
Bernard Tanoh-Boutchoue, who always played an
extremely positive and important role in the Council.
Now it is time for action.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Neculăescu.
Mr. Neculăescu: I wish to thank you, Mr. President,
for the opportunity to brief the Security Council at
today’s important meeting and for providing a concept

18-123383/25

S/PV.8243

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

note (S/2018/325, annex) that captures key priorities for
peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for
his report on peacebuilding and sustaining peace
(S/2018/43). I welcome his emphasis on the importance
of enhancing the coherence and the effectiveness of
the United Nations system, while respecting existing
mandates in supporting Member State-led efforts to
build and sustain peace, and on the significance of
partnerships across the United Nations system and with
other relevant key partners and stakeholders. I thank
him for providing options for adequate resourcing of
peacebuilding activities.
The resolutions to be adopted by General Assembly
and the Security Council are important steps that
demonstrate the commitment of Member States to
peacebuilding and sustaining peace. The resolutions
will provide opportunities for Member States to
discuss the recommendations and options contained
in the Secretary-General’s report on peacebuilding
and sustaining peace and enable the continuation
of our discussions about how we can better support
countries in their efforts to build and sustain peace.
In that connection, I reaffirm the readiness of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) to provide a forum
for those discussions in the follow-up to the high-level
meeting and ahead of the envisaged 2020 review.
Two years ago, the General Assembly and Security
Council adopted by consensus twin resolutions
(Security Council resolution 2282 (2016) and General
Assembly resolution 70/262) on the review of the
peacebuilding architecture. The resolutions reiterated
the commitment of Member States to supporting
countries at all stages of conflict. They emphasized
that sustaining peace requires coherence, sustained
engagement and coordination between the General
Assembly, the Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council, consistent with their mandates as set
out in the Charter of the United Nations. They also
contained a crucial message for the work of the United
Nations that an integrated and coherent approach of all
relevant actors, within and outside the United Nations,
is critical to sustaining country-led peacebuilding
and peace efforts. I am pleased to see that the same
message represents the foundation of the report of the
Secretary-General, as well as an important aspect of
today’s meeting.
4/25

25/04/2018

One of the main objectives of the Peacebuilding
Commission is to help strengthen its bridging role,
especially including as a forum for all relevant
stakeholders, and to enhance partnerships with
actors beyond the United Nations, such as regional
organizations, international financial institutions, civil
society, including women’s and youth groups, and,
where relevant, the private sector. Allow me to reflect
on a few regional and country-specific situations where
the Commission has supported more coherence in the
work of the United Nations.
First, I will speak on the Sahel. In response to
presidential statement of S/PRST/2017/2, adopted in
January 2017, which emphasized the importance of the
convening role of the PBC in peacebuilding efforts,
the Commission has worked, in collaboration with the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS), to mobilize deeper commitment and
partnership among the United Nations, the countries
of Sahel and other international and regional partners
to advance the implementation of the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel. Since the adoption
of the presidential statement, the PBC has convened
a number of meetings, including a joint event with
the Economic and Social Council, which brought
together the countries of the Sahel, the United Nations
and key partners to discuss the challenges facing the
region and efforts within the United Nations system
to enhance coordination in the implementation of
the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel.
In S/PRST/2018/3, adopted in January, the Security
Council reiterated the convening role of the PBC in
support of UNOWAS.
With its ability to go beyond country-specific
discussions and focus on cross-border and regional
issues, with the consent of the countries concerned, and
with its capacity to convene national authorities, regional
organizations, international financial institutions, civil
society and other relevant partners, the PBC is playing
an important role in promoting an integrated, strategic
and coherent approach to peacebuilding and sustaining
peace in that important region.
Secondly, I will turn to Liberia. The resolutions on
the review of the peacebuilding architecture, several
presidential statements of the Security Council and the
report of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding and
sustaining peace all recognize the important role the
PBC plays in advising the Security Council, upon its
request, during the formation, review and drawdown
18-12338

25/04/2018

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

S/PV. 8243

of peacekeeping operations and special political
mission mandates.

spanning from Burkina Faso to Colombia, Burundi to
Kyrgyzstan and Liberia to Sri Lanka.

In the case of Liberia, where the long-standing
peacekeeping mission came to an end only a few weeks
ago, the PBC actively assisted national authorities
and engaged with civil society, the United Nations
leadership on the ground and relevant partners to
support the development of a national peacebuilding
plan. The Commission also convened meetings to
discuss preparations for the elections and the United
Nations transition, including hearing from the United
Nations system on capacity resource mapping to
support national peacebuilding needs. The PBC stands
ready to continue fostering international support to
Liberia that is sustained and coordinated, including in
the country’s development of a national development
plan that fully integrates peacebuilding priorities.
That is a true example of PBC support to building and
sustaining peace in practice.

The Commission has strengthened its focus on
regional and subregional situations and on thematic
issues, such as financing for peacebuilding and
institution-building. It has built stronger links with
key partners, such as the African Union and the World
Bank. It has also strengthened its synergies with
the Peacebuilding Fund. I look forward to further
improving the work of the Commission and its advisory
role to the Security Council.

Thirdly, I will now address The Gambia. Since last
year, the Commission has convened several meetings,
the latest of which was held the day before yesterday
with the participation of the President of The Gambia.
Our discussions focused on assisting the country, upon
its request, at a critical time of its transition. It brought
together senior officials of the Gambian Government,
Member States, relevant parts of the United Nations
system, international financial institutions and civil
society, with a view to enhancing cooperation.
Those brief examples show how the Peacebuilding
Commission, serving as a bridge between the three
relevant principal organs of the United Nations
and through its important convening role, not only
fosters coherence at the intergovernmental level but,
ultimately, also supports the United Nations in being
more valuable, strategic and effective in the field,
where it matters.
Since we are marking the second anniversary of
the adoption of the resolutions on the review of the
peacebuilding architecture, allow me to raise one final
point on how the PBC has been working towards more
flexible and effective working methods. Besides the
important work long being done by the existing countryspecific configurations for Burundi, the Central African
Republic, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia and Sierra Leone,
over the past two years the Commission — always
acting in consultation with and upon the request of
the countries concerned — has considered situations

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Neculăescu for his informative briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Chergui.
Mr. Chergui: First of all, I would like to commend
the Peruvian presidency for convening this timely and
very important meeting on peacebuilding and sustaining
peace. The presence of the honourable Minister for
Foreign Affairs, as well as the high-level participation
bears witness to the importance of the meeting, in
addition to the Council’s commitment to advancing the
agenda of sustaining peace. I also wish to express our
gratitude for the kind invitation extended to me to share
the perspective of the African Union on that strategic
discussion in view of our growing partnership with the
United Nations.
In that regard, it gives me great pleasure and honour
to speak in the presence of the Secretary-General,
Mr. António Guterres, to whom I would like to reiterate
our recognition, as well as our strong support for his
inspiring and tireless efforts to promote peace and
stability in Africa, in close partnership with the African
Union. Only one week ago, I had the opportunity to
brief the Council on one of the most visible parts of
that strategic partnership, illustrated by the recent
successful field mission that I undertook, jointly with
my friend, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, respectively to the
Sudan and the Central African Republic. I thank the
Secretary-General for his support.
Let me start by recalling that the very idea
of peacebuilding and sustaining peace is strongly
grounded in the long-enshrined principle that peace
cannot be achieved without development, and
vice-versa, and that neither peace nor development can
thrive without human rights and good governance. It is
indeed that firm conviction that underpins the African
Union’s approach to fulfilling its central mandate

18-123385/25

S/PV.8243

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

to achieve a peaceful and prosperous Africa. In line
with the provisions of its Constitutive Act and the
Protocol relating to the Establishment of the Peace and
Security Council, the African Union has, over the past
decade, assumed greater responsibilities on conflict
prevention, management, resolution and post-conflict
reconstruction and development.
In the area of peacebuilding, the implementation
of the African Union Policy on Post-Conflict
Reconstruction and Development has progressively
enabled the Commission to take concrete actions to
consolidate peace and prevent relapse into violence. At
the core of the African Union’s interventions is the need
to build sustainable resilience with a view to enhancing
structural transformation, thereby preventing relapse.
In short, the African Union’s approach to peacebuilding
has preventive and stabilization dimensions.
Therefore, our engagement has been geared
towards developing and implementing quick-impact and
peace-strengthening projects in areas of deployment of
African Union peace support operations, and through the
African Union liaison offices. To date, the Commission
has provided support to the Central African Republic,
Liberia, Madagascar, Guinea-Bissau, the Lake Chad
basin, the Sahelo-Saharan region and Somalia in a
broad range of areas, including the strengthening of
human rights institutions, the scaling-up of health
facilities, capacitating educational institutions, and
security sector reform, as well as rule of law reforms.
Currently, the African Union is in the process of
deploying technical advisers to support the security
sector reform as well as transitional justice processes
in The Gambia. That is being done in furtherance of
a Peace and Security Council decision that mandated
the Commission to provide support to The Gambia,
following a request by the new authorities of the country.
Going forward, the African Union plans to scale up
its stabilization efforts on the continent. Our objective
is to manage transitions from initial stabilization,
which often carries a heavy military footprint, to
long-term peacebuilding, focusing on reconstruction,
revitalization of public service institutions, and
short- to medium-term socioeconomic and political
development. In the Lake Chad basin, the African
Union and the Lake Chad Basin Commission are now in
the process of finalizing a strategy that will rationalize
the various initiatives aimed at stabilizing the areas
affected by Boko Haram’s activities. In the same vein,
6/25

25/04/2018

we are in the process of strengthening our stabilization
efforts in Somalia within the framework of the African
Union Mission in Somalia, and in the Sudan through
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur, respectively.
The recent relapses of several post-conflict
countries into violence and instability highlight the
need to do more to address, in a coherent manner, the
structures, attitudes and processes that perpetuate
conflict and instability. In that regard, allow me to
share some of the critical lessons learned, on which
today’s meeting can build to enhance our joint efforts
towards achieving sustainable peace in Africa.
First, there is an urgent need to strengthen
our cooperation in the area of prevention. Conflict
prevention remains the most cost-effective tool, yet it is
the least resourced. The African Union has developed
a continental structural conflict prevention framework
that allows its Member States to engage in a voluntary
process with the Commission to enhance their capacity
to identify vulnerabilities to conflict at the very early
stage and, on this basis, work out a mitigation strategy.
With the support of the African Union Commission,
Ghana has just finalized its report as the first country to
volunteer for the exercise. I believe that this mechanism
could present an additional opportunity for cooperation
between the African Union and the United Nations, in
the light of the joint framework signed last year.
Secondly, there is a need to shift from the current
top-down approach to a more people-centred paradigm
with a specific focus on peace dividends, especially for
women and youth. That entails in particular incorporating
local perspectives and empowering marginalized
communities. It also requires taking into consideration
the regional dimension and the transnational nature
of conflicts in Africa. The African Union has already
started incorporating this dimension in its joint efforts
with the different regional mechanisms.
Thirdly, the importance of establishing close
cooperation and working relationships among
national, regional and international actors cannot be
overemphasized. In that context, given that Africa
remains the major regional focus of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture, the partnership between the
African Union and the United Nations is crucial. The
African Union, through its post-conflict reconstruction
and development, and the United Nations, through its
peacebuilding architecture, have much to learn from each
18-12338

25/04/2018

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

other’s approaches and experiences, and from seeking
greater cooperation and collaboration. The recently
signed Joint United Nations-African Union Framework
for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security and
the subsequent memorandum of understanding between
the African Union Commission and the Peacebuilding
Support Office provide a solid framework to strengthen
cooperation in support of peacebuilding and sustaining
peace efforts in Africa. We welcome the commitment
of the Secretary-General to consolidate and further
promote our partnership in this area, as outlined in his
recent report on peacebuilding and sustaining peace
(S/2018/43).
Fourthly, throughout the sustaining peace process,
our collective endeavours will amount to little if
there is no corresponding effort to mobilize adequate
resources for the implementation of the defined
priorities. No significant progress can be made without
adequate financial resources and technical assistance
to support concerned countries in sustaining peace.
The main challenges that post-conflict reconstruction
and development implementation has been facing are
related to the amount of resources and expertise it
demands and the high-level political and diplomatic
engagement it requires to be successful.
As Council members already know, the African
Union continues to make considerable efforts to assume
greater responsibility for funding its peace activities.
The progress achieved over the past 24 months in the
operationalization of the Peace Fund, which has already
received two-thirds of the planned contribution for
2018, serves as a demonstration of the African Union’s
commitment. It should be recalled that the Peace Fund
is organized around three windows. The first should
fund preventive diplomacy and mediation, the second
should fund institutional capacity, and the third should
fund peace support operations. It is our hope that
the ongoing efforts of the African Union will help to
convince the Security Council to respond positively to
Africa’s demands in this regard. Those demands are
all the more legitimate because sustainable funding
for peace efforts in Africa should not be considered
only as an African priority, but also as an international
strategic imperative to respond to the complex and
interconnected nature of threats to international peace
and security.
That brings me to the end of my briefing. I wish
to conclude by stressing again the strategic importance
of the African Union-United Nations partnership. The

S/PV. 8243

challenging and increasingly complex situations on the
ground emphasize the need to enhance and to properly
calibrate our concerted efforts to achieve sustainable
peace in Africa.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Chergui for his informative briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Peru.
I wish to extend a welcome to the high authorities
present here and to thank Secretary-General António
Guterres; the Secretary of State for Strategic Affairs
of Romania, Mr. Dan Neculăescu, in his capacity as
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission; and Mr. Smaїl
Chergui, Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union, for their important briefings.
Peru has convened this meeting because of the
importance it attaches to the promotion of the sustainable
peace approach with a view to preventing and resolving
conflicts with greater coherence, efficiency and
effectiveness; addressing their root causes in an integral
manner; and strengthening the institutional framework
required to do so. In that regard, we are also pleased
to have been able to provide a draft resolution for the
Council with content considerably identical to that to
be adopted by the General Assembly (A/72/L.49). We
consider it very important that both main bodies remain
committed and coordinated in the promotion of this
agenda item.
The priority that we accord to sustaining peace
has also been reflected in the Security Council’s high
visibility under the presidency of Peru for the month
of April and its agenda, which included the topic of
women and peace and security (see S/PV.8234) and
the convening of the Council’s first open debate (see
(S/PV.8241) this past Monday on youth, peace and
security, concerning which we have been working on
a draft resolution together with Sweden. We believe
that the participation of women and young people is
key to contributing to a shared, peaceful, inclusive and
sustainable vision of the future.
Peru, which chairs the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counterterrorism, is promoting more effective responses to that
scourge through greater cooperation and coordination
aimed at severing its links with organized crime. We
believe that the concept of sustaining peace and its focus
on the root causes of conflicts is consistent with our

18-123387/25

S/PV.8243

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

own experience in achieving peace and consolidating
democracy following the period of violence and
instability created by terrorist groups in our country.
Peru was able to overcome that tumultuous period
thanks to a broad national consensus on national policy
related to security, development and human rights.
We underscore that there are no one-size-fitsall models or recipes for achieving sustainable peace
and that every country must find its own way under
international law and with the commensurate support
of the United Nations and the international community.
However, as our times are characterized by deep-seated
global interdependence, we need to work together to
confront shared challenges and vulnerabilities that
can potentially degenerate into threats to international
peace and security. I am referring to climate change,
desertification, increasing inequality, corruption, the
threat of an arms race and violent extremism, which
leads to terrorism, among other phenomena of a global
scale and transnational nature. We see as obvious the
causal link between such phenomena and the tragic
proliferation of violent conflicts and humanitarian
crises, which have significantly expanded the Council’s
agenda in recent years. In response, we deem it crucial
to strengthen multilateralism as it relates to the concept
of sustaining peace as an overall goal and a continuous
process focused on prevention.
There is much that the United Nations and the
Security Council can and must do to support Member
States in their work to build and strengthen capacities
in order to confront the serious challenges of today. We
therefore welcome the Council’s cooperation with the
Peacebuilding Commission and convey our support
for the restructuring of the Organization’s peace and
security pillar, initiated by the Secretary-General, with
the ultimate goal of contributing to sustaining peace.
In addition, we believe that the Council must adopt a
more systemic approach to conflict prevention, based
on timely risk assessments and management plans
that the Secretary-General and the various United
Nations system agencies and programmes must be able
to provide.
That is a long-standing demand. We recall that,
in 1991, in his last annual report (A/46/1), former
Secretary-General Javier Pérez de Cuéllar highlighted
the importance of preventive diplomacy and,
consequently, the need for early-warning mechanisms
able to provide the Council with reliable information
for its timely consideration. Furthermore, we must
8/25

25/04/2018

encourage greater synergies linking peace operations
deployed by the Council with agencies, funds and
programmes of the United Nations development system
in countries affected by conflicts and humanitarian
crises, as well as with regional and subregional
organizations, neighbouring and donor countries and
financial institutions. It is crucial to step up cooperation
with all relevant actors on the ground.
We underscore the important role of the African
Union, which has accomplished outstanding work in
various countries affected by conflict, and the need
to continue bolstering its diverse efforts in sustaining
peace. Sustainable peace must be the ultimate goal of
Security Council missions, and the degree to which
they adhere to and fulfil their mandates must be judged
in terms of the actual capacities of the country in
which they operate to move from a conflict situation
to one guided by the rule of law and the precepts of
sustainable development.
In that regard, we highlight the need to adopt, on
a case-by-case basis where appropriate, exit strategies
for peacekeeping operations, in cooperation with the
respective United Nations country teams, with the
aim of ensuring a coherent and orderly transition of
the Organization’s activities to support sustaining
peace on the ground. We believe that the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, in particular
Sustainable Development Goal 16, dedicated to the
promotion of peaceful societies with inclusive and
accountable institutions, provides an appropriate
universal normative framework for the United Nations
system to support national efforts to consolidate and
maintain peace.
In conclusion, I affirm that Peru — a country
committed to multilateralism, international law and
the principle of peaceful settlement of disputes — will
continue to actively work to promote those concepts
and see them reflected in more coherent, efficient
and effective action taken by the Organization and
the Council.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I now call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Sweden.
Ms. Wallström (Sweden): I begin by thanking you,
Sir, and the Peruvian presidency for hosting today’s
18-12338

25/04/2018

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

S/PV. 8243

meeting and the Secretary-General for his statement.
He knows that he has our full support.

and structural discrimination is therefore critical
for prevention.

Let me also thank our briefers: Mr. Dan Neculăescu,
State Secretary for Regional Affairs and Multilateral
Global Affairs in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of
Romania, as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission,
and Mr. Smaïl Chergui, Commissioner for Peace and
Security of the African Union. I would also like to
take this opportunity to express my appreciation to the
members of the Security Council for their participation
in the Secretary-General’s retreat at the estate of Dag
Hammarskjöld at Backåkra this past weekend and
thank them for taking the trouble to come.

Importantly, no peace is sustainable, just or
legitimate if it shuts out half the population. The full
and effective participation of women in peace and
security is core Council business — not for the sake of
women, but for the sake of peace and security. Gender
equality benefits everyone.

Today’s date, 25 April, is a special day as we
commemorate the Carnation Revolution, which ended
dictatorship in Portugal and colonial rule in many
Lusophone countries. It set Portugal on the path to
European integration, together with Spain and Greece.
Indeed, that example, which inspired a generation of
Europeans, including me, compels us to reflect on
the fabric of sustaining peace. Fostering the same
commitment to sustain peace that inspired European
leaders following two devastating world wars could
hardly be more urgent.
In 2016, more countries were affected by conflict
than at any time in almost 30 years. The types of
security challenges facing the world have become more
complex and are often interrelated. Once ignited, such
conflicts can take years to quench, thereby requiring
investments in peacekeeping, humanitarian assistance,
resilience, peacebuilding and development — not to
mention the cost in human lives and human potential.
That, if anything, provides a strong incentive for us to
increase investments in prevention. Can we afford not
to prevent conflicts?
The Secretary-General has made sustaining
peace the overarching purpose of the reforms of the
United Nations system, and his follow-up report to the
resolutions of 2016 offers a clear road map (S/2018/43).
Now we must take action. Let me briefly outline
today three core commitments that are needed to
operationalize the sustaining peace agenda.
First, we must boost equality and inclusive national
ownership. Multidimensional poverty, abuses and
violations of human rights and growing inequality are
challenges increasingly influencing the situations that
appear on the Council’s agenda. Addressing exclusion

Similarly, violations and abuses of human rights
erode trust within societies and are root causes of
conflict. Human rights are not optional extras. Building
inclusive societies requires States to abide by their
obligations under international law and to respect,
protect and promote all human rights — civil, political,
economic, social and cultural.
Secondly, we must improve our ability to consider
early warnings and commit to preventive action.
Within the Council we must establish a practice of
early discussions on situations at risk of escalating into
violent conflict, as we have heard examples of before
in this Chamber, with a view to preventing them from
emerging. There are a number of tools at our disposal
that would allow us to engage in early action. Those
include the Peacebuilding Commission, the Ad Hoc
Working Group of the Security Council on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa and the many
informal meeting formats at the Council’s disposal. We
must utilize them.
We need independent, authoritative and candid
advice from the Secretary-General based on
comprehensive analysis. That includes analysis on
emerging threats, such as climate change, which is still
propelling so many ongoing problems and conflicts,
as well as new threats, to improve our collective
understanding, strategic planning and response.
Thirdly, we must target drivers of conflict through
collaborative action. If conflicts have multiple drivers,
then no single action alone can prevent them.
Cross-pillar cooperation and a system-wide
approach are essential. That means going beyond
sharing individual country plans to being jointly
accountable for delivering on a common goal. It means
true collaboration that delivers enhanced synergies
and leads to results that are greater than the sum of the
individual parts.
Furthermore, as we have heard already, we must
enhance our partnerships with regional and subregional

18-123389/25

S/PV.8243

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

organizations. They are the eyes and the ears on the
ground. They understand their neighbours, and can
intervene when we cannot.
The Peacebuilding Commission is a vehicle for
collaborative action and partnerships. It is uniquely
placed to convene international actors for coordinated
and strategic responses for sustaining peace. We can
unlock the full potential of the Commission through
more informal and frequent interactions between
the Council and the Commission. The catalytic role
played by the Peacebuilding Fund has been extremely
useful, and Sweden is therefore doubling its support to
the Fund.
In conclusion, preventing violent conflict is a
Charter obligation. The sustaining peace approach
allows us to improve the Council’s ability to do its part in
delivering on that responsibility. Today, we as Member
States must play our part by mustering political will
and wholeheartedly supporting the Secretary-General
and his vision of putting conflict prevention at the
centre of the Organization.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now call on the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Côte d’Ivoire.
Mr. Amon-Tanoh (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
As this is the first time I take the floor before the
Security Council since the sudden passing away of our
compatriot and friend and Council members’ colleague,
Ambassador Bernard Tanoh-Boutchoue, Permanent
Representative of Côte d’Ivoire to the United Nations,
I would like to convey to members the gratitude of the
President of the Republic, His Excellency Mr. Alassane
Ouattara, and that of the people and the Government
of Côte d’Ivoire for the sincere solidarity extended to
our country by the Security Council, as well as for the
Council’s tribute to the deceased and for all the tokens
of friendship that they continue to extend to his family
and to our country.
Allow me to congratulate your country,
Mr. President, the Republic of Peru, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
April, and to thank you, Sir, for joining me in this debate
on peacebuilding and sustaining peace. I would like to
thank those who spoke before me — the SecretaryGeneral, the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
and the Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union — for their contributions to the matter
at hand.
10/25

25/04/2018

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace is of great
concern to my country. We have embarked upon an
innovative and ambitious sustaining peace process,
namely, since the closure of the United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI).
The end of the post-election crisis, in 2011, heralded
a period of fragile peace in Côte d’Ivoire, and it was
urgent to bolster that peace in order to preclude any
relapse into violence and to definitively turn the page
on instability. The work and support of our development
partners, as well as the direct support of the United
Nations to the Government, have been decisive. Indeed,
the pooling of national and international efforts led to
the implementation of a Peacebuilding Priority Action
Plan for 2011-2014 and 2015-2017, which benefited
from financing totalling $30 million. The Plan is
focused on several axes, including: the restoration
of State authority and community safety, support for
national reconciliation, social cohesion and conflict
risk mitigation, and support for the identification of
vulnerable people.
The Plan has revealed greater needs, which
have required an unprecedented commitment by our
Government in order to sustainably strengthen peace
and to reassure Ivorians about the new direction in
which their country is moving. The support of our
partners has allowed us to keep sight of the fact that only
a peacebuilding process based on national ownership
and State leadership is sustainable, owing to consensus
and national ownership that it inspires.
For my country, the State is the cornerstone to
peacebuilding and sustainability. In that connection,
President Alassane Ouattara, during the post-election
crisis, under the circumstances that all Council members
observed, set out to preserve the State apparatus in
order, once the conflict had ended, to rebuild and
strengthen peace, as we are seeing today.
My country has chosen its own path towards
sustainably establishing peace. We emphasize economic
development and the building of an efficient economy
capable of offering opportunities to ex-combatants so
they will lay down their weapons and in order to reduce
poverty and inequalities, create jobs for young people
and provide the State with the resources needed to
finance crisis exit strategies.
The dramatic recovery of Côte d’Ivoire’s economy,
in the aftermath of the post-election crisis, has
fostered the emergence of a robust State, which has
18-12338

25/04/2018

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

fully taken part in post-conflict normalization efforts
and peacebuilding. Thanks to the clear political will
of President Ouattara, the State of Côte d’Ivoire has
been engaged financially and on a scale rarely seen
on the continent in the implementation and success
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
security sector reform, the strengthening of social
cohesion and national reconciliation and post-conflict
rebuilding efforts,
As I mentioned before the Council in June 2017
(see S/PV.7957), UNOCI left behind a stable and
peaceful country with a resilient economy and credible
and reliable institutions, which has made it possible to
resolve the major problems related to nationality and
rural property, which were causes of the crisis, and
enabled us to definitively establish democracy and
good governance in public life. Drawing on lessons
from our recent history, under the Constitution of
the Third Republic President Alassane Ouattara has
successfully undertaken an in-depth reorganization of
political life and the political space so that the elections
do not inevitably lead to conflict.
The debate that brings us together today two years
after the adoption of resolution 2282 (2016) reflects the
importance that we collectively attach to the outcome
of the reform on peacebuilding and sustaining peace
in order to better support countries in post-conflict
situations and to prevent them from returning to a
state of belligerency. It is important to mention that
sustaining peace should be a concern shared by all
countries, including those at peace.
Countries emerging from crisis have significant
expectations of the Organization. We must continue to
act as a guarantor for the deployment of development
partners in the early stages of post-conflict
reconstruction. In that regard, the example of my
country can set out some principles.
Since peacebuilding and sustaining peace depend
on the post-conflict state of the institutions of a
country, the action of our Organization and other
partners should be either to strengthen the State when it
exists or to rebuild it when it has collapsed. Any action
taken by the international community as a substitute
for the State will remain superficial and lead to a peace
that is disastrously dependent and reliant. In order to
be effective on the ground, our Organization must
demonstrate great consistency and intervene as a single
entity. To that end, it must stop the fragmentation of

S/PV. 8243

its resources and its actions observed in several postconflict scenarios. It must therefore make decisive
progress on its vision of delivering as one United
Nations. In addition, Member States and development
partners must mobilize the necessary resources for the
United Nations as part of financing the peacebuilding
and sustaining peace activity of the Peacebuilding Fund.
Based on the lessons from its own experience,
my country supports the reform of the peace and
security pillar proposed by Secretary-General António
Guterres, which outlines a more effective peacebuilding
architecture. Côte d’Ivoire calls on developed countries,
multilateral partners and the private sector to mobilize
the resources necessary to finance development and the
Peacebuilding Fund so that the United Nations can assist
countries in post-crisis situations more effectively. It
is also important to emphasize the role of preventive
diplomacy and, in particular, the importance of early
warning mechanisms to peacebuilding and sustaining
peace and to encourage our Organization to pay them
greater attention.
I hope that the next review of the peacebuilding
architecture, in 2020, will allow us to revitalize all the
structures involved in that task and to strengthen the
synergy of our actions in that area.
Mr. Haspels (Netherlands): The work to build
peace is never completed. Peace is built before, during
and long after conflict. It takes effort every day.
Sustaining peace means sustained commitment here
at the United Nations and at home, in Member States.
We therefore welcome the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2018/43) and thank him for his leadership
on this issue.
The high-level event of the General Assembly has
again underscored that sustaining peace represents the
common ground of the efforts of the United Nations and
of Member States. That is an important step forward.
However, we must continue to give our full support
to its implementation. That is why we pursue such
objectives at the national level. Conflict prevention
is the cornerstone of both our new Government’s
integrated international security strategy and our
aid and trade policies. It is the focus of our Security
Council membership this year, and it was the focus
of our previous membership in 1999-2000. Some
years ago, the Kingdom of the Netherlands decided
to contribute to the International Security Assistance
Force and the Resolute Support Mission in Afghanistan

18-1233811/25

S/PV.8243

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

and to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali because sustained stability
is not only in the interest of the Afghan and Malian
people but also contributes to stability in Europe. There
are no quick fixes.
Prevention requires us to understand and to address
the root causes of conflict. To do that, first, we must
respect fundamental human rights, the rule of law and
human dignity as the foundation of freedom, justice
and peace. The interrelationship between human rights,
development and security has never been so evident in
certain country situations before the Security Council.
Secondly, we must implement the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) as the best universally
agreed strategy for sustaining peace. For example,
the Netherlands has joined the pathfinders for the
SDG 16+ movement to better promote the worldwide
implementation of Goal 16 — the goal of peaceful, just
and inclusive societies and interconnected SDGs.
Thirdly, we must promote inclusive negotiations
and political processes. In March, we highlighted the
good direction undertaken by Afghanistan with the
inclusive Afghan-led and Afghan-owned process. It
saddens me that path was darkened again last weekend
with the horrific attack on an election registration
office in Kabul, in which at least 57 people died.
Situations of increasing risk must be brought
to the attention of the Security Council in a timely
manner. The Council can improve its role to maintain
international peace and security by preventing violence
from escalating. The Council must also keep a longterm focus on the impact of mandated tasks to achieve
stability and peace.
We are a consistent supporter of an integrated
approach towards peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
prevention. That is why we provide concrete support
to peacekeeping operations, the Peacebuilding Fund
and the United Nations capacities for prevention and
peacebuilding. As Prime Minister Rutte stated in
his intervention in the open debate in March (see
S/PV.8218), we need to deliver on the primacy of the
political process for long-term conflict resolution. In
that regard, I welcome the Secretary-General’s Action
for Peacekeeping initiative. It is an integrated approach
that also relates to solving root causes through political
solutions and to implementing peace agreements.
All too often we have learned the risks of relapse the
hard way.
12/25

25/04/2018

The Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), which
Romania currently chairs, is fundamental to making
cross-pillar and coherent approaches to peacebuilding
a reality. We need to strengthen our cooperation. The
Security Council and the PBC must complement each
other in preparing for the transition of peacekeeping
operations. We need to build on the convening role of the
PBC because it can provide the Security Council with the
perspectives of the varous stakeholders and advice on
socioeconomic and long-term development challenges.
As has been mentioned before, Liberia represents
a successful example. The United Nations Mission
in Liberia helped the country to build capacity for
maintaining law and order. It also used so-called
soft tools, such as public-service radio broadcasts,
to emphasize the promotion of peace and national
reconciliation. The transition is managed in close
cooperation with the PBC.
Such stories tell us that the Security Council has
all the tools necessary to prevent conflict and to sustain
peace. However, without our political will, the only
result is an irresponsible standstill. The bloody conflict
in Syria shows us the consequences of the Council’s
lack of action. The United Nations system and we, the
Member States, must play the role that people expect
from us.
To conclude, achieving peace and sustaining it
always take much longer than we think. However, we
have no choice but never to give up trying, hoping and
supporting people to make the choice for peace and
against violence.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Allow me to
start by thanking the Secretary-General, State
Secretary Neculăescu and Commissioner Chergui for
their briefings. As I remember saying in Addis Ababa
last September at the Security Council’s joint meeting
with the African Union Peace and Security Council, our
relationship is vital and we must continue to strengthen
it if we are to have success. It is particularly good to see
Commissioner Chergui in the Chamber today.
The United Kingdom shares the briefers’ alarm
at the scale and complexity of violent conflict today.
The costs are mounting, whether they are measured in
lost lives, displaced families, human rights violations,
extreme poverty or peacekeeping and humanitarian
budgets. Our motivations to prevent further conflict and
to sustain peace must be greater than ever. I agree very
much with the Secretary-General on the importance
18-12338

25/04/2018

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

of human rights in this context, both, of course, as a
warning or trigger of conflict, but not only that: we
believe that activity on human rights at national and
local levels can be an important contribution in and of
itself to stability and conflict prevention.
The United Kingdom very much welcomes
Secretary-General Guterres’s vision for peacebuilding
and sustaining peace, and particularly the renewed focus
on conflict prevention set out in his report (S/2018/43).
We also fully endorse the understanding that supporting
countries to sustain peace should be a shared priority
across the whole United Nations system, from peace
and security to development and human rights. Many
of our own Ministries and Governments have come
to this conclusion. The Government of the United
Kingdom has decided that over half of our development
spending will be in conflict and fragile States, as there
lies the greatest challenge in reducing poverty today.
That does not, as some might be concerned, mean that
the respective mandates of different parts of the United
Nations are under threat. In that regard, we welcome the
fact that both the General Assembly and the Security
Council will adopt draft resolutions committing to
further implementation of the sustaining peace vision
agreed in 2016. The United Kingdom has identified
three priorities for future work.
First, we want to see a stronger partnership for
peace developed between the United Nations and the
World Bank. Their combined vision, expertise and
global presence are essential to ensure that multilateral
investments in development tackle the drivers
of conflict.
Secondly, we want to see more effective preventive
diplomacy by the United Nations, in particular
addressing underlying causes. We all know the critical
role that political agreements play and the openings
they create for peacebuilding. I very much endorse
the Secretary-General’s words on the importance of
women’s participation in such negotiations. We know
from the research done that peace negotiations are
35 per cent more likely to be sustained for at least 15
years if women are involved in them.
Our third priority is ensuring smoother
peacekeeping mission transitions from mission to
non-mission settings. I will say a few words more
about that in a moment. Right from the moment that we
decide to deploy peacekeepers, we should be thinking
about their exit. While recognizing that fragile contexts

S/PV. 8243

will always be prone to risk, we on the Security Council
need a clear vision of what a sufficiently stable endstate looks like. The Secretariat has a key role to play
in that regard, through generating deeper analyses and
mission-implementation plans with clear benchmarks
towards achieving that end-state. These steps should
then focus resources and allow the Council to track
progress. This approach is being tested at the moment,
of course, in Haiti.
The United Nations development system needs to be
stepping up sooner in mission settings. We welcome the
Secretary- General’s suggestion to link developmentsystem frameworks with mission assessments. As the
Peacebuilding Fund has sought to encourage in Mali,
peacekeepers and United Nations country teams need
to work to the same script, the same deadlines and the
same objectives. Funds, programmes and agencies must
be ready to tackle conflict rather than simply work
around it. Mapping capabilities to do so, as was done in
Liberia, should ensure we are all better prepared to fill
gaps when a mission leaves.
The Secretary-General stressed the importance
of enhancing coherence to support efforts by national
Governments, and not everything is up to the United
Nations. When politically inclusive, national ownership
is what makes transition processes effective and
resilient. We must always consider how missions
implement their hand-overs to national institutions
and actors. Côte d’Ivoire’s experience demonstrates
the impact this can have when done well. I think the
salutary lessons Minister Amon-Tanoh put forward
were important for us all, in particular about ensuring
that the United Nations does not take on the functions
of Government and prevent Governments from being
able to carry out their own tasks.
The development of a shared peacebuilding plan
could help pull the mission, the United Nations country
team, donors, the host Government and other national
stakeholders together through and beyond a transition.
That the United States, Sweden and Liberia worked
together so effectively to develop a peacebuilding plan
demonstrates the valuable role that the Peacebuilding
Commission can have, and that is why the United
Kingdom has been one of the largest and longeststanding donors to the Peacebuilding Fund.
Finally, we need to be creative about what the
residual United Nations country team presence looks
like. The creation of an enhanced Resident Coordinator’s

18-1233813/25

S/PV.8243

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

25/04/2018

Office in Liberia is a very promising initiative, and it
reflects the recognition in the report of the SecretaryGeneral that the United Nations development system
needs enhanced capacities to support countries at risk
of conflict. Transitions from mission settings are just
one dimension of what is a larger agenda for sustaining
peace, but, given that one of the most significant
predictors of future conflict is past conflict, we must
get them right.

First, the Council must strengthen its preventive
action. The United Nations was born out of the
objective of prevention. For too long, this aspect has
been neglected. The Security Council must be in a
better position to anticipate crisis risks through an
early-warning system, so as to improve the Council’s
collective ability to act in advance of crises. Otherwise,
we will be forced to manage crises, at a much higher
human and financial cost.

As daunting as solving the recurrent challenges
to transitions may be, we do have good examples
of innovative and effective action to draw on for our
inspiration. With the Secretary-General’s report on
sustaining peace and peacebuilding, we have a plan
for making change happen. There should therefore
be nothing stopping us in the Security Council from
making change happen.

The first steps taken by the Secretary-General
are in the right direction — for instance, the setting
up of the High-level Advisory Board on Mediation
and a rethinking of communication on the concept of
prevention as a useful tool before and after conflicts.
France fully supports the Secretary-General’s initiatives
in that regard.

Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking the Secretary-General for his
important briefing and for his exemplary commitment
to sustainable peace. I would also like to thank the
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, Mr. Dan
Neculăescu, and the African Union Commissioner
for Peace and Security, Mr. Smail Chergui, for their
particularly enlightening briefings.
As the French Minister of State stressed yesterday
in the General Assembly, recent years have seen
significant progress within the United Nations in
terms of dealing with crises and in the United Nations
approach to them (see A/72/PV.84). We are a long way
from the days when the United Nations was involved
in crises only through peacekeeping operations. The
entire conflict cycle is taken into account today, in a pr
evention-maintenance-peacebuilding continuum. The
crisis situations to which the Security Council must
respond have changed in nature and are increasingly
asymmetrical, transnational and multidimensional.
Many conflicts and civil wars are rooted in development
and governance fragilities, the very same that the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development seeks to address.
We must therefore adopt a cross-cutting and
integrated approach that over time combines security,
humanitarian, political and development actions,
human rights promotion and the fight against climate
change and environmental degradation, by bringing
together all partners in a common approach. In that
context, what role should the Security Council play? I
see three main roles for the Council.
14/25

Regional organizations have an essential role to
play. That was the case of the Economic Community
of West African States in the Gambia, for example,
with success, as President Barrow showed yesterday
(see A/72/PV.83). The same should also be the case
in Burundi, where, unfortunately, the East African
Community’s mediation work is being hampered by
the Government’s refusal to engage in a constructive
dialogue with the opposition and international partners.
We must also enable the most vulnerable countries
to develop their own capacities, so that they are
able to deal upstream with the fragilities that fuel
crises — by combating climate change and environmental
degradation; by fighting unemployment, particularly
among young people; by remedying the lack of public
services and public infrastructure; by establishing
inclusive governance and effective, accountable and
accessible institutions; by promoting a judicial system
that gives everyone, without discrimination, access to
quality justice; by ensuring respect for human rights;
and by reducing tensions over natural resources. To
ensure lasting peace, we must ensure that no one is left
behind, as per our commitment under Agenda 2030.
Secondly, when prevention fails and the spiral
of violence sets in, it is our responsibility to stop the
escalation and to intervene. That is what France has
done at the request of its partners in Mali and the
Central African Republic. In that context, peacekeeping
operations remain a central tool of the Security
Council to promote the return to peace. France will
remain committed — with strength, consistency and
conviction — to supporting peacekeeping operations.
18-12338

25/04/2018

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

It is because these operations are inseparable from
the original ambitions of the United Nations that our
collective credibility depends on them and the reform
work initiated by the Secretary-General must be
fully supported.
For peacekeeping operations to be effective, the
Council must ensure that they have well-calibrated
mandates that are part of a clear political strategy, with
defined priorities and timetables. France is committed
to that goal in the drafting of mandates, in particular on
peacekeeping operations for which it is a penholder, in
close coordination with troop-contributing countries.
That requirement is all the more important in the case
of multidimensional mandates, which, in addition to
their need to adapt to particularly complex conflicts,
must also build a bridge between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding by promoting the treatment of the root
causes of crises.
Finally, the Security Council must ensure a
successful transition from peacekeeping operations to
peacebuilding and sustainability. That approach was
pursued in Côte d’Ivoire, working closely with the
Ivorian authorities to enable a gradual withdrawal of
the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire. The
presence of Côte d’Ivoire in the Security Council today
is an undeniable symbol of that success.
More recently, in Liberia, the peacebuilding plan
developed with the support of the Peacebuilding
Commission also facilitated a successful transition.
The Commission demonstrated the invaluable support
it can provide to the Security Council through its
expertise and its role in facilitating coordination
and exchange among all of its partners. France fully
supports strengthening the Peacebuilding Support
Office and bolstering the Peacebuilding Fund, which
must be able to preserve what makes it most valuable,
that is, its flexibility and ability to react. As a token
of its commitment, France contributed to the Fund
last year after several years of not doing so. We have
also decided to focus our development assistance to
fragile countries and countries emerging from conflict.
A French fund for resilience and peace has raised up
to €100 million a year to that end, and will see its
resources double by 2020. It is therefore a significant
commitment for my country.
While the demand for conflict prevention and
the links between peace and development have
become apparent, it is now up to the international

S/PV. 8243

community — that is to say all of us — to translate
this determination into action for lasting peace.
Ensuring lasting peace requires an effective peace and
security architecture, a development system adapted
to new challenges and based on an Organization with
renewed management — a United Nations capable of
facing the challenges of the twenty-first century. These
three reforms go hand in hand; we cannot consider
them separately. The Secretary-General can count on
France’s determined support in this endeavour.
France will contribute actively to the debates
for the effective implementation of lasting peace
in a constructive spirit. It will continue to pursue
a firm policy in this area, whether on the ground or
as part of its responsibilities at the United Nations,
in order to take — with the Members of the United
Nations — multilateral action in the service of peace
and security.
Ms. Córdova Soria (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): We welcome the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Peru, Mr. Néstor Popolizio Bardales.
We also welcome the report (S/2018/43) presented by
Secretary-General António Guterres, and the briefings
by Mr. Dan Neculăescu, in his capacity as Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission, and Mr. Smail Chergui,
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union. We also thank the Peruvian presidency for
convening this meeting, which allows us to address a
key issue for international peace and security, namely,
peacebuilding and sustainable peace.
The term “peacebuilding” was first used in the
1992 report entield An Agenda for Peace, by former
Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, who defined
it as,
“action to identify and support structures which
will tend to strengthen and solidify peace in order
to avoid a relapse into conflict.” (S/24111, para. 21)
Peacebuilding was required in order to overcome the
effects of war and consolidate peace processes. That
is how began one of the most important and central
tasks of the Organization: strengthening States in postconflict situations.
There is no doubt that the international scene is not
static; it is undergoing considerable change. Persistent
threats to international peace and security from
terrorist groups, transnational crime and armed groups
have served to highlight the need to strengthen and

18-1233815/25

S/PV.8243

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

improve prevention mechanisms. The consolidation of
regional and subregional partnerships, for example, is a
crucial tool within the framework of the ownership and
responsibility of its members, to appropriately address
challenges to security and the rule of law.
We have insisted that sustainable peace be pursued
through political tools to find negotiated political
solutions. We believe that dialogue implies learning,
requires reflection and the recognition of differences,
but also of points of agreement. It also facilitates
recovery from a crisis and can prevent the escalation of
violence, as long as the priorities and needs of the parties
involved are taken into account. As a State that defends
multilateralism and the peaceful means of conflict
resolution, Bolivia is aware of the challenges facing the
international community. We insistently call for peace
through the use of multilateral mechanisms, in strict
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
Bolivia emphasizes that a preventive approach is
essential within the framework of an in-depth study
of the situation on a case-by-case basis. Sharing earlywarning information on potential conflicts; developing
conflict prevention mechanisms; coordinating joint and
mutually supportive actions throughout the different
stages of conflict response and management are all
essential tasks.
As we mentioned, cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations in conflict prevention is
crucial. The exchange of information with bodies such
as the African Union, the Economic Community of
West African States and the Community of Central
African States on their views of the reality on the ground
contributes to reaching a better understanding of crises
and to finding a unified approach to their resolution
by considering the needs of each region on the basis
of comparative advantages. In that connection, we
appreciate the contribution of the Secretariat and the
African Union Commission to the establishment of a
joint working framework.
We have repeatedly stated that peacebuilding is
closely connected to the important links between good
practices, the strengthening of interactive dialogues
and coordination among the General Assembly, the
Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission.
This in turn should make it possible for complementarity
between peace and security initiatives, as well as
national ownership and inclusiveness at all levels, to
play a vital role in building a strategic partnership
16/25

25/04/2018

aimed at ensuring efficiency and flexibility, with the
single goal of achieving sustainable peace.
Likewise, in the context of peacebuilding, it is
imperative to implement the women and peace and
security agenda, under resolution 1325 (2000). We
must reaffirm, ensure and promote the participation
of women not only in peace processes, giving them
an active role in the areas of prevention, mediation
and dialogue, with a view to finding solutions based
on conditions of equality, but also in post-conflict
reconstruction, by means of their economic, social and
cultural reintegration. It is also important to take into
account the issues of the protection of young people;
non-stigmatization; and the inclusion of youth in
peace processes.
We agree that there can be no development without
peace, or peace without development. It is imperative
that the members of the international community as
a whole pool and redouble their efforts, with a view
to enhancing synergies between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding activities as required, in the context of
their respective competencies. In addition, all of this
must take place in the context of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
By way of conclusion, let me say that to break
the vicious circle of war, the structural causes of
conflicts must be addressed. Interventionist practices
and regime-change policies, inter alia, have led to
collateral damage and, consequently, chaos, terrorism
and militarization, with the regrettable results that are
still being experienced today.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): Your
Excellency, Minister for Foreign Affairs, we welcome
you as you preside over this important meeting which
you have organized. It underscores the importance
of peacebuilding and peacekeeping, and reflects the
principles, objectives and purposes of the Charter of
the United Nations. I wish also to thank the delegation
of Peru for the good preparation of the concept note
(S/2018/325, annex), which stresses the importance of
peacebuilding and peacekeeping through advancing
and promoting the efforts made by various organs
of the United Nations to ensure their effectiveness,
particularly peacekeeping operations. We are meeting
today for these lofty ends which reflect the objectives,
purposes and principles of the Charter.
I wish also to take this opportunity to thank
the Secretary-General; His Excellency the Foreign
18-12338

25/04/2018

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Minister of Romania, whose country is chairing the
Peacebuilding Commission; and the Commissioner
for Peace and Security of the African Union for their
valuable briefings at the beginning of this meeting.
It is vital, when speaking of building and
maintaining peace, to highlight the importance of
the role played by the Peacebuilding Commission in
making and sustaining peace. We all are aware that
the Security Council’s task is to maintain international
peace and security. However, the Council usually does
not act until tensions have escalated and become violent
conflicts that are tantamount to a threat to international
peace and security. This takes place at a very advanced
stage of conflicts and when solutions become difficult,
complex and very costly. The role of the Peacebuilding
Commission, however, according to its mandate under
resolution 1645 (2005), is to undertake a number
of activities, such as doing surveys and submitting
reports on the socioeconomic and political situation of
the countries under consideration, as well as dealing
with early-warning, quick-response, good offices and
diplomatic solutions. It is therefore a forum that deals
with various socioeconomic and political issues and
cooperates with the Security Council on securitypolitical issues.
We therefore believe in the importance of promoting
the role of the Commission in reaching the desired goals.
We are firmly convinced that the Security Council
has at its disposal the tools necessary to shoulder its
responsibilities, as stated in Chapters VI, VII and VIII
of the Charter, in responding to the traditional and
renewed challenges facing our contemporary world. The
most important of these tools is preventive diplomacy,
in addition to the important and fundamental role of the
Secretary-General in bringing matters to the attention
of the Security Council, as set out in article 99 of
the Charter.
The Secretary-General has made great efforts to
reform the peace and security pillar of the Secretariat. It
is a very important step that leads to the strengthening
of the Secretariat and which is supported by the State
of Kuwait. We look forward to the adoption of the twin
draft resolutions on this issue by the General Assembly
and the Security Council. This would ensure continued
efforts and the monitoring and assessment of the progress
made by Member States and the United Nations for the
promotion of building peace and sustaining peace. This
would also make the United Nations more transparent,

S/PV. 8243

effective, accountable and capable of shouldering its
duties and responsibilities.
While we believe in the importance of this issue,
which is closely linked to keeping peace and security,
we express our full conviction that these efforts must
be reflected on the ground by all parties concerned
with building and maintaining peace. The topic of
peacebuilding and sustaining peace should not be
limited to thematic issues. Continuous follow-up of this
topic will effectively contribute to its implementation.
The State of Kuwait supports and encourages the
mediation efforts and all other efforts made to ensure
the peaceful resolution of conflict, as well as to help
build national and regional capacities with a view to
bringing about peace, stability and development and
promoting human rights, especially in areas of tension
or conflict.
We would like to stress once again the firm belief
of the State of Kuwait that development and human
rights are closely linked to security, and that all
peoples, through enjoying their social, civil, economic
and political rights, can eradicate the root causes of
conflict throughout the world. We would highlight
the Secretary-General’s focus on strengthening the
main pillars of the United Nations, namely to ensure
security, peace, development and human rights, leading
to sustained peace. This undoubtedly requires full
coherent and coordination efforts on the part of the
relevant organs in order to respond to all crises that
threaten international peace and security.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes Peru’s initiative to convene today’s highlevel open meeting. We welcome your presence here in
New York, Foreign Minister Popolizio Bardales, and
thank you for presiding over today’s meeting.
As the key organ of the United Nations responsible
for peace and security, the Security Council bears
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. The Council should
therefore play an important role in strengthening the
work of the United Nations in the areas of peacebuilding
and sustaining peace.
To that end, I wish to emphasize the following points.
First, we must push for political solutions to
the hotspot issues that exist in various regions. The
Security Council and the international community
should, on the basis of respect for the sovereignty of the

18-1233817/25

S/PV.8243

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

countries concerned, actively support those countries
in promoting the process of achieving peace in
keeping with their specific situation; promote national
reconciliation; continue to de-escalate the situation;
seek to resolve such hotspot issues; and effectively
prevent a relapse into conflict by creating conditions
conducive to peacebuilding.
Secondly, the relevant United Nations agencies, in
their peacebuilding efforts, should have a strong focus
and clearly identified priorities. The United Nations
should respect the will and ownership of post-conflict
countries when providing constructive support and
assistance based on their needs on the ground and
strictly carry out its work in accordance with mandates.
Thirdly, we must ensure that the advisory role of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) to the Security
Council is fully undertaken. The PBC, which is jointly
mandated by the General Assembly and the Security
Council, has the advantage of integrating the political,
security and development aspects. We welcome a
greater role for the PBC as it provides useful and
valuable recommendations to the Security Council.
Fourthly, we must ensure a smooth transition
between peacekeeping operations and peacebuilding.
It is imperative that, once the desired objectives for
peacekeeping operations have been largely achieved,
peacebuilding should follow suit in a timely manner
to prevent the countries concerned from returning to
conflict. In the later stages of peacekeeping operations,
there should be plans for peacebuilding efforts after
the withdrawal of such operations. If their mandates
already include peacebuilding-related elements,
peacekeeping operations should ensure a smooth
transition of related functions.
The United Nations peacebuilding architecture is
mandated by the General Assembly and the Security
Council. China stands ready to actively assist the
Security Council to play its role in building peace
and fulfilling its Charter responsibilities to maintain
international peace and security.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): I would like to welcome His Excellency
Mr. Néstor Popolizio Bardales to New York. I
congratulate you, Sir, on Peru’s presidency of the
Security Council and on convening today’s important
meeting, which enables us to share our views about the
implications of the report of the Secretary-General on
18/25

25/04/2018

peacebuilding and sustaining peace (S/2018/43) on the
work of the Council.
I would also like to thank Secretary-General
António Guterres; State Secretary for Regional
Affairs and Multilateral Global Affairs in the Ministry
for Foreign Affairs of Romania, as Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Mr. Dan Neculăescu; and
the Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union, Mr. Smail Chergui, for their briefings on the
status of the review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture, pursuant to General Assembly resolution
70/262 and resolution 2282 (2016).
Global peacekeeping efforts must be redesigned in
order to respond to twenty-first century conflicts and
address their root causes. The complexity and protracted
nature of current conflicts, as well as their links to
violent extremism, terrorism and organized crime,
make it essential to invest in revamping the United
Nations architecture in order to support countries’
peacebuilding efforts. In that regard, the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea thanks Secretary-General Guterres
for his efforts to ensure the political and operational
coherence of plans to improve leadership, accountability
and the ability of the United Nations to support that
important agenda.
We agree in particular that investing in inclusive
and sustainable global development is the best tool
for preventing violent conflicts. For that reason, we
welcome the efforts of the Secretary-General to ensure
the implementation of United Nations development
system reform. As the Secretary-General states in his
report, peacebuilding is above all the responsibility of
Member States. We therefore welcome the efforts and
unique role of the Peacebuilding Commission in support
of such processes throughout the world, in particular the
African Solidarity Initiative, the Joint United NationsAfrican Union Framework for Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security and the memorandum of
understanding between the African Union Commission
and the Peacebuilding Support Office, while promoting
gender equality and always respecting the principle of
national sovereignty.
According to the report under consideration today,
investing in conflict prevention could save conflictafflicted countries and the international community
between $5 billion and $70 billion per year. The efforts
of the Secretary-General in the areas of development,
management reform and the review of the United
18-12338

25/04/2018

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Nations architecture are constrained by a decrease
in official development assistance to $41 billion,
and, by extension, a lower percentage earmarked for
peacebuilding in conflict-afflicted countries. Conflictaffected countries, in which more than half of the
world’s abject poor live, contributed $153 billion to the
global economy in 2016.
Equatorial Guinea would like to voice its concern
about the implications of that capital flight for some of the
world’s poorest countries and communities, which are
affected by conflicts and extreme poverty. I would like
to encourage the disbursement of the funds required to
boost South-South and triangular cooperation, diversify
the sources of resources and promote partnerships to
ensure predictable funding for peacebuilding efforts, in
particular the Peacebuilding Fund.
Equatorial Guinea welcomes presidential statement
S/PRST/2017/27 and proposes that it be used to support
the reform of the peacebuilding architecture. We
also proposes that the statement be used to support
the important advisory role of the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Peacebuilding Support Office
and that the relevant United Nations bodies conduct
an in-depth study into the practical implications of
proposals for the purpose of prioritizing the use of
existing funds. In that regard, I would like to reiterate
the support of Equatorial Guinea for substantive
dialogue on the implementation of the twin resolutions
and the proposals outlined in the report of the SecretaryGeneral, which are above and beyond the briefings to
which we are restricted. Investing in peacebuilding and
sustainable development is the most effective way to
prevent and end the root causes of conflicts and achieve
peace and security for all.
In conclusion, for the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea, its Government and Head of State, His
Excellency Mr. Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, peace has
no price. It must continue to be cultivated despite the
external adversities that may threaten it at times. It is
that sustainable peace, with which Equatorial Guinea
and its people live, that has enabled every corner of
our country to achieve economic, social and political
development, through the implementation of our
Horizon 2020 agenda, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and African Union’s Agenda 2063.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Let me begin by thanking
the Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres; the Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission, Mr. Dan Neculăescu;

S/PV. 8243

and the Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union, Mr. Smail Chergui, for their very
informative briefings. I would also like to congratulate
the Peruvian presidency for convening today’s briefing,
which addresses one of the most crucial elements of our
work here at the Security Council.
For over 70 years since the founding of the United
Nations, building sustainable peace has been the
holy grail of the international community. We have
worked very hard to find it and fulfil the dreams of
so many, but, so far, to no avail. There have always
been new challenges and obstacles, such as conflicts,
asymmetrical attacks and violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law. In order to tackle
them, we should deploy a broad spectrum of activities
within the competences of all three pillars: peace and
security, development and human rights. They are all
interlinked and mutually reinforcing. Long-term peace
and security cannot be ensured without addressing
development and human rights. If connected, they are
stronger and more effective. That is why I would like to
focus the attention of the Council on those issues.
First, on the peace and security pillar, eacebuilding
and sustainable peace are a fundamental condition for
development. To that end, the United Nations should
comprehensively address conflicts through the use of
all available instruments — from prevention, through
peace settlement and peacekeeping to comprehensive
post-conflict restoration. We should all underline the
importance of peacekeeping in the wider and complex
process of sustaining peace. It should be the priority of
international community to make all the available tools
coherent and effectively interlinked.
Peacebuilding and sustaining peace are strongly
linked to the means of the peaceful settlement of
conflicts enshrined in Chapter VI of the Charter of the
United Nations. Any peacebuilding action will succeed
only if potential conflicts are countered at their roots.
The international community cannot forget that
prevention is a key of peacebuilding and its mention
in the Charter should be taken seriously, as a powerful
tool in our hands.
Secondly, let me turn to the pillar of development.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and its
Sustainable Development Goals, wherein we pledged
to leave no one behind, create conditions for inclusive
and sustainable development and provide the best way
to prevent crises and conflicts in today’s world. In

18-1233819/25

S/PV.8243

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

that regard, we appreciate the latest report (S/2018/43)
of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding and
sustaining peace.
Cooperation among all stakeholders, including
Governments, civil society, academia and the business
community, is of the utmost importance. That
means that we have to be prepared for new forms of
partnership and turn ideas into action, the dividends
of which should extend to all actors involved. It is
therefore crucial to align the core business of the private
sector with the strategic goals of the international
community. Only such an approach will give us a
chance for a peacebuilding process to bring about the
expected results.
Thirdly, with regard to human rights, there is no
successful peace process without full respect for human
rights. Respect for human rights also means social
cohesion. Every member of a society has the right to
be equal and secure. Its absence in many parts of the
world creates a source of instability. Youth also have
their place within the human rights pillar. Young people
in many parts of the world experience great frustration
and desperation, which are factors of destabilization.
Fostering the participation of youth is crucial for the
effective implementation of the peacebuilding and
sustaining peace agenda. Poland therefore fully supports
resolution 2250 (2015), on youth, peace and security.
Equally important is the empowerment of women.
Women’s meaningful participation in all aspects of
peace and security is critical to the effectiveness of
the agreements reached. Poland remains committed
to the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
on women and peace and security, in political and
institutional dimensions.
For Poland — the country that initiated the
negotiations on the Convention on the Rights of the
Child — a question of crucial importance is that of
the rights of children in peace processes, including
their protection from all forms of violence, negligent
treatment and exploitation, including sexual abuse.
We strongly support the need for rehabilitation and
reintegration measures for former child combatants and
their meaningful participation in peacebuilding efforts.
I would here like to commend the important work of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict and her Office.
In conclusion, let me reiterate the statement made
yesterday (see S/PV.8241) by Mr. Jacek Czaputowicz,
20/25

25/04/2018

the Polish Minister for Foreign Affairs, that Poland
is ready to engage actively in the peacebuilding and
sustaining peace efforts of the United Nations and of
the Secretary-General and the international community
at large.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): Let me start by
congratulating you, Foreign Minister Néstor Popolizio
Bardales, and Peru on your successful presidency of the
Security Council this month, as well as to commend
Lima’s initiative to organize this timely briefing on
peacebuilding and sustaining peace. My delegation
expresses appreciation to the Secretary-General’s
determined effort to strengthen the United Nations
peace and security pillar, and offers our full support
in that endeavour. We also thank the Romanian State
Secretary, Mr. Dan Neculăescu, and the African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security, Mr. Smail
Chergui, for their substantive briefings.
Kazakhstan believes that early warning,
preventive diplomacy, mediation and peacekeeping
are interdependent and complimentary components
of a comprehensive, integrated strategy in which
peacebuilding and sustaining peace should be an integral
element running through the entire cycle. Investments
in sustaining peace should begin early to avoid conflict.
Without it, such stability can be uncertain, fragile and
vulnerable to new shocks. We could not but agree
with the Secretary-General’s observation that instead
of responding to crises, we need to invest far more in
prevention. Prevention works, saves lives and is costeffective.
Since gaining its independence, 27 years ago,
Kazakhstan has been at the forefront of preventive
diplomacy, conflict prevention and confidence-building
measures, which are the core principles of our foreign
policy. That is not a political declaration, but rather
the working methods of my country. We have existing
mechanisms that demonstrate how we have carried
out those principles in real life. An outstanding
example of that has been the initiative of my President
to create the United Nations Regional Centre for
Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia, which has
been successfully functioning in our region for the past
10 years, as well as the foundation of the Conference
on Interaction and Confidence-building Measures in
Asia, which today is comprised of 26 countries from
far beyond Central Asia, over a wide geographic space
from Cairo to Beijing, engaging the nations in measures
18-12338

25/04/2018

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

to ensure peace and stability in Asia through dialogue
and trust-building.
We strive to use all possible venues and platforms,
including the United Nations, to prevent threats and
maintain peace. We therefore consider Kazakhstan’s
election as a non-permanent member of the Security
Council as a high responsibility, as well as a symbol
of trust from the United Nations States Members in
our country and its peace-loving policy, initiatives
and proposals for strengthening the role of the United
Nations in ensuring peace and security.
In the context of the overall efforts for peacebuilding
and sustaining peace, Kazakhstan is currently promoting
an initiative of a three-fold strategy to address today’s
conflicts and sustaining peace, which are the security
and development nexus, a regional approach and the
United Nations Delivering as One. That is a simple,
pragmatic and workable formula based on our national
experience, as well as the experience we have gained
in the Council through interactions with different
interlocutors during several Security Council visits to
various countries and regions, including the regions
of Lake Chad and the Sahel, Haiti and Colombia, and
Afghanistan in January during our presidency.
In addition, it is complementary to the efforts
undertaken by the Secretary-General in his reforms of
the peace and security architecture, the development
system and management. That strategy may be seen as a
combined policy of implementing three of the SecretaryGeneral’s reforms and will help to solve problems on
the ground globally. None of the three approaches is
new to the United Nations system; however, in our
view, a combination of them could create a universal
model to address conflicts and sustain peace that can be
replicated in different parts of the world suffering from
local conflicts. We need to create a new United Nations
paradigm for addressing and preventing conflicts.
The importance of the three-fold strategy was
recognized by the Security Council when it adopted
presidential statement S/PRST/2018/1 on 18 January.
It is our aim to introduce this strategy to the wider
United Nations membership. In that regard, we call on
the Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding
Support Office to use their venues to explore the
efficiency of this strategy. Indeed, it has a cross-pillar
bridging and convening role, as well as the ability
to bring together diverse actors, including Member
States, host Governments, the United Nations system,

S/PV. 8243

international financial institutions and regional and
subregional organizations, as well as civil society
and academia.
Kazakhstan is of the firm view that it is a time
to actively engage in the reform of peacebuilding
and sustaining peace systems in order to bring more
efficiency and better coordination to our efforts to build
a safer world. Kazakhstan has been contributing to this
process financially and otherwise — locally, regionally
and globally — and will continue to do so in future
because there is no alternative if we wish, for ourselves
and the next generation, to live in peace and prosperity.
Ms. Eckels-Currie (United States of America):
I thank the Peruvian presidency for calling for and
presiding over this important briefing on peacebuilding
and sustaining peace. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General, Mr. Neculăescu and Mr. Chergui
for their briefings.
Virtually
every
conflict-affected
country
considered by the Security Council has struggled with
consolidating peace in the aftermath of conflict. The
United Nations has often struggled to find and apply
the right tools to prevent crises and break cycles of
conflict. The United States believes in the admirable
goals of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture,
as established. Towards that end, we are optimistic that
the General Assembly’s endorsement of the SecretaryGeneral’s proposal to integrate the Peacebuilding
Support Office into the Department of Political Affairs
will help break down existing institutional silos that
prevent us from using all the tools we have to prevent
conflict and maintain global peace and security.
Structural change alone will not ensure the success
of peacebuilding. Changes in the way the United Nations
thinks are necessary in order to ensure sustainable
peace. We encourage the Secretary-General to follow
through on many of the good ideas and commitments
in the report on peacebuilding and sustaining peace
(S/2018/43). That includes integrated strategic
frameworks and the United Nations development
assistance frameworks and greater in-country crosspillar cooperation, such as among the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, global focal point for police,
justice and corrections, and the Joint UNDP-Department
of Political Affairs Programme on Building National
Capacities for Conflict Prevention and its Peace and
Development Advisers. We must do more to get in front

18-1233821/25

S/PV.8243

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

of and head off the drivers and underlying causes of
conflict. We also urge the Peacebuilding Support Office
to provide greater information on peacebuilding and
sustaining peace best practices for the Peacebuilding
Commission and Member States to draw from when
they are working to prevent conflict and sustain peace.
The United States, however, does not support
suggestions to repurpose, reprogramme or tie
a percentage of peacekeeping budget funds to
peacebuilding. We encourage countries to provide
voluntary funding to the Peacebuilding Fund. Access to
assessed funding is not a panacea for all problems, and
it will not fix the fundamental obstacles to effective
peacebuilding, namely, the lack of coherence and
coordination across existing programmes and the lack
of political will to integrate conflict prevention and
the promotion of human rights at the country level and
across the United Nations. One area where we would
like to see better integration of peacebuilding resources
is in enabling sustainable exit strategies for United
Nations peace operations, including plans for a viable
transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding.
We have emphasized the importance of sustainable
exit strategies for peacekeeping missions and noted
that peacekeeping cannot be a substitute for political
solutions. Better integration of peacebuilding strategies
into the exit strategies of peacekeeping missions can
help enable sustainable political transitions. The
Security Council did precisely that when it mandated
that the United Nations to devise a peacebuilding
plan for Liberia in preparation for the closure of the
mission there. The United Nations devised that plan
in close coordination with the Government of Liberia
and with the participation of civil society. The result
was something that all parties could support and
something of which we should all be proud. The
Liberian Government committed to working with the
peacekeeping mission, the United Nations country
team, local stakeholders and international partners to
implement the steps laid out in this first-of-its-kind plan
to sustain peace in the years to come. That should be
the best-practice model for similar transitions in future.
We know that every situation is different. As we have
seen in Haiti, for instance, United Nations police can
play an essential role in ensuring viable exit strategies.
A critical aspect of achieving mission exit strategies
is better integration of the police into all aspects of
mission planning and ensuring that the United Nations
Police Division is empowered to properly assess, plan,
22/25

25/04/2018

deploy, manage and support peace operations. Even
more critical is the inclusion of civil society actors in
peacebuilding planning, including women and youth
leaders, human rights activists, experts in transitional
justice and others. Only when all voices in a society are
heard and human rights and human dignity are respected
can effective and lasting transitions to peace occur.
Equally important to sustaining peace and
peacebuilding are partnerships with the World Bank
and other international financial institutions, as well as
the role of the private sector. Addressing socioeconomic
challenges is an extremely important element of
peacebuilding and requires greater engagement with
multiple stakeholders. Governments must hold up
their side of the deal, cooperating with United Nations
agencies and, most importantly, demonstrating the
political will to build and sustain peace. That political
will must include the protection and promotion of
human rights and commitments to building just and
equitable governing structures.
While we are far from resolving many of the
conflicts facing the world today, we are optimistic
that the Secretary-General’s focus on United Nations
reform and on peacebuilding and sustaining peace will
yield good results. The United States looks forward to
continuing to work with all members of the Security
Council and the General Assembly to that end.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): I am pleased to welcome the eminent
participants to this important discussion, preparations
for which took a number of years. We thank the
Secretary-General for finding the time to participate
personally in this discussion. We further thank the
Peruvian presidency for the initiative of convening
today’s meeting.
Today, on the second day of deliberations in the
General Assembly, those present here already have a
view as to how Member States envisage the way ahead
in the important work of the United Nations in building
and sustaining peace. It is well known that those who
do not recall the past cannot count on a dignified future.
For that reason, I wish to turn to the very sources of
peacebuilding to recall how it began and the noble goals
set forth by the General Assembly and the Security
Council when they established these avenues of work.
Thirteen years ago, through General Assembly
resolution 60/180 and Security Council resolution 1645
(2005), two United Nations Charter bodies established
18-12338

25/04/2018

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

the Peacebuilding Commission to deliver assistance to
countries in the post-conflict period. The main aim of
this decision was to help set countries on the path to
development and recovery as expeditiously as possible.
The Commission was instructed to deliver assistance
in crafting peacebuilding strategies for host States on
the basis of their priorities, to bring together the key
stakeholders within and beyond the United Nations,
and to coordinate their efforts.
Ten years later, the identical General Assembly
resolution 70/262 and Security Council resolution
2282 (2016) specified the goals of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC). Above all, States agreed on defining
the concept of sustaining peace to help them understand
differences among tasks implemented at the national
and international levels to achieve sustainable solutions.
For States, this is a matter of national ownership in
defining and implementing peacebuilding strategies,
the importance of considering public opinion and the
need to prevent the emergence, escalation, perpetuation
and recurrence of conflicts, and to eliminate their root
causes. To that end, it is important that the task of
sustaining peace lie not only with Governments, but
equally with all national stakeholders.
While international assistance in the area of
sustaining peace plays a supporting role, the same term
has a slightly different meaning at the United Nations.
It implies that such support must be based on the
experience of all bodies of the Organization and that
attention must be accorded from the very outset and
at all stages of conflict. In that regard, every United
Nations body must act strictly within its mandate.
Since the adoption of the twin resolutions two
years ago at the United Nations, there has been ongoing
debate on exactly how activities in this area should
change. Secretary-General António Guterres has made
an important contribution to the discussion with his
recent thematic report (S/2018/43). His proposals and
recommendations will undoubtedly provide a basis for
further discussion among Member States to strengthen
the effectiveness and capacity of the United Nations in
the area of peacebuilding support. I will not pre-empt
our statement to be delivered at the General Assembly
tomorrow. I will note only the main points.
First, peacebuilding and sustaining peace are
inextricably linked. With the introduction of the new
term, traditional peacebuilding must not be relegated
to the back burner. On the contrary, as the work of the

S/PV. 8243

PBC demonstrates, it is becoming ever more necessary.
We are therefore sceptical about the idea of positioning
sustaining peace as a new central task.
Secondly, conflict prevention is an independent
domain. Its principles are enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations and United Nations resolutions. The
primary role in that respect is also played by States
themselves within their national territories. It is they
that determine whether or not they need international
support and what form it should take.
Thirdly, by definition, one-size-fits-all approaches
and reliable universal crises indicators do not exist.
Every case requires an individual approach, a unique
solution and, most importantly, a State’s consent to be
provided with international support. That also applies
to human rights issues, which are often artificially
politicized to influence sovereign domestic political
processes. It is interference in the internal affairs of
others under the pretext of the protection and promotion
of human rights that has led to most of today’s bloody
conflicts. There are many examples of such situations
and, unfortunately, many of them are to be found in
States neighbouring the Russian Federation.
Fourthly, the main task of resident coordinators
should be to step up the reliability and effectiveness
of State institutions without duplicating or supplanting
their work. Monitoring less-than-obvious indicators
instead of helping to resolve urgent issues is fraught
with the risk of reducing, not increasing, effectiveness.
Fifthly, concerning theoretical linkages connecting
human rights, development, peace and security, it is
important to understand that each of those areas should
be addressed by specialized bodies in full adherence to
their current mandates. Whether or not certain issues are
discussed in the Security Council should not determine
their importance to the international community.
The Security Council will soon adopt a draft
resolution identical to that agreed by the General
Assembly. We support the core message of those
documents that Member States closely follow
issues concerning peace and intend to continue to
discuss them. We appreciate the Secretary-General’s
contribution to that discussion and hope that the
procedural consensus on procedural resolutions will
be properly interpreted. Peacebuilding and sustaining
peace are far too multidimensional in nature to operate
on what is largely an artificial consensus.

18-1233823/25

S/PV.8243

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Much work remains to be done in the future, in the
course of which United Nations Member States and
bodies should learn to better understand and consider
one another’s priorities. We believe that the primary
goal and purpose of peacebuilding, sustaining peace
and the United Nations as a whole are to help States
build their own capacities so that they can dispense
with international assistance and ultimately begin
helping those that continue to require such assistance.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): Let me begin by thanking
the Peruvian presidency for organizing this important
high-level briefing. We are pleased to see you,
Mr. Minister, presiding over this meeting.
I would like to express our appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2018/43) two years after the twin resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council (General
Assembly resolution 70/262 and resolution 2282 (2016))
on the review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture were adopted. We thank him for his
presentation of the report, which outlines how he intends
to implement the new approach to sustaining peace.
We also thank the State Secretary for Regional
Affairs and Multilateral Global Affairs in the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs of Romania, as Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
We are indeed very pleased to see Commissioner
Chergui among us, and his presence here today
signifies the need to forge necessary partnerships with
regional organizations in addressing the challenges of
sustaining peace. We draw satisfaction from the fact
that cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union (AU) is currently at the highest level
that it has ever been. Commissioner Chergui rightfully
paid tribute to the Secretary-General for the role that
he has been playing in strengthening that partnership
between the United Nations and the AU. We, of course,
look forward in the same spirit to further strengthening
cooperation between the Security Council and the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union.
The timing of this high-level meeting could not be
any more appropriate in the light of the unprecedented
challenges facing the United Nations in the maintenance
of international peace and security. All indications are
that we are passing through a period characterized by
increasing geopolitical tensions. The proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction is now becoming a major
threat. Terrorism and violent extremism also remain
24/25

25/04/2018

a grave danger to international peace and security.
Cybercrime and the possibility of the disruption of
critical infrastructure are becoming an almost realized
nightmare. The spread of small arms and light weapons
and the increasing activities of transnational organized
criminals continue to foment instability around the
world. The impact of that on Africa is cause for great
concern. Nevertheless, we are encouraged by the
ongoing reform process that the Secretary-General is
undertaking to make the Organization fit for purpose
in responding to current security challenges.
In view of the enormous peace and security
challenges we face today, prioritizing conflict prevention
is not really an option. The concept of sustaining peace
is also perfectly aligned with that important priority,
and it has certainly brought about a new paradigm shift
in the manner in which we should deal with peace and
security issues. It is hence encouraging to note that
the proposed reform of the United Nations peace and
security pillar has prioritized prevention and sustaining
peace as its overarching goal. That is very critical, in
our view, as it provides the necessary framework to
coordinate a coherent response in addressing root
causes and violence across various stages of conflict.
We believe that the reform outcome will allow
the United Nations to develop an integrated capability
to comprehensively tackle contemporary security
challenges, including, among other ways, by reducing
duplicative structures and overlapping mandates;
ensuring greater transparency and accountability; and
improved planning and budgetary process. We feel that
this would ultimately strengthen the Organization’s
ability to deliver effective and efficient operational
support in the field, including in complex security
terrains where peacekeeping and special political
missions are deployed. That is why we welcome the latest
report of the Secretary-General on the review of the
peacebuilding architecture and his recommendations
contained therein.
It has been emphasized time and again that peace
and security, development and human rights are
inextricably linked, and therefore closer collaboration
among various United Nations organs and other
stakeholders is required for building peaceful and
inclusive societies. As rightly stressed in the latest
report, addressing institutional fragmentation and
ensuring policy and operational coherence across the
entire United Nations system is also essential to ensure
18-12338

25/04/2018

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

that conflict prevention and sustaining peace are placed
at the heart of the Organization’s work and activities.
However, we have to realize that we cannot
achieve that without fully utilizing the potential role
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), particularly
its convening, bridging and advisory roles with
principal and relevant organs of the United Nations.
We therefore need to scale up the PBC’s contribution
along that line, and continuous focus and engagement
are needed to ensure that the Commission continues
to promote an integrated, strategic and coherent
approach. In that regard, we are encouraged to note
the recent comprehensive advice of the PBC to the
Security Council on a number of regional and countryspecific issues. We are also encouraged to note that
the Secretary-General has underscored in his reform
proposal the hinge role of the Peacebuilding Support
Office in linking the peace and security pillar with
development and humanitarian efforts.
We believe that the United Nations cannot address
the myriad international security challenges alone.
In order to achieve the end goal of sustaining peace,
there is a need to enhance partnerships with various
stakeholders, including with regional and subregional
organizations, international financial institutions,
national Governments and various civil society and
private organizations across the whole spectrum of
conflict cycles, including prevention, peacekeeping
and special political missions, conflict resolution
and peacebuilding.
For instance, the African Union’s peacebuilding
efforts in Africa in line with the implementation of the
AU post-conflict reconstruction and development policy
framework, as well as the African Solidarity Initiative,
certainly complements the work of the PBC. We hope
the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for
an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security will be

S/PV. 8243

instrumental in further strengthening the cooperation
between the United Nations and the AU in peacebuilding
and sustaining peace in Africa. We also welcome the
signing of the memorandum of understanding between
the PBC and the Economic Community of West African
States, which provides a framework for cooperation and
partnership in peacebuilding.
Ultimately, sustaining peace is of course a national
endeavour, and the national ownership and inclusivity
of all stakeholders, including the Government, the
private sector and civil society, is key to achieving the
objective of sustaining peace. What is really required of
the United Nations and international partners is to help
build national and local capacities for sustaining peace.
That has to be very well explained and understood
by all so as to avoid any misunderstanding. Building
the necessary confidence among Member States is
absolutely important to facilitate the implementation
and operationalization of this new approach to
peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
Finally, we believe there is a need for a change
of mindset, without which no amount of structural
adjustments and innovations can help us achieve
the ultimate objective of making peace and security
sustainable and avert what otherwise could be a
calamity of immeasurable consequences. That should
not be considered as too difficult or complex to achieve,
for a good start can be made by summoning our
earlier commitment to multilateralism, without which
the creation of the United Nations would have been
inconceivable, and reining in the short-sighted and
undisciplined pursuit of national interest, in which the
rationale for the United Nations is anchored and which
the Second World War made a lesson to be ignored
only at our peril. This, no doubt, is a period when much
wisdom is needed in relations among States.
The meeting rose at 5.25 p.m.

18-1233825/25
