90

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

in its efforts to identify the major obstacles to increasing food production, to mobilize greater action in
this area and to formulate, in close collaboration with
developing countries, donor countries and major international financial and development assistance agencies,
proposals to overcome obstacles to the mobilization of
internal and external resources for this purpose;
7. Recommends that the World Food Council, at
its fifth session, should give consideration to the impact
of trade, including the protectionist measures harming
the exports of the developing countries, on the solution
of the food problems of the developing countries and
put forward specific recommendations thereon;
8. Urges Governments to implement fully the recommendation to establish the international emergency
reserve of 500,000 tons of cereals as a continuing
reserve, with yearly replenishment determined by the
Committee on Food Aid Policies and Programmes,
which would be placed at the disposal of the World
Food Programme;
9. Expresses its deep regret and concern at the
suspension of the negotiations to replace the International Wheat Agreement, 1971,50 and urges that the
Governments participating in those negotiations reach,
as a matter of urgency, a definitive agreement and
reaffirm their commitment to world food security and
that they also, inter alia, seek to establish as early as
possible an international system of grain reserves of
adequate size to provide world food security and
reasonable market and price stability;
10. Urges also that the new food aid convention,
directed towards securing at least 10 million tons of
cereals as food aid per annum, be concluded and implemented by traditional donor countries and by those
in a position to do so as a matter of urgency;
11. Calls upon traditional donor countries and
those in a position to do so, considering the growing
need of the developing countries for agricultural inputs
and their increasing costs, to increase their assistance
for agricultural inputs, especially fertilizer, through the
appropriate bilateral and/or multilateral channels, in
particular the International Fertilizer Supply Scheme
of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations, 51 and also to make substantial contributions to the Seed Improvement and Development
Programme and the Action Programme for Prevention
of Food Losses of the Food and Agriculture Organization, so as to reach the desirable funding level of
$20 million for each;
12. Strongly calls upon donor countries to do their
utmost to preserve the nutritional value, in particular
the protein element, of their food aid;

lotions and programmes regarding food adopted since
the World Food Conference, to formulate actionoriented recommendations thereon and to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session.
85 th plenary meeting
15 December 1978
33/108.

United Nations University

50 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 800, No. 11400, p. 45.
51 Approved by the Council of the Food and Agriculture

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2951 (XXVII) of 11 December 1972, 3081 (XXVIII) of 6 December 1973,
3313 (XXIX) of 14 December 1974, 3439 (XXX)
of 9 December 1975, 31/117 and 31/118 of 16 December 1976 and 32/54 of 8 December 1977,
Recalling also its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of
12 December 1974 containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States and 3362 (S-VII)
of 16 September 1975 on development and international economic co-operation,
Having considered the report of the Council of the
United Nations University on the work of the University52 and the report of the Secretary-General, 53
Noting decision 5.2.3 of 19 October 1978 adopted
by the Executive Board of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization at its one
hundred and fifth session, in which the Board, inter
alia, emphasized the need for further progress in the
strengthening of co-operation between the United
Nations University and the agencies of the United
Nations system, affirmed its conviction that the development of the University required and deserved
greater financial support and reiterated its appeal to
Member States to contribute generously to the University Endowment Fund and, additionally or alternatively, to make special contributions for research and
training activities,
1. Notes with satisfaction that the programme activities of the United Nations University are making
steady progress in three priority programme areas
-world hunger, human and social development, and
use and management of natural resources-and expresses its confidence that the University will continue
its intensified efforts for the early achievement of the
results that will represent substantial contributions to
the solution of the pressing problems of global concern;
2. Recognizes that the major activities of the
United Nations University are concerned with problems and institutions in developing countries and
encourages continuation of that emphasis;
3. Encourages the United Nations University to
continue to concern itself with various activities taking
place in the United Nations system, thereby further
developing its co-operative and co-ordinated relationships with relevant agencies and bodies of the system
and orienting its programme activities in the direction
of the urgent concerns of Member States;
4. Notes that fund-raising results have not proved
adequate to sustain the programmes of the United

Organization of the United Nations in its resolution 1/63
of 19 July 1974 (see Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations, Report of the Council of FAO, Sixtythird Session, para. 26).

62 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 31 (A/33/31).
5H A/33/333 and Corr.I.

13. Requests the World Food Council, at its fifth
session, taking into consideration the various annual
assessments made by the Council, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and other
bodies and bearing in mind the ongoing preparations
for the international development strategy for the third
development decade, to undertake a comprehensive
mid-decade review and assessment of the progress
made in the implementation of the decisions, reso-

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Nations University and requests the Secretary-General
of the United Nations and the Director-General of
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, in consultation with the Rector and the
Council of the University, to study ways and means
of promoting the awareness and understanding of the
programmes and activities of the University with a view
to establishing a more stable financial situation and
thereby strengthening the University, and to report to
the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session;
5. Urges the Secretary-General of the United
Nations and the Director-General of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization as
well as the Rector of the United Nations University
to continue to intensify their efforts to obtain financial
support for the University from all possible sources;
6. Appeals to all Member States to take cognizance
of the achievements of the United Nations University,
particularly in relation to the developing countries,
during its first three years and to make substantial
contributions to the Endowment Fund and/ or to specific programmes of the University so that its work can
go forward successfully.
87th plenary meeting
18 December 1978
33/109.

Proposal for the establishment of a
University for Peace

The General Assembly,
Noting that the President of the Republic of Costa
Rica has submitted for the consideration of the General
Assembly at its thirty-third session a proposal for the
establishment of a University for Peace, as a specialized international institute for post-graduate studies
related to peace, within the system of the United
Nations University, and has offered it to the international community through the United Nations, 54
Bearing in mind that the Government of Costa Rica
has not only offered preliminary plans and designs for
the proposed University for Peace and the headquarters
and land for the campus of that institution but has
also made every effort to finance it outside the United
Nations and the United Nations University so that it
will not constitute a financial burden for either the
Organization or the Member States,
Considering that both its resolution 2951 (XXVII)
of 11 December 1972, by which it established the
United Nations University, and the Charter of the
United Nations University, adopted in resolution 3081
(XXVIII) of 6 December 1973, provided expressly
for the establishment of a decentralized system of
affiliated institutions, integrated into the world university community, devoted to action-oriented research
into the pressing global problems of human survival,
development and welfare that are the concern of the
United Nations and its agencies, and to the postgraduate training of young scholars and research
workers for the benefit of the world community,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the proposal
submitted by the President of the Republic of Costa
Rica for the establishment of a University for Peace
54 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Plenary Meetings, 11th meeting, paras. 106-122.

91

within the system of the United Nations University
and of his offer to the world community;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
text of that proposal to Member States, the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural organization and the Rector and Council of the United Nations
University and to any other agencies he may deem
appropriate, so that they may communicate their views
on it to him;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General to bring
those views to the attention of all Member States and
interested specialized agencies and to submit a report
on the matter, through the Economic and Social Council, to the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session.
87th plenary meeting
18 December 1978
33/110.

Llving conditions of the Palestinian
people

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Vancouver Declaration on Human Settlements, 1976,55 and the relevant recommendations
for national action 56 adopted by Habitat: United
Nations Conference on Human Settlements,
Recalling also resolution 3, entitled "Living conditions of the Palestinians in occupied territories", contained in the recommendations for international cooperation adopted by the Conference, 57 and Economic
and Social Council resolutions 2026 (LXI) of 4
August 1976 and 2100 (LXIII) of 3 August 1977,
Recalling General Assembly resolutions 31/110 of
16 December 1976 and 32/171 of 19 December 1977,
1. Takes note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the living conditions of the Palestinian
people in the occupied Arab territories 58 and notes
that it has not been possible to prepare the full report
called for in General Assembly resolution 32/171 in
time for submission to the Assembly at its thirty-third
session;

2. Requests, therefore, the Secretary-General, in
collaboration with the relevant United Nations organs
and specialized agencies, particularly the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, the Economic Commission
for Western Asia and the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights
of the Population of the Occupied Territories, to
prepare and submit to the General Assembly at its
thirty-fourth session a comprehensive and analytical
report on the social and economic impact of the Israeli
occupation on the living conditions of the Palestinian
people in the occupied Arab territories;
3. Also requests the Secretary-General, in preparing the above-mentioned report, to consult and
co-operate with the Palestine Liberation Organization,
the representative of the Palestinian people;
55 Report of Habitat: United Nations Conference on Human
Settlements, Vancouver, 31 May-11 June 1976 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.IV.7 and corrigendum),
chap. I.
56 Jbid., chap. II.
111 Ibid., chap. III.
5 8 A/33/354.
