S/PV.9206

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9206th meeting

Monday, 5 December 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Kamboj. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(India)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Liang Hengzhu
Mrs. Dime Labille
Mrs. Onanga
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mr. Gallagher
Mr. Ndung’u
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Kuzmin
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Eckersley
Mr. Mills

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security
Letter dated 7 November 2022 from the Special Adviser and Head of the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2022/836)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-72202 (E)
*2272202*

S/PV.9206

Threats to international peace and security

Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD).

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President: I should like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the Council, to
His Excellency Mr. Harold Adlai Agyeman, Permanent
Representative of Ghana, for his service as President of
the Council for the month of November 2022. I am sure
I speak for all members of the Council in expressing
deep appreciation to Ambassador Agyeman and his
team for the great diplomatic skill with which they
conducted the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
Letter dated 7 November 2022 from the Special
Adviser and Head of the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2022/836)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Iraq to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Christian
Ritscher, Special Adviser and Head of the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2022/836, which contains the text of a
letter dated 7 November 2022 from the Special Adviser
and Head of the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant addressed
to the President of the Security Council.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ritscher.
Mr. Ritscher: I am honoured to address the
Security Council today to deliver the ninth report of
the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
2/18

05/12/2022

Over the reporting period, my Team continued to
advance its investigations into international crimes
committed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) against all communities of Iraq. The Team
continuously engages in constructive and supportive
dialogue with Iraqi counterparts, notably with the
judiciary, as well as with Iraqi political authorities.
Furthermore, the considerations and concerns of all
communities impacted by ISIL crimes in Iraq remain
at the forefront of the Team’s investigative work.
Since I previously reported to the Council
(see S/PV.9059), the Team has continued to implement
its independent investigative activities in accordance
with its mandate and in compliance with its terms of
reference. Various lines of investigations have been
developed, from purely researching endeavours to
dynamic case-building strategies. All that investigative
work would not be possible without the close cooperation
of the national authorities of Iraq, including the Kurdish
region. Allow me to highlight some examples of the
progress made.
A key outcome has been the completion of the
case assessment focused on crimes committed against
the Christian community in Iraq, in particular in the
Ninawa plains. The evidence collected and the analysis
conducted thus far substantiate preliminary findings
from my previous report (see S/2022/434) that ISIL
commissioned acts such as the seizing of properties, the
looting and destruction of churches and the commission
of sexual violence against, and the enslavement and
forcible religious conversions of, members of the
Christian community. Those acts constitute crimes
against humanity and war crimes, including, but not
limited to, forcible transfer, persecution, pillage, sexual
violence and slavery and other inhumane acts, such as
forced conversion, as well as intentional destruction
of cultural heritage and religious sides protected
under international humanitarian law. In that respect,
the Team identified a number of ISIL leaders and
members originating from areas nearby, but also from
foreign countries, who considerably participated in
those attacks.
The Team‘s investigations into the development and
use of chemical and biological weapons by ISIL have
notably progressed. Evidence collected continues to
support the notion that ISIL manufactured and produced
22-72202

05/12/2022

Threats to international peace and security

chemical rockets and mortars, ammunition, warheads
and improvised explosive devices, in addition to the
development, testing, weaponization and deployment of
a range of chemical agents highlighted in my previous
report. The Team met with affected communities
and Iraqi authorities at several incident sites and has
focused on the 8 March 2016 attack against Tazah
Khurmatu, which has generated significant volumes of
battlefield evidence.
Importantly, UNITAD started to advance with
its investigations into ISIL’s destruction of cultural
heritage in Iraq. Those investigations represent a
breakthrough in the landscape of core international
crimes investigations. So far, the evidence obtained
shows that religious and cultural sites were either
intentionally destroyed by ISIL or taken over and
occupied, sometimes for military purposes. That
resulted in severe damage or destruction to those
sites. While the motives and methods adopted by the
perpetrators are still being reviewed and analysed, it
appears that explosives and heavy equipment were used
to destroy many of those heritage sites. Several ISIL
fighters responsible for those crimes have already been
identified. In collaboration with UNESCO, that ongoing
work will provide the basis for a case assessment report,
giving a detailed picture of this aspect of ISIL‘s heinous
crimes — crimes that targeted the history and culture
of Iraq and that of humanity at large.
In parallel, the Team kept advancing continued
support to capacity-enhancement initiatives aimed at
directly serving our Iraqi counterparts. Only a few days
ago we organized an intensive one-week training course
for 19 judges from across Iraq, including the Kurdish
region, on international humanitarian and criminal
law and its practical use, hosted by the International
Nuremberg Principles Academy in Germany. It was the
first of its kind on that scale and brought together a range
of renowned academics and practitioners, who provided
in-depth knowledge on issues of international criminal
justice. Along the same lines, in October we held a pilot
training course on building cases related to international
crimes for 11 investigative judges and prosecutors from
the Kurdish region. That will be critical in providing
technical assistance to judges on international criminal
law and helping to ensure sustainable capacity at the
practitioner level for investigating and prosecuting
ISIL members for the crimes they committed in
Iraq in fair and evidence-based trials in line with
international standards.

S/PV.9206

My Team also continued to support the excavation
of several ISIL-related mass graves in Iraq, according
to the annual road map agreed to with the Government
of Iraq and international partners. The road map’s
implementation has been made possible through
close cooperation with the Mass Graves Directorate
of Iraq’s Martyrs’ Foundation and the medical-legal
directorate of its Ministry of Health, as well as with
field-based assistance from Kurdish authorities. In
close coordination with the same Iraqi counterparts,
UNITAD has reached an agreement with the federal
authorities of Germany on collecting data and DNA
reference samples from the Yazidi community residing
in Germany. Based on that agreement, a forthcoming
campaign will be organized to collect those reference
samples for the purpose of identifying human remains
currently held in Iraq, which will eventually enable
survivors to mourn their loved ones. As part of that
programme, psychosocial support training is provided
to Iraqi authorities in order to ensure that international
best practices are maintained when dealing with victims
and survivors.
Efforts to preserve the evidence of ISIL-related
crimes also continued during the reporting period. The
Team has so far converted 5.5 million physical pages
of documentary evidence into usable digital formats.
We are supporting digitization activities at six different
sites in Iraq, with a throughput of approximately
100,000 pages per week. More than 30 individual local
contractors have been recruited and trained in best
practices for evidence collection, preservation and
archiving, in order to support the work and sustain that
key expertise in Iraq.
UNITAD has been working as part of the
United Nations system-wide efforts to address the
issue of the repatriation of Iraqi nationals from camps
in neighbouring countries. Most recently, just last
month, we took part in a meeting of the Technical
Working Group for the Implementation of the Global
Framework for United Nations Support on Syria/Iraq
Third Country National Returnees, as members of the
subgroup on security and accountability. The work
is done jointly between the United Nations offices
concerned, including the United Nations Office on
Counter-Terrorism, and the Iraqi national authorities,
in particular the National Security Advisory. UNITAD
will intensify that important work in accordance with
its mandate to contribute to reconciliation and security
in Iraq.

22-722023/18

S/PV.9206

Threats to international peace and security

I would like to take this opportunity to express
my gratitude to our Iraqi counterparts. In October I
had the honour of meeting with the new President of
Iraq, as well as the Prime Minister and the National
Security Adviser, and I have continued meeting with
many other counterparts, including the President of
the Supreme Judicial Council. I am grateful for the
renewed support to my Team’s work and for the fruitful
cooperation on our existing partnership, notably at the
level of the judiciary. UNITAD remains committed
to improving modalities of information-sharing with
its Iraqi counterparts. Time and again, the Team has
expanded and further operationalized arrangements
with members of the Iraqi judiciary to allow
information to be shared on financial crimes committed
in connection with ISIL activities in Iraq. The Team
continues to find ways to further share information in
line with its terms of reference. In that regard, I remain
hopeful that a memorandum of understanding between
UNITAD and the National Security Advisory of Iraq
will soon be concluded in order to enable the sharing
of information for the purpose of supporting the
United Nations sanctions regime. The memorandum of
understanding, which was jointly drafted, is awaiting
the approval process within the Government of Iraq.
In anticipation of that, a series of meetings was held to
further familiarize relevant Iraqi experts in the listing
and application processes.
One of our key goals is supporting Iraq in playing
a leading role in holding ISIL members accountable
for international crimes. As I mentioned, UNITAD is
committed to building the capacities of the judiciary in
Iraq to work for fair and just trials in accordance with
the applicable standards of the United Nations. We are
also encouraging the Iraqi Council of Representatives
to consider adopting adequate domestic legislation on
core international crimes, such as war crimes, crimes
against humanity and genocide. UNITAD stands ready
to provide technical assistance to that end, and the
recent Government formation gives us hope that such
legislation could be prioritized on the agenda soon.
UNITAD is firmly committed to supporting Iraq in
achieving that goal, in addition to its obligation and
commitment to upholding the policies and best practices
of the United Nations. The sharing of evidence with the
Iraqi judiciary for criminal proceedings can therefore
take place only once the respective legal requirements
and standards are met in terms of substantive and
procedural law.
4/18

05/12/2022

Additionally, I would like to emphasize that
information-sharing with the Iraqi judiciary to support
investigative work and ongoing judicial proceedings
means a lot more than just handing over a huge box
of evidentiary material comparable to thousands, even
millions, of puzzle pieces. Promoting accountability for
international crimes committed by ISIL in Iraq means
delivering tailored assistance in accordance with the
needs of the respective investigative court or judge.
That could pertain to sharing evidentiary information
but can also involve conducting specific training and
sharing experience and best practices in terms of
handling the huge volume of evidence already in the
Iraqi judiciary’s possession.
As conveyed in my previous report to the Council,
UNITAD has been providing support for their
ongoing investigations and prosecutions not only
to the Iraqi authorities but also to Member States in
various parts of the world. That support continued to
increase during the previous reporting period. It is
administered in accordance with the Team’s mandate
to promote accountability for ISIL crimes throughout
the world, and where necessary in consultation with
the Government of Iraq. So far, 17 Member States
have requested assistance from UNITAD to support
their national prosecutions. The ability of the Team to
collect testimonial evidence from witnesses in direct
response to those requests, combined with its capacity
to identify corroborating internal ISIL documentation
from battlefield evidence, has been of significant
assistance in supporting investigations by national
jurisdictions within those Member States. Several of
the investigations supported by UNITAD are expected
to lead to judicial proceedings in the Member States in
question in the near future.
Furthermore, the Team continues to assist the
Joint Investigation Team, currently consisting of the
national prosecutorial authorities of Sweden, France
and Belgium. The goal of the Joint Investigation Team
is to adjudicate core international crimes committed
by ISIL members against the Yazidi community in
2015. UNITAD supports that effort through focused
interviews with Yazidi witnesses, both in Iraq and
abroad, as well as the collection of battlefield evidence
related to Yazidi enslavement networks and specific
searches against evidence in our holdings. That
work is key to ensuring that wherever they are, the
ISIL perpetrators who have committed such heinous
international crimes are held accountable before
22-72202

05/12/2022

S/PV.9206

Threats to international peace and security

competent courts. While carrying out the work, the
Team takes all necessary measures to minimize the
potential retraumatization of witnesses, in line with our
commitment to a victim-centred approach.
My Team consistently engages with a wide range
of stakeholders, including the national authorities,
religious actors, survivor groups and non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), to promote accountability for
crimes committed by ISIL, both in Iraq and globally. In
November, UNITAD co-hosted, with the Embassy of
Iraq to Egypt and the League of Arab States, a special
event entitled “Command Responsibility, Identifying
Leaders and the Role of ISIL Foreign Fighters” in Cairo,
the first event of its kind in the region. Cooperation
with survivors in the investigative daily work, as well
as in the well-established format of the UNITAD-NGO
Dialogue Forum, continues to be placed at the centre
of the Team’s work to ensure that the interests of the
affected communities in achieving accountability for
ISIL crimes are fully realized and recognized.
At this pivotal stage of our mandate, allow me to
state that my Team has now reached the next level on
the path to holding ISIL perpetrators accountable for the
core international crimes that they committed. While
maintaining the same dedication to our investigative
lines and capacity-enhancement activities, UNITAD
will also shift towards a stronger and systematic
support of individual accountability proceedings of
alleged members of ISIL for international crimes before
the competent courts. The mandate of UNITAD is not
geared towards creating a widely unknown archive
behind closed doors, containing the history of ISIL.
UNITAD was established by the Council to ensure that
the perpetrators of the most heinous crimes committed
by ISIL in Iraq are held responsible in courts of law and
that justice is served. To promote accountability means
to raise awareness among all States Members of the
United Nations of UNITAD’s work and to be in regular
contact for exchanges with all the competent authorities
in Iraq and abroad. Within the coming months, the Team
will further improve its capabilities to cooperate with
the investigative and judicial authorities in that regard.
My Team remains at the disposal of the Iraqi
judiciary and any national jurisdiction committed to
indicting ISIL perpetrators for alleged mass atrocity
crimes. My Team is ready to support any discussion,
sharing of expertise, capacities or analytical products
that can serve accountability processes for the core
international crimes committed by ISIL.

My Team is now moving at an even more rapid pace
to assist justice opportunities for alleged ISIL members
if and when they present themselves and regardless of
where the perpetrators may reside. UNITAD will not
stop ensuring that justice is delivered for the thousands
of victims and survivors who have been impatiently
waiting to see their day in court.
I thank the
continuous support.

Security

Council

for

its

The President: I thank Mr. Ritscher for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Eckersley (United Kingdom): Let me start by
welcoming the representative of Iraq to the Chamber.
We would like to thank the Special Adviser for the
expertise and dedication that he and his team have
shown in pursuing accountability for the crimes
committed by Da’esh.
Four and a half years since the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (UNITAD) started its work, the need for
justice for Daesh’s appalling crimes is undiminished.
As we heard, those were crimes against the people,
the history and the culture of Iraq. Nadia Murad told
the conference of the International Preventing Sexual
Violence in Conflict Initiative, held in London last
week, that “survivors around the world do not need a
call to action. We need action — period.” UNITAD is
a key part of that work, working to deliver justice for
survivors. We therefore commend the Government of
Iraq for its engagement with UNITAD’s important work.
Let me highlight in particular two areas of progress
over the past six months.
First, we welcome the breadth of cooperation
between UNITAD and Iraq, as we heard from the
Special Adviser. In particular, we welcome the
technical assistance in relation to the excavation
of several mass grave sites, information-sharing,
tailored assistance for investigations and the capacitybuilding of the Iraqi judiciary and prosecutors,
particularly relating to the collection of evidence.
We also commend UNITAD’s assistance to Iraq on
United Nations sanctions, including its plans to share
information, which could help to support designating
Da’esh members under the sanctions regime of the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989

22-722025/18

S/PV.9206

Threats to international peace and security

05/12/2022

(2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities. We look
forward to the conclusion of the relevant memorandum
of understanding with the Government of Iraq.

committed against the Christian community in Iraq and
a more advanced case assessment on the development
and use of chemical weapons by ISIL in Iraq. As we
heard, evidence of the manufacture and use of chemical
weapons is of particular importance.

Secondly, we welcome the outreach that UNITAD
has prioritized with affected communities in Iraq. That
has built trust and enabled the collection of testimonies
that were used in the prosecution of Da’esh members
around the world, drawing on the support and the
assistance of UNITAD.

The collection and review of digital and documentary
evidence, including through face-to-face interviews and
screenings with witnesses and field missions in several
locations, namely, Qaraqosh, Bartalah, Karamlays
and Mosul, are a substantive component in moving
forward with legal proceedings. That brings about a
fundamental change: the heinous crimes committed by
ISIL are no longer nameless — the perpetrators have
names and faces. That is of the utmost importance, and
we agree with the Special Adviser that it takes his work
and that of his team to another, higher level.

Let me reiterate the importance of collaboration
between Iraq, including the Kurdistan Regional
Government, and UNITAD. Wide-ranging and
comprehensive coordination among all three is crucial
for progress. Following Iraq’s elections, we are pleased
to hear of the relationship that is being built between the
new Iraqi Government and UNITAD, and we hope that
the collaboration will continue to deepen and deliver
justice for survivors.
For our part, we reiterate our strong support for
UNITAD’s pursuit of accountability for the atrocities
committed by Da’esh, both in Iraq and around the world.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I am very pleased to see you,
Madam President, presiding over the Security Council,
and I wish you and your team the best for this month.
I thank Special Adviser Christian Ritscher for his
ninth report (see S/2022/836) and for the information
provided on the advancement of investigations that aim
to ensure justice for the victims of Da’esh/Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL).
Albania commends the excellent work of the
investigative team in Iraq in prioritizing case-building
capacities focused on individual perpetrators,
collecting, documenting and preserving evidence,
witness protection and the inclusive engagement of all
affected communities.
The excavation of mass graves and the collection
of evidence on a case-by-case basis must continue as
the only way to bring about justice for all atrocities
committed by ISIL against the various communities,
be they Christian, Yazidi or Sunni. I would like to
highlight the following key points.
First, we welcome the significant progress achieved
across all investigative lines of inquiry, in particular in
case-building and information-sharing, including the
completion of a first case assessment focused on crimes
6/18

Secondly, delivering justice has never been easy.
We know that the justice system may be slow, but it
should grind fine. Although a great deal has been done
in such a complex environment, much more still needs
to be done. We support the call for strengthening the
coordination of the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD)
with the Iraqi authorities, all affected communities,
civil society and, in particular, the victims and
their families.
Thirdly, despite the ongoing efforts and progress
in countering ISIL/Da’esh and their affiliates, as we
have repeatedly highlighted in the Council, they still
represent an imminent threat in various regions, and
the spread of ISIL in Africa remains of the utmost
concern. Sharing information with the relevant Member
States therefore remains crucial in order to enable
the prosecution of those responsible for financing,
supporting and executing terrorist actions worldwide,
as well as for capacity-building.
Bearing in mind the paramount importance of
accountability, we welcome the excellent cooperation
with the Iraqi Government and encourage it to further
strengthen cooperation with UNITAD in order to
promote evidence-based trials and move forward to the
next level of holding perpetrators responsible in a court
of law. We reiterate our call to the Iraqi authorities to
adopt adequate legislation on core international crimes
for the prosecution of such crimes.
Ending impunity will help the Iraqi people to
rebuild a better and peaceful future. It is also a
22-72202

05/12/2022

Threats to international peace and security

reminder for all perpetrators anywhere that they will be
held accountable for their actions and made to answer
for their crimes. Albania supports the implementation
of the Team’s strategic vision in moving ahead by
prioritizing the completion of case assessments in the
areas of investigation, while we call for special attention
to be placed on the needs of victims and their families,
including through additional efforts to ensure special
protection and assistance for women and children.
Lastly, we welcome the establishment of a new
Government in Iraq and hope that it will continue to
pay special attention, first and foremost, to promoting
justice and accountability for the Iraqi people.
Mrs. Dime Labille (France) (spoke in French): Let
me first commend Ghana’s outstanding presidency of
the Security Council last month and wish you, Madam
President, every success this month.
I thank Mr. Christian Ritscher, Special Adviser
and Head of the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da’esh/ISIL (UNITAD), for his presentation of
the Team’s ninth report (see S/2022/836), submitted
pursuant to resolution 2651 (2022). I welcome the
presence of the Permanent Representative of Iraq, which
reflects Iraq’s commitment to working closely with
the international community and UNITAD to ensure
justice for all the victims of crimes committed on its
territory. We commend all the members of UNITAD
for their outstanding work under sometimes difficult
conditions, and we renew our support for their efforts.
Thanks to UNITAD’s work on the ground in
cooperation with national and local authorities,
significant progress has been made. We underscore
the important support that UNITAD has continued to
provide for the exhumation of mass graves at the sites
of the mass crimes perpetrated by Da’esh, as well as the
progress made in the investigation of the development
and use of chemical and biological weapons and the
destruction of cultural and religious sites by Da’esh.
UNITAD’s achievements in digitizing evidence
are critical to preventing the loss or degradation of
evidence. We encourage UNITAD to pursue that work,
which is at the core of its mandate.
Addressing the situation of the victims of Da’esh
must remain our primary concern. The victim-centred
and gender-sensitive approach that guides UNITAD’s
work is essential for achieving that goal. We highlight
the Investigative Team’s continued engagement with

S/PV.9206

Iraqi civil society. That critical dialogue has enabled
the gathering of valuable testimony to advance the
investigations and shed light on the scope and gravity
of the crimes committed by Da’esh. The fight against
impunity for the crimes committed by Da’esh requires
effective cooperation between UNITAD and the
Iraqi Government, in particular the training of Iraqi
investigative judges in international criminal law,
the preparation of indictments and the prosecution
of members of Da’esh for war crimes, crimes against
humanity and genocide. We encourage the Iraqi
authorities to continue communicating with UNITAD
on those issues. France calls on all States concerned
to support the work of UNITAD through increased
cooperation. France is proud to support UNITAD
through voluntary contributions. It is also important to
recall the long-standing United Nations position not to
share information in judicial proceedings, regardless of
their location, that might result in the death penalty.
In conclusion, France reiterates its commitment to
the fight against terrorism and combating impunity.
The threat posed by Da’esh has not disappeared. The
terrorist organization continues to carry out deadly
attacks on a regular basis. Together with its partners,
France will continue to stand by Iraq in the fight
against terrorism and remains determined to pursue
its activities in order to ensure the permanent defeat of
Da’esh. The Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs
met with Nadia Murad on 11 November. The Minister
reassured her that France would continue to participate
in 2023 in the reconstruction of the Sinjar region of
Iraq, home to most of the Yazidi community on which
horrific crimes were inflicted by Da’esh, in particular
by building a hospital that has received substantial
financial support from France in partnership with
Nadia’s Initiative. Faced with the risk of the resurgence
of Da’esh, the Security Council must remain prepared to
act, including by supporting the work of UNITAD. The
fight against impunity for all those who have committed
crimes is imperative for stabilization, reconstruction
and the reconciliation of the Iraqi people as a whole.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I take the opportunity to congratulate Ghana on
its outstanding and effective presidency of the Security
Council last month and to wish you, Madam President,
every success this month. I also thank Mr. Christian
Ritscher, Special Adviser and Head of the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq

22-722027/18

S/PV.9206

Threats to international peace and security

and the Levant (UNITAD), for his valuable briefing on
its work. I welcome the presence of Ambassador Bahr
Aluloom of Iraq at this meeting.
I would like to begin by paying tribute to the efforts
of UNITAD in conducting investigations and collecting
evidence about the crimes committed by Da’esh against
the Iraqi people, including those constituting crimes
against humanity and genocide. UNITAD efforts in that
regard have culminated in the completion of five cases.
We welcome the progress made in the investigations
related to the crimes perpetrated by Da’esh against the
Christian community, as well as the progress made in
the investigations related to the development and use of
chemical and biological weapons by Da’esh. We hope
that UNITAD’s efforts will contribute to strengthening
the capabilities of the relevant Iraqi authorities in
holding Da’esh accountable for its terrorist crimes.
We recall that, as a sovereign State, Iraq has
the primary responsibility to investigate the crimes
committed by Da’esh on its territory and to hold
the perpetrators accountable in accordance with
resolution 2379 (2017), which recognizes that the
relevant authorities in Iraq are the primary intended
recipient of the evidence collected by UNITAD. We call
upon the Team to share the evidence with the relevant
Iraqi authorities, in compliance with resolution 2651
(2022). In the context of sharing information obtained
by UNITAD with third countries to support the
prosecution of Da’esh criminals, we urge advanced
coordination with Iraq. We also urge the Team to keep
the Council abreast of developments and of the efforts
made to overcome the challenges in that regard. We
hope to see more progress in the upcoming period,
given that the survivors of Da’esh crimes in Iraq and
the relatives of the victims still await justice.
In order for the Team to be successful in
implementing its mandate, there is a need to maintain
communications between the members of the team and
Iraqi officials at all levels and to cooperate with the
Iraqi judicial authorities through information-sharing,
training and capacity-building. Many families in Iraq
still await the completion of the examination of the
remains recovered from mass graves in Sinjar, Tall
Afar and elsewhere, as well as the identification of
the victims’ identities so that they can be buried with
dignity. We appreciate the progress made in returning
the remains of Yazidi victims as families prepare
for that in the coming months. We also welcome
UNITAD’s efforts to reconstruct crime scenes and
8/18

05/12/2022

uncover the circumstances related to mass graves using
advanced technology. My country supports UNITAD’s
investigations into the destruction by Da’esh of cultural
and religious heritage sites in Iraq, in cooperation with
UNESCO, while stressing the importance of holding
the perpetrators accountable. It is also important to
continue to rebuild the sites and monuments that were
damaged or destroyed, which will require concerted
international efforts in order to revive that human
and cultural heritage and give it back to the Iraqis and
humankind as a whole.
In conclusion, we urge the international community
to support the efforts of Iraq and UNITAD in promoting
accountability for Da’esh crimes. In the coming period,
we will continue to follow UNITAD’s efforts, including
its investigations into Da’esh crimes against children
and crimes of sexual violence. We also support the
Team’s focus on expanding investigations into Da’esh’s
financial resources and its exploitation of Iraqi oil to
finance its crimes. We will be unable to totally eradicate
terrorism if we do not dry up its funds.
Mr. Liang Hengzhu (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate
the delegation of Ghana on its successful presidency of
the Security Council last month. We believe that under
India’s leadership this month the Security Council will
achieve every possible success. China thanks Special
Adviser Ritscher for his briefing and welcomes the
representative of Iraq to today’s meeting.
Da’esh committed egregious crimes in Iraq in the
past and continues to carry out activities to this day.
Assisting Iraq in investigations, evidence collection
and accountability efforts is vital to the fight against
terrorism and to the pursuit of justice. We have read
the ninth report of the Special Adviser and Head of
the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD) (see
S/2022/836) and welcome the overall encouraging
progress that UNITAD has made in gradually
uncovering the crimes committed by Da’esh against
innocent people in Iraq, as well as its destruction
of cultural heritage and its development and use of
chemical weapons and terrorist financing, among other
things. We also welcome the Team’s continued close
cooperation with the Iraqi Government in promoting
the digitization and archiving of evidence and in
enhancing Iraq’s judicial capacity-building.
22-72202

05/12/2022

Threats to international peace and security

The collection of evidence is not the end of those
efforts. The international community expects that the
large amounts of evidence that UNITAD has obtained
will be used in the work of the Iraqi judicial authorities
and translated into practical results in their quest to
hold terrorists accountable for their actions. That is also
why the Security Council took the decision to establish
UNITAD at the request of Iraqi Government in 2017.
In its adoption in September of resolution 2651 (2022),
on the UNITAD mandate renewal, the Council once
again underscored the importance of sharing evidence
with the competent Iraqi authorities in a timely manner.
China welcomes the fact that the Team shares with
Iraq its findings on the financial activities of Da’esh
and hopes that the Team will begin a comprehensive,
systematic and complete evidence-sharing process
without delay. Iraq’s domestic laws and legislative
process have no bearing on the Team’s mandate and
should not be linked to the issue of evidence transfer
or handover.
When sharing the information collected in its work
with other Member States, UNITAD should first and
foremost obtain prior consent from Iraq, adhere to
the principles of transparency and non-discrimination
and include details of that work in its reports to the
Council. It is important to emphasize that UNITAD is a
temporary transitional arrangement that was set up by
the United Nations in support of Iraq’s accountability
efforts. It should not become a permanent body.
UNITAD’s May 2021 report (S/2021/419) outlined a
preliminary vision of its completion strategy, and we
expect it to consult with Iraq on the issue to further
refine the strategy and define its performance indicators
and a specific timetable.
Terrorism is a public enemy of humankind.
Counter-terrorism knows no borders. The international
community should continue to support Iraq’s efforts to
counter terrorism, while pursuing accountability for
terrorist crimes in line with Iraq’s domestic laws and
addressing the issue of foreign terrorist fighters in Iraq.
The countries concerned should take responsibility
and respond to the Iraqi Government’s appeal to speed
up the repatriation of such fighters in Iraq. Countries
should also strengthen their cooperation under the
auspices of the United Nations, oppose terrorism in all
its forms, remain resolute in the fight against terrorist
groups listed by the Council, avoid the politicization
of counter-terrorism issues and reject double standards.

S/PV.9206

Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): Let me first join
others in congratulating you, Madam President, on
your country’s assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council, and assuring you of our full support
during the month of December. I thank Special Adviser
Christian Ritscher for his briefing on the ninth report
of the Special Adviser and Head of the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (UNITAD) (see S/2022/836), which reflects
the progress made by the Investigative Team during
the reporting period in ongoing investigations. My
delegation would also like to welcome the Permanent
Representative of Iraq to today’s meeting.
As the Council has repeatedly stated, pursuing
justice and seeking redress for the victims of heinous
international crimes committed by the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) is a collective duty that we owe
to international justice and to humankind. Any failure
on our part to establish meaningful accountability for
atrocities committed by ISIL will only undermine the
global fight against terrorism, thereby diminishing the
aspirations of victims and survivors for justice. We
must not allow that to happen. Ghana holds the view
that maintaining the momentum in the global response
to accountability for atrocities committed by ISIL is
crucial if we are to deal decisively with the scourge of
terrorism and violent extremism. Although the pursuit
of accountability and justice is a painstaking process,
Ghana is encouraged by the significant progress that the
Team continues to make to bringing ISIL perpetrators
to justice.
We are particularly pleased to note that during the
reporting period the Team continued to intensify its
focus on transitioning from investigating to building
targeted case files focused on individual perpetrators,
including through capacity-building efforts. That
phase of the work of UNITAD is crucial if we are
to advance the delivery of its mandate and move the
accountability process forward through the transfer of
evidence gathered by the Team to Iraqi authorities and
the subsequent prosecution of individuals responsible
for international crimes.
We also welcome the progress made across all
investigative lines of inquiry during the reporting
period, particularly the completion of a first case
assessment focused on crimes committed by ISIL
against the Christian community in Iraq, as well
as deeper insights into the development and use of

22-722029/18

S/PV.9206

Threats to international peace and security

chemical and biological weapons. As well as attesting
to the Team’s commitment, those developments are
critical to the evidence-gathering process in support
of domestic investigations and prosecutions that can
deliver justice to victims and survivors. In that context,
we look forward to the completion during the next
reporting period of the case assessment reports on the
destruction of cultural heritage by ISIL in Iraq, ISIL
leadership and hierarchical structure in Mosul and
Tal Afar and crimes committed by ISIL against other
communities in and around Sinjar.
UNITAD’s commitment to enhanced cooperation
and
improved
information-sharing
with
the
Government of Iraq remains vital to the implementation
of its mandate. We applaud the Team for its continued
cooperation with the Iraqi authorities and encourage
it to continue to sustain the healthy cooperation and
coordination that have characterized its relationship
with Iraq’s political and judicial authorities. In a similar
vein, we would like to emphasize that any comprehensive
attempt to establish global accountability for the crimes
perpetrated in Iraq must continue to include UNITAD’s
cooperation with other Member States. In that regard,
we urge the Team to build on its accomplishments and
continue to improve how it supports domestic processes
around the world.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Ghana’s
support for the work of UNITAD under the leadership
of Special Adviser Christian Ritscher, as well as its
expectations for the successful implementation of the
Team’s mandate, which is critical to delivering justice
for victims and genuine national reconciliation.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I congratulate India
on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council and thank Special Adviser Ritscher for his
comprehensive briefing.
Accountability for the crimes committed in Iraq
by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) is a
prerequisite for the rule of law and sustainable peace
in the country. We commend the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (UNITAD) for its continued progress
on key investigative tracks during the reporting period,
including improved evidence-processing time.
Regarding the Team’s initial priority investigations,
we welcome the evolution of efforts from structural
case assessments to specific briefs supporting the
10/18

05/12/2022

prosecution of individual perpetrators. That is a crucial
step towards accountability. We also welcome the
progress reported in other investigations, including
ISIL’s crimes against Iraq’s Christian population. It
is deeply concerning that the evidence collected has
further strengthened the preliminary findings that
ISIL has committed acts constituting crimes against
humanity and war crimes against that minority group.
There must be no impunity for such acts. Furthermore,
we commend advancements in the Team’s ongoing
thematic investigation into ISIL’s sexual and genderbased crimes and crimes against children. The evidence
obtained serves as a stark reminder of ISIL’s depravity.
We continue to applaud UNITAD for consistently
employing an age- and gender-sensitive approach
in its work, and we note that the Team’s provision of
psychosocial support to vulnerable witnesses is a
best practice for investigations of that kind. Norway
commends Iraq for its close cooperation with, and
support for, UNITAD. Results in accordance with the
Team’s mandate depend largely on that close partnership
with the national authorities.
However, we regret that domestic legislation to
establish a legal basis for prosecuting ISIL’s atrocities
in Iraq as international crimes is still pending. We also
regret that the Government of Iraq has not adopted a
moratorium on the use of capital punishment, which
would allow UNITAD to share the evidence collected
with the Iraqi authorities in accordance with its terms of
reference and core mandate. We urge further progress
in that area.
The depth, breadth and speed of the work that
UNITAD has reported over the past two years has
been a source of optimism during Norway’s term as an
elected Council member. The Team serves as a timely
example of the impactful and innovative solutions that
the Council is capable of when it overcomes political
gridlock and unites in pursuit of international peace and
security. I once again thank Special Adviser Ritscher
and UNITAD for the Team’s tireless efforts to ensure
accountability for ISIL’s crimes. Norway continues to
support the Team and the Iraqi people in that endeavour.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I congratulate Ghana on its presidency of the
Security Council during November and wish you and
your delegation, Madam, every success in December.
The Russian Federation closely follows the
activities of the United Nations Investigative Team
22-72202

05/12/2022

Threats to international peace and security

to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
(UNITAD). We are grateful to Special Adviser Ritscher
for submitting its ninth report (see S/2022/836). We
welcome the finalization of preparations for a case
assessment report on the investigation of crimes against
the Christian community. We hope that the Team will
maintain its momentum and that, by the time of our
next meeting in the Council, it will also have completed
its preparation of reports on the crimes of ISIL against
other communities. We believe that the Team’s directive
to closely investigate cases involving the destruction of
cultural and religious heritage by terrorists is perfectly
correct and noted the information stating that such
sites were not only intentionally destroyed by ISIL but
also seized for criminal purposes. We hope to receive
detailed data and conclusions on all such cases by the
end of the next reporting period.
We acknowledge the progress made by the Team
in investigating the development and use of chemical
and biological weapons by terrorists in Iraq. The report
makes it clear that there are no isolated cases — ISIL
had a full-fledged chemical programme that included
the production of a variety of chemical projectiles
and their regular use. The attack on Tazah Khurmata
on 8 March 2016 is far from being the only case in
which terrorists employed chemical weapons. We have
no doubt that ISIL has made use of its development
of chemical weapons in other countries, including
neighbouring Syria. The wide geographical scope of
ISIL’s criminal activity is clearly evidenced by the
links established by the Investigative Team between the
terrorists and criminal networks, both locally in Mosul
and Baghdad and on a regional scale, the influence of
which has expanded throughout the Middle East and
the Persian Gulf region.
We welcome UNITAD’s efforts to provide
evidentiary material on ISIL’s crimes in Iraq. At the
same time, we note that the collection and accumulation
of evidence cannot be an end in itself and will not by
itself lead to the punishment of the perpetrators. The
task of the Investigative Team, in accordance with its
mandate, is first and foremost to support the efforts of
Iraqi national law enforcement and judiciary bodies
to hold members of ISIL to account in accordance
with resolution 2379 (2017), which identifies the Iraqi
authorities as the primary recipients of the evidence
gathered by the Team. We sincerely hope that key part

S/PV.9206

of the mandate will not be ignored and that the evidence
will be handed over to Iraq as soon as possible.
Mrs. Onanga (Gabon) (spoke in French): I join
others in thanking you, Madam, for organizing this
briefing on the ninth report (see S/2022/836) of
the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD),
submitted in accordance with resolution 2651 (2022).
I am grateful to Mr. Christian Ritscher for the very
detailed information provided on the status of the
ongoing investigations during the reporting period. I
also welcome the representative of Iraq to this meeting.
Gabon supports the Security Council’s strategy
on preventing the proliferation and use of chemical
weapons by both State and non-State actors, such as
terrorist organizations. The accountability mechanism
established in Iraq, which is based on criminal justice
and the rule of law, is essential for the maintenance
of international peace and security, as it promotes the
fight against impunity and ensures access to justice for
local communities affected by the war crimes, crimes
against humanity and crimes of genocide committed by
Da’esh against the Yazidi people.
We welcome the significant progress made in
advancing the comprehensive investigations under
way and in strengthening the judicial capacity of local
jurisdictions, including those of Kurdish entities. We
note with satisfaction the spirit of mutual cooperation and
assistance between UNITAD and the relevant Member
States in the investigation process, which will allow for
the enhanced involvement of the jurisdictions of those
countries in the ongoing proceedings. The specific
focus of the Team on the ground on strengthening
cooperation with the Iraqi judicial authorities, including
the support of stakeholders, in relation to the crimes
committed by Da’esh against Christian communities
and crimes relating to the alleged use of chemical and
biological weapons against the population of Tazah
Khurmatu represents a significant step forward. In that
regard, the new digital evidence obtained is crucial
in clarifying the impact on the victims of Da’esh
chemical and biological weapons attacks, as well as the
material damage done to property and the environment.
Furthermore, the discovery of clear evidence of the
existence of a Da’esh-orchestrated operations centre,
as well as the involvement and financial support of
organizations such as Bayt Al-Mal and Diwan Al-Jund,

22-7220211/18

S/PV.9206

Threats to international peace and security

05/12/2022

undoubtedly confirm the particular relevance of
those investigations.

value the presence in today’s debate of the Permanent
Representative of Iraq.

We welcome the judicious use of state-of-the-art
technology, in particular new strategies for accelerating
the digitization of evidence documents throughout the
reporting period, as well as the launch of the Zeteo
project on facilitating the visualization of analysis
and evidence in a highly advanced format. Such
technologies will not only facilitate access to those
documents but also save time.

Mexico reiterates the great importance of
cooperation between UNITAD and the Iraqi authorities,
in particular with the judiciary and law enforcement
agencies. In that regard, we acknowledge improvements
in information-sharing and hope that it continues
to improve. We also recognize the value of working
closely with Kurdish authorities and with various actors
in Iraqi society, such as religious leaders, survivors’
groups and non-governmental organizations, with a
view to promoting national and regional reconciliation,
which is only possible through truth and justice.

Given how fundamental the continuation of dialogue
is in that sensitive context, Gabon hopes that the new
Government in Baghdad will engage in the necessary
cooperation in order to finalize the investigations and
the memorandum of understanding, which should
help to identify areas in which capacity-building of
the Iraqi national judiciary is needed. Furthermore,
the involvement of civil society is indispensable, in
particular for the provision of assistance to victims
of sexual violence, as well as to children who have
suffered mistreatment and abuse in the context of their
recruitment as child soldiers.
In conclusion, we would like to emphasize the
urgent need to create the conditions for restorative
justice for the suffering of the Iraqi people, in
particular the Yazidi communities, in relation to the
war crimes, crimes of genocide and crimes against
humanity committed by Da’esh. It is imperative that an
inclusive approach is adopted in order to maximize the
gathering of information so as to definitively ensure the
establishment of the facts.
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): Mexico is pleased to see you presiding
over our work, Madam President. We could not have
imagined a better conclusion of our mandate as an
elected member of the Security Council.
The crimes committed by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant, including those targeting Christian
communities, deserve our full determination to punish
those responsible by all legal means at our disposal.
We thank Mr. Christian Ritscher and his Team
for their comprehensive presentation of the ninth
report (see S/2022/836) on the progress of the work
of the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD), in
accordance with resolution 2651 (2022). In addition, we
12/18

We also reiterate our call on the Iraqi authorities to
make the necessary changes to their legislation in order
to enable the prosecution of individuals for war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide through trials
with full due process. We recognize Iraq’s cooperation
in that regard, but urge the Government to make
progress in the adoption of the relevant legislation
and to consider a moratorium on the imposition of
the death penalty for all of the reasons Mexico has
always asserted.
Mexico agrees with UNITAD’s intention to
give greater visibility to the results of its work at
the international level, in view of the fact that the
availability of solid evidence and investigations can
stimulate the initiation of more trials, including in
the domestic systems of other countries, through the
exercise of universal jurisdiction.
Finally, we acknowledge the progress in the work
of mass grave excavation and investigation through
the use of technology, always putting the victims at
the centre of the Team’s work. In particular, we note
the completion of excavation work in five mass graves
during the months of June and July, as well as Germany’s
cooperation in the identification of human remains.
In conclusion, Mexico reiterates its support for
the work of UNITAD and reaffirms its conviction that
reliable and evidence-based judicial procedures are
the best way to achieve the justice and truth that the
victims of the most heinous crimes committed by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant well deserve.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): We thank
Special Adviser Christian Ritscher for his briefing.
We are encouraged by the progress that the
United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
22-72202

05/12/2022

Threats to international peace and security

Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD) has
made as it works to deliver accountability for the
heinous crimes that the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham (ISIS) has committed.
As my Albanian colleagues noted as well, ISIS
remains a critical threat in Iraq and globally. We have
seen the terrorist group continue to use violence in
Syria and Iraq and seek to refill its ranks by trying
to break out captive ISIS fighters from detention
centres and prisons. We continue to credit UNITAD’s
patient work of gathering, digitizing, analysing and
cataloguing evidence of ISIS crimes. That effort is
laying a foundation for future prosecutions based
on comprehensive evidence, including battlefield
evidence. The increasing capability to develop case
files against individual perpetrators is a demonstration
that the groundwork is paying off.
We welcome UNITAD’s report (see S/2022/836)
of strong cooperation between the Team and Iraqi
courts and other national authorities that are requesting
information from it for investigations and prosecutions.
We encourage the new Iraqi Government to continue
to expand on the relationship established by its
predecessors, and we commend the Special Adviser
for having met with the new Iraqi leadership. The
United States also welcomes the memorandum of
understanding between UNITAD and the Government
of Iraq that would enable information-sharing in order
to support United Nations sanctions nominations. We
look forward to the Council of Ministers approving
the memorandum. We note that UNITAD’s work can
assist in the completion of transparent prosecutions
against ISIS members that will meet minimum fairtrial guarantees and legal protections. We encourage
the Government of Iraq to adopt legislation on
international crimes, notably genocide, war crimes and
crimes against humanity.
The continued presence of thousands of ISIS foreign
fighters in detention centres and their associated family
members in displacement camps in Syria and Iraq must
be addressed. Those facilities are targets for attack
by ISIS and for additional radicalization to violence,
underscoring the urgency for all States to repatriate
and prosecute those who have committed crimes, as
appropriate. We commend Iraq and other nations for
repatriating their nationals from those camps, and we
urge the Iraqi Government to restart such repatriations.
The United States welcomes UNITAD’s commitment

S/PV.9206

to support domestic legal proceedings by States that
have repatriated individuals who travel to Iraq and
Syria to join ISIS and engage in terrorist activity. We
urge all States whose nationals committed crimes as
foreign fighters and are detained to engage UNITAD
to take advantage of the valuable assistance the
Team can provide in investigating and prosecuting
these individuals.
In conclusion, UNITAD has clearly established
itself as an effective investigative body, and we are proud
to assist the Team when possible. We look forward to
subsequent UNITAD reports on its continued progress
in helping to deliver accountability for the depraved
crimes of ISIS and a measure of justice for the victims.
Mr. Gallagher (Ireland): Let me join others in
congratulating you, Madam President, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council.
We thank Special Adviser Ritscher for his report
(see S/2022/836) and briefing this morning. I want to
assure him of Ireland’s steadfast support for his work
in delivering justice for the victims and survivors of
atrocity crimes committed in Iraq by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). We also join others in
welcoming our colleague, the Ambassador of Iraq, to
the Chamber today.
Ireland welcomes the progress achieved by the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (UNITAD) across all investigative
lines of inquiry during the reporting period. We also
recognize the cooperation afforded by the Government
of Iraq, the Iraqi judiciary and the authorities of the
Kurdistan Regional Government.
The completion of the first case assessment focused
on crimes committed against the Christian community
in Iraq marks an important moment for accountability
in Iraq. The evidence collected to date strengthens the
Team’s preliminary findings that ISIL commissioned
acts constituting crimes against humanity and war
crimes against the Christian community, including
sexual violence and slavery. We also commend
UNITAD for its completion of an initial analysis of the
horrific crimes committed by ISIL against the lesbian,
gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex community,
including the public executions of men and boys
accused of being gay. Moreover, UNITAD’s continued
attention to the thematic investigation into sexual and
gender-based violence perpetrated by ISIL is welcome.

22-7220213/18

S/PV.9206

Threats to international peace and security

UNITAD’s interviews with older Yazidi men who were
enslaved will contribute to a broader understanding
of the scope of gender-based violence inflicted by
ISIL against the Yazidi community. More broadly, we
welcome the fact that the Team has placed cooperation
with victims, survivors and civil society at the heart of
all its investigative work.
As we heard today from the Special Adviser,
the reporting period was defined by a shift from
investigations towards the identification of the
perpetrators most responsible for atrocity crimes, as well
as the building of targeted cases. While that is welcome,
moving from evidence-gathering to evidence-based
trials requires further action. Key to holding ISIL
perpetrators to account is the adoption of national
legislation that enables the domestic prosecution of war
crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide. Ireland
regrets the delay in enacting such legislation. We call
on the Iraqi authorities to progress that initiative as
a matter of priority. We note UNITAD’s readiness to
support any such efforts. Once again, Ireland reiterates
its firm view that such legislation must preclude the
application of the death penalty.
United Nations sanctions are an indispensable
component of the Security Council’s toolbox for
holding members of ISIL accountable for their actions.
Ireland is therefore encouraged by the ongoing efforts
of UNITAD and the Iraqi authorities to cooperate on
United Nations sanctions listings, including possible
designations under the sanctions regime of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015).
We look forward to the Council of Ministers approval
of the memorandum of understanding authorizing the
sharing of information in those types of cases.
Finally, the technical assistance and support
provided by UNITAD to the Iraqi authorities is
wide-ranging and comprises evidence digitization
and preservation, forensic expertise, the excavation
of mass graves and the provision of training to judges
and investigators. That is important work, and we urge
its continuation. Beyond Iraq, we also welcome the
growing assistance provided by UNITAD to support
investigations by national authorities in a range of
jurisdictions, including in Europe. Before I conclude,
let me reiterate to the Special Adviser Ireland’s strong
support for UNITAD’s crucial work.
14/18

05/12/2022

Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Let me start by
congratulating Ghana on its successful presidency of
the Security Council during the month of November.
I also want to wish you, Madam, as well as your team,
all the best during the month of December. We know
that we are in good and firm hands. I also welcome the
Permanent Representative of Iraq to today’s meeting.
We thank Special Adviser Christian Ritscher for his
informative and comprehensive briefing.
In September, Brazil voted in favour of extending
the mandate of the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD)
for another year (see S/PV.9131), at the request of
the Government of Iraq, because we understand
the importance of supporting Iraqi efforts to hold
Da’esh members accountable for international crimes
committed in Iraq.
We commend UNITAD’s constructive cooperation
with the Iraqi judicial authorities, while always recalling
the key importance of respect for Iraq’s sovereignty as
a guiding principle in the Team’s relations with the host
country. Evidence collected within Iraq, for example,
must be shared with the competent local authorities.
UNITAD was established under resolution 2379
(2017) primarily to assist Iraq in exercising its right
to prosecute Da’esh members for crimes falling within
its territorial jurisdiction. That resolution was adopted
under Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations
at the request of the Government of Iraq.
Brazil welcomes the continuing progress in all lines
of investigation conducted by UNITAD. Nevertheless,
we observe that after, more than four years of UNITAD
operations, such progress has yet to lead to concrete
results, at least in terms of prosecutions by the Iraqi
judiciary — the primary intended beneficiary of
UNITAD’s activities. The persistence of that situation
should not be taken, however, to justify a departure
from UNITAD’s mandate. Specifically, the sharing
with third countries of evidence obtained in Iraq for
the purposes of prosecution elsewhere should not
be deemed a substitute for, or take precedence over,
UNITAD’s mission to support accountability in Iraq.
That is not to mention, of course, that any sharing
of evidence outside Iraq requires the consent of the
competent Iraq authorities.
We have taken note of UNITAD’s efforts,
including through the negotiation of a memorandum
22-72202

05/12/2022

Threats to international peace and security

of understanding with Iraq, aimed at supporting Iraqi
authorities in the preparation of listing requests to the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015).
Brazil welcomes those efforts, which should contribute
to expediting UNITAD’s sharing of evidence with the
host country. At the same time, we caution against
the setting of arbitrary conditions for the sharing
of information with Iraq. Endeavours to build and
strengthen capacities in Iraq are an important means
of supporting local authorities in delivering justice for
Da’esh crimes and bringing UNITAD closer to fulfilling
its mandate. Brazil welcomes those endeavours and notes
Iraq’s appreciation for its partnership with UNITAD.
Finally, Brazil commends UNITAD’s efforts to
increase the representation of Iraqi nationals in its staff,
as well as the gender balance achieved, including in
senior positions. We encourage further efforts to ensure
geographical balance as well, without losing sight of the
fact that UNITAD remains a temporary arrangement
that is mandated to support Iraq authorities in pursuing
accountability for crimes that fall primarily within
Iraq’s own national jurisdiction.
Mr. Ndung’u (Kenya): I join others in commending
Ghana for its leadership of the Security Council during
the month of November. I also congratulate you, Madam,
and extend Kenya’s best wishes to the Indian delegation
during its presidency of the Council this month. I thank
the Special Adviser and Head of the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (UNITAD), Mr. Christian Richter,
for his briefing, and welcome the participation of the
Permanent Representative of Iraq in today’s meeting.
Kenya takes note of UNITAD’s ninth report (see
S/2022/836), in particular the progress made by the
Team into investigations of international crimes
committed by Da’esh in Iraq, especially its completion
of an additional case assessment report on crimes
against the Christian community. The successful
compilation of evidence to build up that strong case file
significantly strengthens the primary findings that the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant did indeed commit
crimes against humanity and war crimes against
communities in Iraq. We commend UNITAD for its
continued investigations and for having finalized six
case assessments to date.

S/PV.9206

Kenya supports efforts to hold to account the
prominent leaders and members identified as having
perpetrated the atrocious crimes, including the 2014
attacks against three Christian towns in Ninawa
plains, as well as mass killings, forcible transfers,
persecution, sexual violence and slavery, among others.
We welcome the ongoing specialized investigations to
unearth additional evidence into sexual and genderbased crimes and the financial networks, both local
and regional, that offered material support to Da’esh
to carry out its international crimes. The effective
execution of UNITAD’s core investigative mandate
cannot be fully realized without the cooperation of
the Iraqi Government. We want to commend the close
collaboration with the Iraqi authorities in that respect.
We note UNITAD’s concerns on sharing evidence
with the Iraqi Government. We appreciate the range
of initiatives designed by UNITAD to facilitate
information-sharing, including the negotiations on
a memorandum of understanding and providing
information to a select group of investigative judges.
Nevertheless, we observe that such a practice limits the
scope of the partnership with the Government of Iraq
and its capacity to pursue justice and accountability for
crimes committed on its territory.
It is the sovereign and primary responsibility of the
Iraqi Government to determine how to utilize evidence
to prosecute the perpetrators of those despicable crimes.
Kenya therefore urges UNITAD and the international
community to support efforts to integrate international
crimes into the Iraqi legal system. That will provide a
basis for the prompt sharing of all collected evidence
and for the Iraqi Government to prosecute the offenders
and pursue justice for the families and victims without
further delay.
To promote global accountability for terror
activities and other international crimes committed
by members of Da’esh and other terrorist groups,
,including Al-Qaida, its affiliates and fellow foreign
terrorist fighters in Africa and elsewhere, Kenya urges
the Security Council to apply the full force of counterterrorism measures in equal measure, without any
distinctions based on political considerations.
In conclusion, Kenya affirms its commitment to
supporting the Iraqi Government in its pursuit to hold
Da’esh accountable for its atrocities and to promoting
justice for its people. We commit to Iraqi’s territorial
integrity, stability and prosperity.

22-7220215/18

S/PV.9206

Threats to international peace and security

05/12/2022

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of India.

their fight against ISIL, it is also critical to fight the
impunity of terror globally.

I thank Special Adviser Christian Ritscher for his
briefing. I also welcome the Permanent Representative
of Iraq to this meeting.

Last week, the victims of the 26/11 Mumbai
terrorist attacks were remembered in India and several
other countries. Be it Mumbai or Mosul, India strongly
believes that the credibility of our collective fight
against terrorism can be strengthened only once we
can ensure accountability for the grave and inhuman
acts of terror committed by terrorists and take strong
measures against those who encourage, support and
finance terrorism.

The world was witness to the heinous and dastardly
crimes committed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) against innocent Iraqis, including those
from its diverse ethnic and religious communities.
Victims of ISIL’s horrific crimes in Iraq also include
39 Indian nationals. The work of the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (UNITAD) seeks to render justice to
those victims, their families and the survivors of such
crimes. UNITAD’s relevance is also underscored by
the importance of accountability for reconciliation in
a post-conflict Iraq. In that regard, we welcome the
ongoing cooperation between the Iraqi authorities
and UNITAD.
India recognizes the valuable work of UNITAD in
promoting accountability for crimes committed against
the people of Iraq. In addition to the political support
for UNITAD’s mandate, India has also extended
financial support to the Team to strengthen the pursuit
of accountability. India’s financial contribution to the
UNITAD Trust Fund has supported the production of a
substantive case-assessment report on the development
and use of chemical and biological weapons by ISIL.
It has also contributed to the expansion of UNITAD’s
investigations into the destruction of the cultural
and religious sites of the different Iraqi communities
and minorities.

Since this is the last scheduled meeting on Iraq
during our tenure in the Council, I take this opportunity
to thank the Permanent Mission of Iraq for its excellent
cooperation with the Indian delegation during our
tenure. We are also grateful for the cooperation and
support extended by the Iraq team of the Department
of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and the Special
Adviser and his team.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Iraq.

We understand the significance of case-building
and information-sharing in the work of UNITAD. Those
are important steps. However, the key to advancing
full accountability is the timely sharing of evidence
collected by UNITAD with the Iraqi authorities that
will be used in the trials of ISIL perpetrators in Iraqi
courts. The Security Council has also emphasized
the importance of UNITAD sharing evidence with
the relevant Iraqi authorities in a timely manner. We
encourage UNITAD to work towards that objective in
close cooperation with the Government of Iraq.

Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic):
At the beginning of my statement and on behalf of
my country, I would like to express my thanks and
gratitude to the United Nations for its efforts, along
with its organs and agencies and through its resolutions,
recommendations and decisions. I would also like to
thank the international community for all its efforts
to support Iraq in the fight against terrorism and the
prosecution of terrorists. I also extend my thanks to
Ghana for conducting the work of the Security Council
in the month of November. I congratulate the Republic
of India on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of December, and I
wish you, Madam President, every success in that task.
I would also like to thank Mr. Christian Ritscher and
his team for his briefing to the Council on the ninth
report (see S/2022/836) issued by the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (UNITAD), which covers its activities in my
country during the reporting period.

Terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
remains a global challenge, and only a unified and zerotolerance approach to terrorism can eventually defeat
it. As the Government and the people of Iraq continue

At the outset, I would like to recall resolution 2651
(2022), by which the Security Council approved the
request of the Government of Iraq to extend the mandate
of UNITAD and its Head for the period of one year,

16/18

22-72202

05/12/2022

Threats to international peace and security

as the mandate of the Investigative Team and its Head
expires on 17 September 2023. During that period, we
look forward to greater effort and attention to continue
the work of prosecuting all those who have been
involved in the terrorist organization Da’esh and who
have helped, funded and provided it with logistics and
cyber support, as well as prosecuting crimes committed
by Da’esh related to smuggling oil and artefacts during
the period when it was in control.
In the context of Mr. Ritscher’s important briefing,
we commend what was stated in his ninth report, which
addressed several important points that highlighted the
progress that had been made in the Team’s work in Iraq
by collaborating and cooperating with the Government
of Iraq. We also commend the substantial progress
made by opening new investigation tracks, as well as
the fact that the Team continued to investigate previous
issues, namely, the crimes committed by the terrorist
organization against all the people of Iraq so as to
achieve accountability in cooperation with the Iraqi
national authorities. In that regard, we also commend
the efforts of the Investigative Team and its Head
to promote universal accountability for the crimes
committed by the terrorist organization in Iraq.
After almost six years of the Team’s work, my
Government has made it clear on several occasions
that the most important challenge for the Team in the
upcoming period is to ensure that justice is done and
proceed as soon as possible to submit all the evidence
to the Iraqi Government, whether gathered by the Team
or received from Iraq and developed using advanced
technology, for use before national courts.
UNITAD’s mandate, in accordance with
resolution 2379 (2017) and its terms of reference, is to
collect, preserve and store evidence pertaining to the
crimes that the terrorist organization Da’esh committed
in Iraq and to present that evidence to Iraq to enable it
to conduct fair and just trials and achieve justice and
ensure redress for the victims. UNITAD’s mandate is not
complete if it stops at collecting, preserving and storing
evidence and investigating crimes without allowing the
use of that evidence in national legal contexts.
With regard to the Team’s previous reports, the
eighth report in particular (see S/2022/434) mentioned
that the Investigative Team had completed its
investigations in four important cases, and today the
ninth report (see S/2022/836) refers to the completion
of investigations and the start of new ones into crimes

S/PV.9206

committed by Da’esh against the Iraqi people on Iraqi
territory. In that regard, we would like to point out
that the Investigative Team’s sixth report (S/2021/419)
clearly referred to the possibility of holding trials at the
end of 2021 or the beginning of 2022. Iraq therefore
considers that a commitment requiring cooperation
in its implementation in accordance with the timeline
set out in the report. We also stress the need to take
rapid, effective and practical measures to present
the evidence to the Iraqi Government and conduct
national trials. That is very important to Iraq and the
international community.
We welcome the contents of the ninth report
regarding the exchange of evidence, in particular
paragraph 4, which mentions that the Team is
working on finding ways to further share information
with the Iraqi Government in line with the Team’s
competencies. It cites the conclusion of a memorandum
of understanding between the Iraqi Government and
the Investigative Team that will enable UNITAD
to present such evidence to the national authorities.
It also notes that there is a pre-existing modality
whereby information linked to Da’esh financing held
by the Team has been shared with national investigative
judges. Crimes of an economic nature are dealt with
according to the Team’s competencies and presented to
the relevant national authorities. We hope that similar
measures will be taken to gather evidence of criminal
offences committed by Da’esh.
UNITAD has continued to work and cooperate
with the Iraqi Government to ensure the success of its
mandate. We are familiar with the Team’s progress in
collecting, preserving and storing evidence, which my
Government appreciates considering the difficulties and
challenges that the Team is dealing with. However, we are
aware of the pressure of Iraqi public opinion, especially
the families of victims, for achieving accountability
and being informed of the nature of the evidence and
the investigations that the Team has conducted on Iraqi
territory for nearly six years. The reports of the Team,
and the most recent report in particular, make it clear
that certain Da’esh members who committed crimes
have been identified. The evidence is there, and the
perpetrators have been identified, and it is therefore
time to bring the perpetrators of those crimes to justice.
The Government of Iraq will follow UNITAD’s
activities very closely, especially in the next few months,
in order to assess the Team’s work for this year. The
extension of the Team’s mandate and the appointment

22-7220217/18

S/PV.9206

Threats to international peace and security

of its Head under resolution 2651 (2022) were not easy
for the Government of Iraq. We are sincerely committed
to the work of the Team, as a priority for my country.
We therefore reiterate the urgent need for developing
a plan in cooperation with the Iraqi Government and
its National Coordination Committee for achieving
tangible results pursuant to the seventh preambular
paragraph of resolution 2651 (2022), which stresses the
importance of presenting the Team’s evidence to the
Iraqi authorities in a timely manner so that it can be used
fairly and independently. The Government of Iraq once
again reiterates its commitment to cooperating with
the Investigative Team and providing it with assistance
through the National Coordination Committee in order
to support its work, in full respect for Iraq’s sovereignty
and jurisdiction over crimes committed on its territory
and against its people.
Iraq values the determination of certain Member
States to repatriate terrorist combatants and their

18/18

05/12/2022

families, and would like to remind the Council that
Iraq is one of the countries that has made significant
efforts in that regard, repatriating nearly 6,000
individuals, including combatants and their families.
Our rehabilitation and accountability efforts continue,
and we hope that we will see greater efforts from other
Member States in that regard.
In conclusion, Madam President, I would like to
express our thanks and appreciation to you and to the
friendly countries that have supported my country in the
face of terrorism as we have worked together to bring
perpetrators to justice in our national courts. I am also
grateful to Mr Ritscher and his team for their efforts
and progress in exchanging expertise with national
authorities. They have highlighted the magnitude of
Da’esh’s violations against the Iraqi people, and we
wish him and his Team every success in their work.
The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.

22-72202
