S/2019/913

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 November 2019
Original: English

The situation in Central Africa and the activities of the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to the statement of the President of the
Security Council dated 10 August 2018 (S/PRST/2018/17), in which the Council
requested me to keep it informed about the activities of the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa (UNOCA). It provides an assessment of the major politica l
and security developments and trends in Central Africa since my report dated 24 May
2019 (S/2019/430) and an update on progress in the implementation of the UNOCA
mandate with regard to the conclusions of the strategic review of UNOCA, which
were welcomed by the Council in the statement of its President dated 12 September
2019 (S/PRST/2019/10). The report also provides an update on the situation in the
Lake Chad basin region, pursuant to Council resolution 2349 (2017).

II. Major developments in the Central Africa subregion
A.

Political, peace and security developments and trends
2.
Preparing for upcoming elections and reconciling past electoral challenges
remained salient features of the political landscape in Central Africa. As several
countries grappled with the challenges of managing peaceful and credible democratic
transitions of power, the mostly young population has grown increasingly vocal about
the need for reform. While some countries continued to urge greater economic
integration, including the free movement of people and goods in the Central African
Economic and Monetary Community (CEMAC) zone, others were reluctant to lower
barriers that they perceived to be necessary for maintaining national security.
3.
Central Africa achieved a milestone in adopting a much-anticipated plan for the
institutional reform of the Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS).
By the end of 2019, ECCAS Heads of State and Government are expected to sign the
reform package developed and approved by ministers in June and July, in order to
transform the ECCAS secretariat into a commission, as well a s to fully integrate the
Council for Peace and Security in Central Africa into the ECCAS institutional
architecture. On 26 July, Gabon announced its donation of a new building in
Libreville to serve as the new commission’s headquarters.

19-19933 (E)

021219

*1919933*

S/2019/913

Political developments and trends
4.
In Angola, the administration of the President, João Lourenço, continued to
focus on addressing poverty and corruption while tackling increasing public debt. On
15 June, the ruling party, Movimento Popular de Libertação de Angola, con vened its
seventh extraordinary congress in Luanda, at which it adopted a strategy for the
municipal elections to be held in 2020 and voted to enlarge its central committee to
nearly 500 members.
5.
In Cameroon, tensions around the contested presidential election held in
October 2018 surged when more than 280 members of the Mouvement pour la
renaissance du Cameroun, an opposition party, were arrested during demonstrations
in Yaoundé, Douala, Nkongsamba, Bafoussam and Bangangté on 1 and 8 June. A key
issue was the holding of parliamentary elections, which had been postponed twice
since 2018. On 27 June, the Government of Switzerland made public its efforts to
facilitate a resolution to the crisis in the North-West and South-West Regions through
a dialogue process. Meanwhile, on 26 August, in Yaoundé, the Government
announced its intention to reopen schools in the North-West and South-West Regions.
In reaction, the secessionists imposed a new 16-day lockdown in the two regions,
resulting in increased displacement.
6.
From 30 September to 4 October in Yaoundé, the Prime Minister, Joseph Dion
Ngute, presided over a national dialogue focusing primarily on the crisis in the North West and South-West Regions. The dialogue was attended by participants from
various sectors of Cameroonian society. Secessionist leaders and members of the
opposition party of the former presidential candidate Maurice Kamto, some of whom
were detained at the time, did not participate in the dialogue. Some opposition leaders
left the dialogue process and rejected its outcome. Among the conclusions of the
national dialogue were the recommendations that a special status be accorded to the
North-West and South-West Regions and that regional councils be created. Other
outcomes included the authorization of dual citizenship and representation of the
diaspora in the National Assembly, the adoption of measures to promote bilingualism
and the designation of mediators to engage radicalized members of the diaspora. The
Prime Minister vowed to reopen schools and ensure the resumption of socioeconomic
activities and the return of refugees and internally displaced persons. These
recommendations were submitted to the President, Paul Biya, for his consideration.
To date, no official decision on the recommendations has been made public.
7.
On 3 October, Mr. Biya ended legal proceedings against 333 persons detained
in connection with the crisis in the two regions. On 5 October, a military court ordered
the release of Mr. Kamto, along with 102 other members of the Mouvement pour la
renaissance du Cameroun, at the request of the President. Since then, authorities have
prohibited three public meetings of supporters of Mr. Kamto. On 10 November,
Mr. Biya signed a decree calling for legislative and municipal electio ns to be held on
9 February 2020.
8.
In Chad, the security situation was of increasing concern. In the face of
continued lawlessness in parts of the north and escalating intercommunal violence in
the east, the Council of Ministers decreed a state of emerge ncy in the northern
province of Tibesti and in the eastern provinces of Ouaddaï and Sila on 19 August.
On 21 August, the Government announced the closing of the country’s borders with
the Central African Republic, Libya and the Sudan, leaving a small numbe r of official
crossing points open along each border. On 10 September, the National Assembly
extended the state of emergency in the three provinces until January 2020. On
11 November, the government security forces signed an agreement with the Miski
self-defence committee in an attempt to end the fighting that had broken out in Tibesti
several weeks earlier.
2/16

19-19933

S/2019/913

9.
Progress continued to be made towards the holding of legislative and local
elections in Chad, which had been postponed repeatedly since 2015. On 3 July, the
National Assembly passed a new electoral law in line with the statute on gender parity
of 2018. On 12 September, the President, Idriss Déby Itno, appointed a new executive
bureau for the national political dialogue framework, which started revisi ng the
electoral law to shorten the legal deadlines to hold elections before the end of 2019,
as requested by the Government. On 3 October, the National Independent Electoral
Commission announced that legislative elections would most likely be held in the
first quarter of 2020.
10. In the Congo, some progress was achieved towards inclusive political dialogue.
Since 9 October, the National Dialogue Council has been consulting with national
stakeholders, including political parties, religious groups, civil s ociety and
professional organizations, in preparation for a dialogue to be convened in 2020. The
implementation of the ceasefire concluded in 2017 between the Government and the
Ninja militia, led by Frédéric Bintsamou, also known as Pastor Ntumi, in the P ool
Region continued to advance. However, the critical reintegration phase of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme, supported by the
Peacebuilding Fund, had not commenced. This was largely because the financial
contribution of $4 million by the Government, which was expected to trigger donor
support, was not released.
11. In Gabon, the President, Ali Bongo Ondimba, gradually resumed his duties
following his illness in October 2018. On 10 June, he appointed a leaner Government
led by a Prime Minister and comprising 28 ministers and deputy ministers. A new
ministerial position for the promotion of good governance was established. A reshuffle
on 4 October expanded the Cabinet to 31 ministers. On 24 September, the
Constitutional Court was sworn in. The terms of the President of the Court and most
of its judges were extended to nine years, in line with the provisions of the
Constitution of 2018.
12. In Sao Tome and Principe, inter-party and intra-party political tensions
increased, with the former ruling party, Acção Democrática Independente, undergoing
a split in leadership, and with a marked rise in tensions within the ruling coalition.
Continued fuel shortages and power cuts led to an increase in the number of
demonstrations, acts of vandalism, violence and public discord. In an effort to
demonstrate a commitment to institutional and political stability, the Government
convened a high-level meeting on 17 September at which the President, Evaristo do
Espírito Santo Carvalho, the Prime Minister, Jorge Lopes Bom Jesus, and the
President of the National Assembly, Delfim Santiago das Neves, committed
themselves to preserving the country’s institutional and political stability and agreed
to develop a strategy for modernizing the justice sector.
13. On 16 July, Equatorial Guinea endorsed the abolishment of visa requirements
for nationals of CEMAC countries, in accordance with the CEMAC agreement of
2013 on free movement in Central Africa. The Congo and Gabon were the last two
countries to ratify the agreement, in October 2017.
14. On 16 August, the Minister for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of
Equatorial Guinea publicly denied rumours that the country was building a wall along
its border with Cameroon, prompting the chief of the Ca meroonian army to warn
against any unlawful intrusions into the country’s territory. In July, Gabon ratified a
special agreement to adjudicate its border dispute with Equatorial Guinea through the
International Court of Justice.
15. On 12 July, Angola convened a quadripartite summit in Luanda with the
Presidents of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and Uganda. In a joint
communiqué, they renewed their commitment to dialogue for economic and political
19-19933

3/16

S/2019/913

cooperation and the peaceful resolution of disputes. On 21 August, in Luanda, the
Presidents of Rwanda and Uganda signed a memorandum of understanding,
facilitated by the Presidents of Angola and the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
with the goal of normalizing relations. On 16 September, a minister ial-level
commission formed to implement the memorandum of understanding held its first
meeting in Kigali, resulting in a joint communiqué in which several measures were
outlined to move the process forward.
Security developments and trends
Boko Haram/Lake Chad basin
16. Boko Haram attacks on civilian and military targets continued in the Far North
Region of Cameroon and in the Lac Province of Chad. Between 1 June and
30 September, there were 130 reported Boko Haram-related security incidents in
Cameroon, with 98 civilian fatalities, and 25 incidents in Chad, with 22 civilian
fatalities. The Government of Chad reinstated security measures that included a ban
on fishing and the closure of markets in border areas. On 10 June, intense fighting
near a military installation in Darak, Cameroon, claimed the lives of more than
15 Cameroonian soldiers. On 21 June, clashes near Ngouboua in the Lac Province of
Chad led to the death of 11 Chadian soldiers, including three officers. Authorities
confirmed that 26 Boko Haram fighters were also killed. On 13 August, a female
suicide bomber killed six people, including one soldier, in the same region. On
13 September, it was reported that Boko Haram had attacked a military post in
Soueram, near Fotokol in Cameroon, killing six Cameroonian soldiers and wounding
nine others. Increasingly, landmines were used in carrying out attacks. On
17 September, a Chadian soldier was killed when his vehicle drove over a mine in the
vicinity of Kaïga Kindjiria in the Lac Province.
Lord’s Resistance Army
17. The Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) continued to commit abuses against
civilians and abduct children, who were frequently held longer in captivity than adults
were and forced into marriage with combatants. Adults were frequently abd ucted to
carry goods and undertake dangerous and arduous labour before being released or
escaping. LRA groups remained highly mobile within the subregion. The
non-governmental organization (NGO) Invisible Children reported that, from January
to September 2019, LRA abducted 172 people in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, including 29 children, and 37 people in the Central African Republic,
including 8 children.
Maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea
18. Maritime crime in Central Africa, specifically piracy, continued to be a major
obstacle to the security and sustainable development of coastal economies. While the
overall number of attacks worldwide decreased slightly during the third quarter of
2019, the International Maritime Bureau reported that abduction and hostage-taking
in the Gulf of Guinea now accounted for more than 80 per cent of incidents
worldwide. Armed groups at sea demonstrated better capacity to operate far from the
coast with greater technical skill. Attacks were often focused on ki dnapping for
ransom, which indicated increasing association with organized crime. Judicial
responses to crimes at sea were rare and inconsistently documented.
Poaching and illicit trafficking in wildlife and natural resources
19. Illicit trafficking in natural resources and other forms of environmental crime
continued to have an impact on the security situation in the subregion. While there
4/16

19-19933

S/2019/913

was abundant evidence that trafficking in natural resources contributed to the funding
of armed groups, the competition to control those resources also exacerbated tensions
between rural communities and nomadic pastoralists.
20. On 17 July, the Superior Council of the Judiciary of Gabon adopted new
criminal procedure codes that, inter alia, substantially increased penalties for
environmental crimes, particularly those related to trafficking in wildlife and in
minerals and, to some extent, those related to the forest industry.
Effects of climate change, ecological changes and natural disasters on the
stability of Central Africa
21. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, in its most recent report,
anticipated that Central Africa would see a decrease in the length of wet periods and
a slight increase in heavy rainfall, which would pose a higher risk of flooding than
previously forecast. Simultaneously, the Panel predicted higher drought intensity in
the Congo River basin. Shifts in rainfall patterns and the increase d incidence of
extreme weather events could disrupt farming by damaging crops and reducing food
production. This would ultimately have an adverse impact on food security and human
health, which could undermine stability and humanitarian efforts in the regi on.
22. On 7 September, an extraordinary ministerial meeting of ECCAS held in
Brazzaville adopted a common subregional position on the contributions of Central
African forests to the global fight against climate change. Governments renewed their
collective commitment to reducing threats to the world’s second largest rainforest
while seeking to mobilize greater global support for the subregion. On 23 September,
the President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Félix Tshisekedi, presented
the common ECCAS position at the Climate Action Summit held in New York. On
the margins of the summit, Gabon and Norway signed an agreement by which they
committed up to $150 million over the next 10 years to the Central African Forest
Initiative. Under the agreement, Gabon became the first country to receive resultsbased payments for preventing deforestation and land degradation, which will
contribute to the natural absorption of carbon dioxide by forests. Germany and the
Republic of Korea also pledged $33 million and $2 million, respectively, to the
Initiative. On 3 September, in Paris, during a visit by the President of the Congo,
Denis Sassou Nguesso, the President of France, Emmanuel Macron, in his capacity
as chair of the Executive Board of the Initiative, signed a letter in which he declared
that $65 million would be designated for the preservation of the Congolese rainforest.

B.

Humanitarian developments
23. In Cameroon, the escalation of violence and insecurity caused humanitarian
needs to reach their highest levels yet. Some 4.3 million people required emergency
assistance – a 30 per cent increase compared with 2018. Checkpoints established by
both security forces and armed non-State actors made it difficult for humanitarian
actors to gain access to the population. Violence and insecurity had dramatic effects
on the lives of civilians, in particular women and children. The deteriorating
economic and security situation contributed to high rates of sexual abuse and
exploitation and other types of gender-based violence. Concerns related to the
protection of teenage boys and young men persisted, including with regard to killings,
kidnappings, arbitrary detention and forced recruitment. In the North -West and SouthWest Regions, violence continued to affect 1.3 million people, including over 700,000
people who were uprooted from their homes. Armed fighting and insecurity in the
two regions continued to be the principal impediment to the provision of assistance
and a barrier for those in need to reach areas where the y could receive aid. Attacks on
health infrastructure and personnel, schools, teachers, parents and children persisted.

19-19933

5/16

S/2019/913

More than 855,000 children – almost 9 out of 10 – have been out of school for three
years in the two regions. As of November 2019, 90 per cent of public primary schools
and 77 per cent of public secondary schools remained closed or non -operational. In
July, 785 cases of gender-based violence, including 74 cases of rape, were reported
in the North-West and South-West Regions. Cameroon continued to host some
272,000 refugees from the Central African Republic, the majority of whom lived
among the host communities. The appeal for humanitarian aid for Cameroon remained
one of the least-funded such appeals in Africa, with just 41 per cent of the
$299 million required to assist 2.3 million people received by November.
24. In Chad, the humanitarian situation continued to deteriorate owing to
multidimensional emergencies in several parts of the country. As a result of
displacement, food insecurity and malnutrition, as well as health emergencies,
4.3 million people were in need of assistance and support for their livelihoods. Chad
continued to host more than 330,700 refugees from the Sudan and more than 94,100
from the Central African Republic. More than 170,200 Chadians were internally
displaced on account of violence by armed groups, an increase from 133,000 in April
2019. In addition to a measles epidemic that had so far affected 24,330 people, with
241 deaths between January and mid-September 2019, a cholera outbreak was
declared in August in the south-west of the country. Humanitarian funding remained
desperately low, with just over 49 per cent of the $476.6 million required to assist
2 million people received by November.
25. At the end of September, it was reported that some 14,000 refugees had
spontaneously left the Lóvua camp in Angola to return to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Their departure was apparently triggered by the announcement of an
improved security situation in the three Kasai provinces. The Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) was engaged in tripartite
discussions with the affected countries to establish a mechanism for safe, voluntary,
dignified and sustainable returns. A tripartite agreement signed by both Governments
and UNHCR entered into force on 9 October, paving the way for organized voluntary
repatriations.
26. On 10 September, Rwanda concluded a memorandum of understanding with the
African Union and UNHCR to temporarily receive Africa n migrants evacuated from
Libya, beginning with an agreed initial intake of 500 people. On 26 September and
20 October, two humanitarian flights relocated an initial group of 189 refugees.
Boko Haram/Lake Chad basin
27. In the Far North Region of Cameroon, violence has displaced over 270,850
people since the beginning of the crisis. The region also hosted more than 108,600
Nigerian refugees. Cameroon remained the second most affected country by the crisis
in the Lake Chad basin after Nigeria, with 1.9 million people – or one in two people
living in the region – in need of humanitarian assistance, representing more than one
third of the country’s entire humanitarian caseload in 2019. Populations of the Lake
Chad basin faced epidemics and outbreaks, including of cholera, measles and
poliomyelitis, and the destruction of assets and agricultural incomes owing to
exceptional flooding in September and October.
28. In Chad, a resurgence of armed attacks and insecurity in the Lake Chad basin
prompted thousands of civilians to flee and seek refuge. Since the beginning of 2019,
47,000 people had reportedly been displaced in the Lac Province. This included
refugees arriving from Nigeria, returnees from the Niger and Chadians who had
previously been displaced who were seeking security and assistance. Within the
context of ongoing military operations and the growing number of reported incidents,
the protection of civilians remained a major concern. Children were particularly
6/16

19-19933

S/2019/913

affected by recent violence: 49 schools in the Lac Province were temporarily closed
in 2019 owing to insecurity, affecting over 12,000 students. Twenty children
associated with armed groups were identified and enrolled in a reintegration
programme implemented by the United Nations Children’s Fund and its partners.

C.

Human rights trends
29. In Cameroon, civil society organizations, national and international human
rights observers and humanitarian groups continued to denounce violence and abuses
stemming from the crisis in the North-West and South-West Regions. A technical team
of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR)
visited Cameroon from 5 to 27 September and found that serious human rights
violations and abuses, attributed to both government security forces and armed
separatists, were occurring across the two regions. OHCHR received allegations of
unlawful killing, rape and gang rape, torture and other forms of ill -treatment,
abduction for ransom, infringement of the rights to freedom of expression and
peaceful assembly, forced displacement, destruction of property and attacks on
schools and medical facilities, as well as arbitrary detention. There was concern
regarding impunity.
30. On 24 June, the Ministry of Defence of Cameroon announced that a military
court would try seven soldiers for extrajudicial killings in the Far North Region in
July 2018. The trial was postponed several times, but commenced on 21 October,
when the defendants entered pleas of not guilty before a military tribunal. On 22 and
25 July, respectively, prison riots broke out in Yaoundé and Buea, reportedly
involving several hundred people detained in connection with the crisis in the North West and South-West Regions. On 9 September, courts tried and convicted 15 persons
for involvement in the riots. On 20 August, military courts sent enced 10 separatist
leaders to life in prison and the payment of more than $400,000 in damages. On
26 August, the leaders appealed the sentences.
31. On 19 July, the Government of Cameroon established the Human Rights
Commission, replacing the National Commission on Human Rights and Freedoms.
The mandate of the new Commission includes promoting and protecting human rights
and preventing torture. By law, 30 per cent of the commissioners, whose number was
reduced from 30 to 15, should be women. The Commissio n was also designated to
function as the national mechanism for the Optional Protocol to the Convention
against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
32. Killings, abductions and the destruction of property by Boko Haram co ntinued
in the Far North Region of Cameroon and the Lac Province of Chad. On 27 August,
a special criminal court in Chad handed down prison sentences ranging from 10 to 20
years to 97 individuals charged with terrorism, child recruitment and conspiring wit h
Boko Haram. Ten adults and one minor were acquitted. The trial involved several
hundred detainees, including more than 240 members of the Union des forces de la
résistance rebel group, and was held at the remote Koro Toro high -security prison.
33. In Chad, the Government confirmed the appointment of 11 members of the new
National Human Rights Commission. The United Nations country team in Chad
provided support to the Commission.
34. On 2 July, the Government of Equatorial Guinea established a special com mittee
to begin working on legislation that would criminalize public indecency, prostitution
and homosexuality. On 5 July, the Ministry of the Interior and Local Corporations
disbanded the human rights NGO Centro de Estudios e Iniciativas para el Desarroll o
on charges of carrying out political activities. From 27 August to 8 September,

19-19933

7/16

S/2019/913

authorities in Bata detained two journalists for broadcasting an interview with a judge
who had been suspended by the Supreme Court.
35. During the reporting period, in Gabon, a number of prominent opposition
figures were arrested and briefly detained for making public statements calling into
question the health of the President. The High Authority for Communication issued
several media suspensions for non-compliance with financial and administrative
regulations for broadcasters. On 5 July, the National Assembly enacted a new penal
code in which same-sex relations were designated a moral crime.

D.

Socioeconomic trends
36. According to a study presented by the Economic Commission for Africa in
Malabo on 25 September, on the margins of the thirty-fifth session of the
Intergovernmental Committee of Senior Officials and Experts for Central Africa, the
subregion remained highly undiversified and was focused almost entirely on the
extractive sector. Despite having a large market in excess of 187 million people and
diverse natural resources for mining, agriculture, forestry, tourism and energy, Central
Africa continued to face challenges in attracting international investors. Thi s was
aggravated by weak regional integration and reliance on the export of raw materials
for economic growth, which left the subregion vulnerable to shocks.
37. On 11 July, after two years of talks, the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
approved a three-year macroeconomic stabilization package of nearly $450 million
for the Congo. This was expected to trigger up to $1.3 billion in co -financing by
international partners. The country’s external and internal debt was estimated at
$9.5 billion. According to IMF, the Congolese economy was showing its first signs of
improvement since the onset of the recession three years ago, but IMF recommended,
inter alia, greater efforts in the implementation of structural reforms. From 10 to
12 September, the President hosted the fifth Investing in Africa Forum in Brazzaville,
aimed at promoting economic cooperation between China and Africa.
38. Gabon continued with a fiscal arrangement under the IMF Extended Fund
Facility. According to IMF, the country’s economy had largely stabilized, but growth
remained sluggish, vulnerabilities persisted and almost one third of the population
lived below the poverty line. The main economic challenge remained the resumption
of development-oriented growth. On 13 September, the Prime Minister announced
new investment in training and professional development to boost the country ’s
agricultural sector.
39. On 13 June, IMF approved an Extended Credit Facility arrangement for Angola,
confirming that the Government had demonstrated a strong commitment to fiscal
reform despite a weakened and volatile external environment.
40. On 2 October, IMF approved a $18.2 million Extended Credit Facility
arrangement for Sao Tome and Principe. The programme would also enable the World
Bank to release its budget support, thereby averting an acute financial crisis caused
by low revenues and high levels of debt. The programme came with significant reform
measures, including the gradual elimination of fuel subsidies.

8/16

19-19933

S/2019/913

III. Activities of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa
A.

Good offices, preventive diplomacy and mediation
Cameroon
41. My Special Representative for Central Africa and Head of UNOCA continued
to advocate broadly both in Cameroon and with regional and interna tional partners
for a peaceful resolution of the crisis in the North-West and South-West Regions
through inclusive dialogue. From 3 to 7 September, he met with the Prime Minister
and other government officials in Yaoundé, as well as relevant international partners,
to discuss the status of dialogue initiatives. He advocated enhanced dialogue with all
relevant stakeholders, as well as confidence-building and reconciliation measures. He
also assured national partners of United Nations support for dialogue eff orts,
bilingualism and multiculturalism, decentralization and disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration, including through the Peacebuilding Fund, following my
designation of Cameroon as eligible for financing from the Fund in July. On
4 September, he made a public statement urging all Cameroonians in the North -West
and South-West Regions to uphold the fundamental right to education and ensure safe
conditions for children to return to school.
Central African Republic
42. UNOCA continued to advocate intensively with the countries of the subregion
in support of the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic. My Special Representative met political leaders in N ’Djamena in
September and urged the Government of Chad to resume holding meetings of its joint
bilateral commission with the Central African Republic to discuss critical issues,
notably border management. Sustained advocacy contributed to the resumption of the
joint commission between the Central African Repub lic and the Congo on 6 August.
While in N’Djamena, on 12 September, my Special Representative briefed the
meeting of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 2127
(2013) concerning the Central African Republic via video link, providing an update
on progress towards arms control and the implementation of sanctions in the
subregion.
Chad
43. From 10 to 14 September, my Special Representative met with the President and
other senior officials in N’Djamena to advocate the finalization of the ECCAS
institutional reform process. He also discussed the country’s progress in organizing
legislative elections in a challenging security context, as well as the important
regional role of Chad in supporting the peace process in the Central African Republic
and in the fight against Boko Haram.
Congo
44. From 17 to 23 June, a UNOCA working-level team visited Brazzaville to follow
up on the implementation of the ceasefire agreement of 2017 in the Pool Region
between the Government and the Ninja militia led by Pastor Ntumi. It also discussed
efforts aimed at launching a political dialogue and addressing the human rights
situation.
45. On 9 July, in Brazzaville, UNOCA participated in the formal induction of the
permanent secretariat of the National Dialogue Council, which was created under the
Constitution of 2015 and has an important role in mobilizing support for inclusive

19-19933

9/16

S/2019/913

political dialogue. As part of a project financed by the Peacebuilding Fund in support
of the stabilization of the Pool Region, UNOCA provided capacity-building support
to the Council.
46. From 8 to 13 November, my Special Representative met with national and
international stakeholders in Brazzaville, including the Permanent Secretary of the
National Dialogue Council, the High Commissioner for the Reintegration of Former
Combatants and other political leaders. He welcomed ongoing consultations between
the Council and national stakeholders in preparation for dialogue and encouraged
political leaders, in particular those of the opposition, to participate in such efforts
ahead of the presidential election to be held in 2021. He reiterated his appeal to the
Government to disburse its pledged contribution for the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of former combatants.
Equatorial Guinea
47. UNOCA sent a working-level mission to Malabo from 23 to 27 September to
hold meetings with national authorities and coordinate with the United Nations
country team. UNOCA also organized activities jointly with ECCAS and the United
Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa to ass ist the
Government in accelerating a framework for implementation of the Central African
Convention for the Control of Small Arms and Light Weapons, their Ammunition and
All Parts and Components That Can Be Used for Their Manufacture, Repair and
Assembly (the Kinshasa Convention), including by hosting a workshop for arms
control experts from the subregion in Malabo from 25 to 27 September (see
sect. III.B).
Gabon
48. My Special Representative remained in close contact with influential Gabonese
persons from across the political spectrum, encouraging them to maintain direction
and momentum following the recent period of institutional and political uncertainty.
He also urged them to exercise moderation in their discourse and seek recourse
through the appropriate national institutions. On 2 September, he met with the Prime
Minister and encouraged the resumption of social dialogue. On 17 July and
9 September, UNOCA met with delegations from a prominent national trade union
confederation to urge dialogue with the Prime Minister.
49. On 5 November, my Special Representative met with the President, who, in his
capacity as Chair of ECCAS, confirmed that the next extraordinary summit of ECCAS
Heads of State and Government would be convened in Libreville by the end of 2019
to agree on the ECCAS reform process. My Special Representative reiterated the
commitment of the United Nations to supporting the implementation of the reforms
and the strengthening of ECCAS capacity.
50. UNOCA continued to support ECCAS in providing strategic training for the
security sector. From 17 to 21 June, UNOCA and ECCAS jointly organized a
workshop for more than 30 officials from the national police force of Gabon on human
rights and transnational crime. From 16 to 19 September, UNOCA and E CCAS jointly
organized a capacity-building workshop for 34 senior officials from various branches
of the national defence and security forces of Gabon on preventing and combating
terrorism.
51. In October, UNOCA and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
signed an agreement with the Ministry of the Interior, Public Security, Immigration
and Decentralization and the Ministry of Justice of Gabon to implement an 18 -month
national human rights capacity-building project, with financing from the European
Union and the United Nations. The project is designed to provide updated human
10/16

19-19933

S/2019/913

rights training to the National Human Rights Commission, line ministries, human
rights NGOs and civil society organizations representing women and youth.
Sao Tome and Principe
52. My Special Representative visited Sao Tome from 15 to 19 September to follow
up with the authorities on progress towards implementing the recommendations made
by the United Nations technical support mission in March. To that end, on
17 September, he participated in the high-level meeting on the justice sector (see
para. 12). The meeting was supported by the United Nations country team and had
resulted from recommendations of the support mission, fulfilling the request of the
Government for United Nations assistance in advancing democratic and judicial
reforms.

B.

Support for United Nations, regional and subregional initiatives on
peace and security
United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in
Central Africa
53. The Bureau of the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security
Questions in Central Africa visited N’Djamena and Bol in Chad from 21 to 24 October
to assess the situation in the Lake Chad basin, in particular the effects of cl imate
change and the implementation of the Regional Stabilization, Recovery and
Resilience Strategy for Areas Affected by Boko Haram in the Lake Chad Basin
Region. The forty-ninth meeting of the Committee was held in Luanda from 25 to
29 November.
Collaboration with regional, subregional and intergovernmental organizations
54. From 25 to 27 June, in Kigali, UNOCA and ECCAS hosted an expert group
meeting on women and peace and security at which the ECCAS general policy and
regional action plan for the implementation of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000) were adopted. On 28 June, the ECCAS meeting of ministers responsible for
gender and women’s affairs endorsed the regional action plan. UNOCA recruited a
consultant to support ECCAS in resource mobilization, among other things, in view
of a conference on women and peace and security to be held in Malabo in 2020.
55. From 15 to 30 September, the United Nations deployed an expert from the
Standby Team of Senior Mediation Advisers at the request of the ECCAS secretariat
to support ongoing reform of its mediation and preventive diplomacy service. The
expert held consultations with various stakeholders, made substantive comments on
the draft protocol on peace and security and provided guidance to ensure overall
coherence of the reform process.
56. From 8 to 10 October, in Libreville, UNOCA and ECCAS hosted the inaugural
meeting of the new civil society coalition for conflict prevention, peace and secu rity
in Central Africa, a regional coordination mechanism aimed at engaging civil society
in conflict prevention and early warning activities. During consultations with civil
society representatives from the region, held in Douala, Cameroon, in March, it w as
agreed that ECCAS would lead the creation of a regional civil society coordination
mechanism, drawing from the experience of the West Africa Network for
Peacebuilding.
57. On 18 October and 6 November, my Special Representative met with the
Secretary-General of ECCAS to discuss progress in its reform process and joint
cooperation, including on the implementation of the Lomé Declaration on Peace,

19-19933

11/16

S/2019/913

Security, Stability and the Fight against Terrorism and Violent Extremism, adopted at
the joint summit of Heads of State and Government of ECCAS and the Economic
Community of West African States in 2018.
Boko Haram
58. From 18 to 20 June, in Niamey, UNOCA participated in the regional
consultative forum for civil society groups in the Lake Chad basin, convene d by the
Lake Chad Basin Commission and the African Union, with support from UNDP, the
Finnish NGO Crisis Management Initiative and the German Agency for International
Cooperation. The forum was focused on engaging civil society in the implementation
of the Regional Stabilization, Recovery and Resilience Strategy for Areas Affected
by Boko Haram in the Lake Chad Basin Region and identifying avenues for
collaboration, partnerships and information-sharing through peer-to-peer learning and
exchange.
59. From 16 to 18 July, UNOCA participated in the second meeting of the Lake
Chad basin governors’ forum for regional cooperation on stabilization, peacebuilding
and sustainable development. The meeting was convened by the Lake Chad Basin
Commission, with support from the African Union, UNDP and the Crisis Management
Initiative. At the forum, UNDP launched the Regional Stabilization Facility for Lake
Chad as the mechanism for financing regional cooperation on stabilization, recovery
and resilience. UNOCA delivered a presentation on supporting subregional
mechanisms to enhance coordination around ongoing national, regional and
multilateral stabilization efforts.
60. In the context of enhancing United Nations support for Governments and
subregional organizations in addressing the impact of Boko Haram, my Special
Representative for Central Africa and my Special Representative for West Africa and
the Sahel undertook a joint high-level visit to Nigeria from 20 to 23 November, along
with the European Union Special Representative for the Sahel, to advocate the
regional strategy led jointly by the African Union and the Lake Chad Basin
Commission. Similar visits were made to Chad in March 2019 and to Cameroon and
the Niger in April 2019.
Maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea
61. From 9 to 12 July, UNOCA conducted a joint technical mission with the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) to the Interregional
Coordination Centre for Maritime Safety and Security in the Gulf of Guinea, in
Yaoundé, to assess the maritime security situation in the Gulf of Guinea. The mission
met with Centre officials and external partners from diplomatic missions, who agreed
to convene an annual meeting to assess progress in and coordinate support for a four year work programme focused on maritime governance, judicial enforcement,
information-sharing and administration.
62. On 3 October, in Luanda, UNOCA held a working-level meeting with the
secretariat of the Gulf of Guinea Commission to discuss the forty-ninth session of the
United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central
Africa.
Regional strategy and plan of action on counter-terrorism and the
non-proliferation of small arms and light weapons in Central Africa
63. UNOCA, ECCAS and the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and
Disarmament in Africa continued to implement their joint project in support of the
implementation of the Kinshasa Convention. In June, all States members of ECCAS
appointed experts to assess national implementation of the Convention. The findings
12/16

19-19933

S/2019/913

of the experts were presented in a series of workshops and transformed into an
implementation guide. A capacity-building workshop on legal matters was held in
Malabo from 25 to 27 September, with arms control experts from subregional
organizations, civil society and other external partners. The workshop adopted
recommendations to enhance support for the operationalization of nationa l small arms
commissions and to further engage civil society in the implementation of the
Convention at the national and local levels.
Transhumance and farmer-herder conflicts
64. UNOCA continued to support the efforts of ECCAS towards the adoption of a
subregional regulatory framework on pastoralism and transhumance. A consultant
hired by UNOCA developed an initial draft regulatory framework, on the basis of the
conclusions of ECCAS regional workshops. From 14 to 16 October, in Libreville,
UNOCA supported ECCAS in holding an expert-level workshop to review the draft
regulatory framework. Throughout his advocacy in the region, my Special
Representative urged leaders to fully integrate the phenomenon of transboundary
transhumance into their security strategies, including through joint bilateral
commissions between countries sharing a common border.
Link between illicit trafficking in wildlife and natural resources and financing
of armed groups in the subregion, including the Lord’s Resistance Army and
Boko Haram
65. On 24 and 25 June, in Libreville, UNOCA participated in a workshop on the
implementation in Central Africa of the Convention on International Trade in
Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, organized by the Gabonese
parliamentary caucus for conservation in partnership with ECCAS, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and the National Agency for National
Parks of Gabon. Members of parliament from 6 of the 11 States members of ECCAS
also participated. The Convention secretariat presented an overview of the
Convention and its implementation in the subregion, and UNODC discussed the
impact of illicit trafficking on regional security and the need to further target criminal
networks.

C.

Enhancing United Nations coherence and coordination in
the subregion
66. On 12 and 13 July, in Nairobi, UNOCA participated along with other
subregional entities in the development of an action plan for the comprehensive
regional prevention strategy for the Horn of Africa. The Office shared experiences,
good practices and challenges facing a regional office and lessons learned from
system-wide integration in Central Africa.
67. From 18 to 22 September, in Luanda, UNOCA participated in the first biennial
Pan-African Forum for a Culture of Peace in Africa, hosted by the Government of
Angola, the African Union and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization. Bringing together hundreds of participants from Africa and
elsewhere, the Forum was focused on the intersection between partnerships and
culture for engaging young people in the prevention of violent conflict. UNOCA
sponsored the participation of 10 young people from Central Africa.
68. On 9 October, in Dakar, my Special Representative briefed the United Nations
Children’s Fund regional management team for West and Central Africa on the
political situation in the subregion and ongoing prevention efforts.

19-19933

13/16

S/2019/913

69. On the margins of the high-level segment of the seventy-fourth session of the
General Assembly, my Special Representative met with the Executive Director of the
United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN-Women) and the Nobel peace prize laureate and advocate Leymah Gbowee, to
coordinate United Nations support for the African Women Leaders Network. Such
support included initiatives taken in coordination with the Government of Cameroon
to support the engagement of women in the national dialogue process.
70. On 23 and 24 October, UNOCA participated in the coordination meeting of
Great Lakes political units and peace and development advisers organized in Nairobi
by the Office of my Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region.
71. On 4 and 5 November, in Libreville, UNOCA held an annual coordination
meeting with United Nations political units and peace and development advisers in
Central Africa, aimed at enhancing the coherence of the United Nations system,
including through the development of a common analysis of the subregion.
72. UNOCA continued to collaborate with the Subregional Centre for Human Rights
and Democracy in Central Africa on strengthening national human rights monitoring
and oversight mechanisms. On 30 July, in Libreville, it contributed to a workshop
with Gabonese officials of the Ministry of Justice, the Nation al Human Rights
Commission and the Centre for Elections, as well as members of parliament, on
mobilizing civil society to engage with marginalized groups. Further to a request by
the Government of Equatorial Guinea, UNOCA and the Subregional Centre underto ok
a joint mission to Malabo from 18 October to 3 November to support the Government
in establishing a national human rights capacity-building programme.

IV. Observations and recommendations
73. I welcome the intention of ECCAS to hold an extraordinary summit of Heads of
State and Government before the end of 2019 to approve its institutional reform
package. The reform process is the result of subregional collaboration, extensive
advocacy and the marshalling of political will. I reiterate the continue d commitment
of the United Nations to supporting ECCAS in the implementation of its reform.
74. The decision by the President of Cameroon to convene a national dialogue in
Yaoundé was a significant step towards addressing the various crises facing the
country. Dialogue efforts must continue with all relevant stakeholders, including
armed groups, local communities, the diaspora and opposition leaders, to tackle the
underlying grievances of those who have felt marginalized and to address the
aspirations of the population. It is essential to build on the positive momentum created
by the national dialogue to ensure inclusiveness in the implementation of related
recommendations with the participation of all Cameroonians, including women,
young people and those living abroad. It will also be key to ensuring that inclusive
and transparent legislative and municipal elections are held in February 2020. I reiterate
my encouragement to the Cameroonian authorities to continue to adopt additional
confidence-building and reconciliation measures in connection with the crisis in the
North-West and South-West Regions. I call upon all parties to renounce violence and
invest in the political process in order to bring about lasting peace and reconciliation.
I urge national authorities to redouble their efforts to fight impunity and call upon all
actors to abide by international human rights principles. I encourage the Government
of Cameroon to implement the commitments that it has made in the context of the
universal periodic review of the Human Rights Council and to promptly initiate
follow-up actions on the recommendations made by the OHCHR technical assessment
mission in September, including on alleged human rights violations in the North -West
and South-West Regions.
14/16

19-19933

S/2019/913

75. I am concerned about the deteriorating security situation in Chad, which is
closely interlinked with security challenges in key neighbouring countries and in the
region. The spread of violent extremism is best addressed through prevention. I
reiterate my call for the international community to provide increased support to the
Group of Five for the Sahel. In Chad, it is essential from the perspective of sustaining
peace that the Government advances the implementation of its strategic development
plan, Vision 2030, and that international partners provide more support in this respect.
Meanwhile, I welcome the renewal of the national political dialogue framework,
which remains an essential platform for permanent and constructive dialogue between
political parties. I welcome the appointment of several women to the framework and
the inclusion of gender quotas in the new electoral law. I also welcome the progress
towards the holding of the long-postponed legislative elections. I call upon the
Government to increase its efforts towards establishing conditions conducive to
inclusive and credible legislative elections. The United Nations stands ready to
provide further technical support for these elections.
76. The reactivation of the bilateral joint commission between the C entral African
Republic and the Congo brings new hope to the subregion. I congratulate the
authorities of the two countries for demonstrating the necessary trust and
collaboration, and I urge them to capitalize on the current momentum to further
enhance their bilateral relations in support of the Political Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic. I call upon all neighbouring countries
to follow this example and show regional solidarity with the Central African
Republic.
77. I welcome the IMF Extended Credit Facility support programme for the Congo
and urge the Government to remain engaged in the economic reform progress in order
to consolidate the renewed upward trajectory of the economic situation. I am
encouraged by the commitment of the Government to pursue the stabilization of the
situation in the Pool Region. In order to sustain progress, I call upon the Government
to continue to address the political dimension of the situation in that region. I further
urge the Government to disburse its contribution to the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programme, which is supported by the Peacebuilding Fund, to
enable the implementation of the essential reintegration phase.
78. I congratulate the Government of Sao Tome and Principe on showing resolve
for ensuring political stability by enhancing the rule of law. However, the
commitments articulated by the country’s leaders on 17 September must be backed
by clear steps towards larger reforms, on the basis of genuine and inclu sive dialogue,
that will contribute to modernizing the justice sector. The United Nations will
continue to support the Government in that modernization process and in promoting
inclusive dialogue platforms, including through the deployment of relevant expe rtise.
79. In some parts of the subregion, the non-realization of economic, social and
cultural rights continued to generate social tensions and protests against degrading
standards of living. The influence of the executive branch over the judiciary and
legislative bodies undermines the delivery of justice and the adoption of legislation
that is compliant with international human rights norms and standards, thus increasing
impunity. I encourage all Governments of the subregion to step up their engagement
with United Nations human rights mechanisms, including the treaty bodies, the
universal periodic review and the special procedures of the Human Rights Council,
to deliver on their human rights obligations.
80. The humanitarian situation in several pockets of Central Africa remains deeply
troubling. While needs continue to grow, resources have become increasingly scarce
and host communities are stretched to the limits of their capacity to accommodate
displaced populations. Genuine partnership is needed between the affected countries
19-19933

15/16

S/2019/913

and the donor community to ensure that sustainable strategies are in place to respond
to humanitarian needs while also addressing the political, economic and social
conditions that aggravate the desperate situation of millions of pe ople. I will continue
to fully promote the new way of working between humanitarian and development
actors in order to leverage their comparative advantages and achieve collective
outcomes that will reduce need, risk and vulnerability over time.
81. I have taken particular note of the statement of the President of the Security
Council of 12 September, in which he acknowledged the vital role of partnerships
with civil society networks. In that regard, I commend ECCAS on taking the initiative
to establish a subregional civil society coalition aimed at engaging civil society in
conflict prevention and early warning in Central Africa. I encourage UNOCA and
UNOWAS to exchange best practices that will be beneficial to the new civil society
coalition and commit the full support of the United Nations to making the coalition
operational and effective.
82. I have also noted that the Security Council has encouraged UNOCA to take into
consideration the effects of climate change, ecological changes and natural disasters,
among other factors, on the stability of Central Africa, including through drought,
desertification, land degradation and food insecurity. I welcome the increased
engagement of the subregion in efforts to protect the Central African rainforest. I also
welcome the increased support of the international community for the protection of
the rainforest in the context of global efforts to address climate change. I encourage
a continued strengthening of the related partnerships. The Central African Forest
Initiative will bring significant positive benefits to approximately 60 million people
living in or around Central African forests and 40 million living in urban centres, who
depend on the forest for food and fuel. Since agriculture and hydropower production
in large parts of Africa depend on the Central African forests, their preservation is
critical for regional livelihoods and security.
83. I remain concerned about the continued threat of Boko Haram to peace, stability
and socioeconomic development in Central Africa. The relentless determination of
the Governments in the subregion, as well as subregional and regional organizations,
to address the impact of Boko Haram and Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant will be
required to ensure the full implementation of the Regional Stabilization, Recovery
and Resilience Strategy for Areas Affected by Boko Haram in the Lake Chad Basin
Region, led jointly by the African Union and the Lake Chad Basin Commission, and
the effective engagement of local authorities in the affecte d countries. UNOCA and
UNOWAS, along with the rest of the United Nations system, will pursue coordinated
efforts to help to achieve this common objective.
84. I would like to express my appreciation to the Governments of the subregion,
the African Union, ECCAS, CEMAC, the Lake Chad Basin Commission, the Gulf of
Guinea Commission and other regional and subregional institutions for their
continued collaboration with UNOCA. I would also like to express my appreciation
to the Multinational Joint Task Force and troop-contributing countries for their
dedication and commitment to the service of peace and stability. I am grateful to the
Government and people of Gabon for their generous hospitality and support for
UNOCA. I would like to thank the various entities of the United Nations system
working in Central Africa, including the heads of United Nations peace operations,
regional offices, country teams and other entities, for their support for and
cooperation with UNOCA.
85. Finally, I would like to thank my Special Representative, François Louncény
Fall, and the staff of UNOCA for their continuing support for regional efforts to
advance the cause of peace and security in Central Africa.

16/16

19-19933
