United Nations

A/RES/59/272

General Assembly

Distr.: General
2 February 2005

Fifty-ninth session
Agenda item 119

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 23 December 2004
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/59/649)]

59/272. Review of the implementation of General Assembly
resolutions 48/218 B and 54/244
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 48/218 B of 29 July 1994 and 54/244 of 23 December
1999,
1.
Decides to maintain the reporting procedures for the Office of Internal
Oversight Services in full compliance with its resolutions 48/218 B and 54/244, and
in this context requests the Secretary-General to ensure that:
(a) Annual reports submitted by the Office of Internal Oversight Services to
the General Assembly contain the titles and brief summaries of all reports of the
Office issued during the year;
(b) Semi-annual reports of the Office of Internal Oversight Services contain
the titles and brief summaries of all other reports of the Office issued in the
reporting period;
(c) Original versions of the reports of the Office of Internal Oversight
Services not submitted to the General Assembly are, upon request, made available to
any Member State;
Also decides that when access to a report would be inappropriate for
2.
reasons of confidentiality or the risk of violating the due process rights of
individuals involved in Office of Internal Oversight Services investigations, the
report may be modified, or withheld in extraordinary circumstances, at the
discretion of the Under-Secretary-General for Internal Oversight Services, who will
provide reasons for this to the requesting party;
Further decides that reports of the Office of Internal Oversight Services
3.
shall be submitted directly to the General Assembly as submitted by the Office and
that the comments of the Secretary-General may be submitted in a separate report;
Affirms its primary role in the consideration of and action taken on the
4.
reports submitted to it;
5.
Notes that no mechanism has been established for the follow-up to Office
of Internal Oversight Services recommendations, including those considered by the
General Assembly;

04-49258

A/RES/59/272

6.
Emphasizes the importance of establishing real, effective and efficient
mechanisms for responsibility and accountability;
7.
Regrets that despite previous information provided by the SecretaryGeneral on the establishment of accountability mechanisms, including the
accountability panel, such mechanisms are not in place, thereby affecting the
efficient and effective functioning of the Organization;
Takes note of paragraph 129 (b) of the annual report of the Office of
8.
Internal Oversight Services, 1 and concurs with the view that a high-level follow-up
mechanism under the authority of the Secretary-General should be established in the
Organization to effectively feed findings and recommendations of the Office, as
well as relevant findings of the Joint Inspection Unit and the Board of Auditors, into
the executive management processes;
Requests the Secretary-General to submit annually to the General
9.
Assembly a report under the agenda item entitled “Review of the efficiency of the
administrative and financial functioning of the United Nations” addressing the
measures implemented with the aim of strengthening accountability in the
Secretariat and the results achieved;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General to establish the aforementioned
follow-up mechanism as soon as possible and to report to the General Assembly on
the results achieved in the context of the report referred to in paragraph 9 above,
with specific reference to:
(a) The composition of such a mechanism, including the seniority of the
chair and members;
(b)

Terms of reference of the mechanism and frequency of its meetings;

(c) The inclusion in the mechanism of one or more participants with relevant
expertise from United Nations-system oversight bodies;
(d)

Reporting procedures;

11. Reaffirms the role of the Board of Auditors and the Joint Inspection Unit
as external oversight bodies, and, in this regard, affirms that any external review,
audit, inspection, monitoring, evaluation or investigation of the Office can be
undertaken only by such bodies or those mandated to do so by the General
Assembly;
12. Also reaffirms the importance of effective coordination, in the
implementation of their respective mandates, between the Joint Inspection Unit, the
Board of Auditors and the Office of Internal Oversight Services, in order to
maximize the use of resources and share experiences, knowledge, best practices and
lessons learned;
13. Stresses the vital importance of the evaluation function of the Office of
Internal Oversight Services, and requests the Secretary-General to better reflect the
objectives, expected accomplishments and performance indicators related to this
function in future biennial programmes and budgetary submissions of the Office;
14. Reaffirms its oversight role as well as the role of the Fifth Committee in
administrative and budgetary matters;

_______________
1

2

See A/59/359.

A/RES/59/272

15. Notes paragraph 129 (a) of the annual report of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services, and in this context requests the Secretary-General to report to
the General Assembly at its sixtieth session, taking into account the views of
external oversight bodies, on how to guarantee the full operational independence of
the Office within the context of its resolution 48/218 B;
16. Decides to evaluate and review at its sixty-fourth session the functions
and reporting procedures of the Office of Internal Oversight Services and any other
matter which it deems appropriate, and to that end to include in the provisional
agenda of that session an item entitled “Review of the implementation of General
Assembly resolutions 48/218 B, 54/244 and 59/272”.
76th plenary meeting
23 December 2004

3
