S/PRST/2014/9

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
22 May 2014
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 7181st meeting of the Security Council, held on 22 May 2014, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Somalia”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the Secretary-General’s 3 April Letter
to the President of the Security Council (“the Letter” - S/2014/243),
identifying options for supporting the Federal Government of Somalia to meet
its obligations under the partial suspension of the arms embargo. The Security
Council underlines that improved arms and ammunition management in
Somalia is a fundamental component of greater peace and stability for both
Somalia and the region.
“The Security Council underscores the need for the Federal Government
of Somalia to show tangible progress in complying with the terms of the
partial suspension of the arms embargo as highlighted in both the Letter and
resolution 2142 (2014). The Security Council remains concerned about the
diversion of arms and ammunition, including potentially to Al -Shabaab, which
was also highlighted in resolution 2142 (2014). In that regard, the Security
Council welcomes the Federal Government of Somalia’s establishment of an
Arms and Ammunition Steering Committee as the overall body responsible for
arms and ammunition management. The Security Council highlights the
important role which should also be played by the Weapons and Ammunition
Management Technical Working Group (Working Group) with respect to
improving weapons management. The Security Council reiterat es that its
decision in October 2014 on the continuation of the suspension of the arms
embargo will be informed by the Federal Government of Somalia’s compliance
with its obligations to carry out Security Council decisions.
“The Security Council underlines the importance of the international
community supporting the Federal Government of Somalia in the areas
identified in the Letter. In particular the Security Council underlines the urgent
need for international support to the Office of the National Securi ty Adviser,
which coordinates the Federal Government’s reporting obligations to the
Security Council, as well as oversees the national architecture for weapons and
ammunition management. The Security Council appeals to Member States and
relevant international and regional organisations to provide support and
equipment which focus on:

14-53887 (E)

220514

*1453887*

S/PRST/2014/9

i)

Improving the Federal Government of Somalia’s reporting to the
Security Council on the structure of its security forces, as well as
improving its notifications to the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009)
concerning Somalia and Eritrea (“Sanctions Committee”);

ii)

Completing a baseline registration survey of the Somali Security
Sector;

iii)

Starting a weapons marking and registration process, in order to
inform future verification activities.

“The Security Council encourages Member States to provide financing
and in-kind resources to accelerate key deliverables in the 2014 work plan of
the Arms and Ammunition Steering Committee and its Working Group.
“The Security Council also emphasizes in particular the need for five
weapons marking machines, equipment required for mob ile marking units for
armouries outside of Mogadishu, and interim weapons storage facilities.
“The Security Council underlines to all Member States and international
organisations that all deliveries of military equipment and notifications should
be coordinated through the Office of the National Security Adviser, which the
Federal Government of Somalia has identified as the coordinating entity for
arms and ammunition management.
“The Federal Government of Somalia should consider establishing a joint
verification team with international experts. The team should focus on physical
verification of arms and ammunition provided to the Federal Government, as
well as the systems of control in place for arms and ammunition management.
The team should focus on supporting the Federal Government of Somalia in
complying with the decisions of the Security Council and the Sanctions
Committee, in particular with respect to arms and ammunition management.
The Security Council underlines that this team would complement the work of,
and should coordinate with, the Somalia and Eritrea Monitoring Group
(SEMG), in order to avoid any duplication in their respective activities. The
Security Council encourages Member States, UNSOM, and relevant UN
Agencies, funds and programmes, to support the establishment of this team.
The Security Council further encourages Member States to provide sufficient
financial resources to support the prompt establishment of this team.
“The Security Council highlights that the work of the SEMG is of
paramount importance. The Security Council reiterates paragraph 32 of
resolution 2111 (2013) and reminds the Federal Government of Somalia of the
importance of cooperating with the Group. In that context, the Security
Council encourages the SEMG to increase its presence in Mogadishu and step
up its interaction with the Office of the National Security Adviser, including
by regular participation in the meetings of the Working Group.
“The Security Council encourages all relevant members of the
international community, UNSOM, UN agencies and the African Union to
support the Federal Government of Somalia in improving its arms and
ammunition management, including through providing financial and in -kind
support to enhance their capacity. The Security Council underlines that the

2/3

14-53887

S/PRST/2014/9

Federal Government of Somalia is ultimately responsible for the management
of its weapons and military equipment. The Security Council highlights its
expectation that the Federal Government of Somalia will make substantive
progress in the months ahead.”

14-53887

3/3
