United Nations

A/RES/61/111

General Assembly

Distr.: General
15 January 2007

Sixty-first session
Agenda item 30

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 14 December 2006
[on the report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) (A/61/406)]

61/111. International cooperation in the peaceful uses
of outer space
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 51/122 of 13 December 1996, 54/68 of 6 December
1999, 59/2 of 20 October 2004 and 60/99 of 8 December 2005,
Deeply convinced of the common interest of mankind in promoting and
expanding the exploration and use of outer space, as the province of all mankind,
for peaceful purposes and in continuing efforts to extend to all States the benefits
derived therefrom, and also of the importance of international cooperation in this
field, for which the United Nations should continue to provide a focal point,
Reaffirming the importance of international cooperation in developing the rule
of law, including the relevant norms of space law and their important role in
international cooperation for the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful
purposes, and of the widest possible adherence to international treaties that promote
the peaceful uses of outer space in order to meet emerging new challenges,
especially for developing countries,
Seriously concerned about the possibility of an arms race in outer space, and
bearing in mind the importance of article IV of the Treaty on Principles Governing
the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the
Moon and Other Celestial Bodies, 1
Recognizing that all States, in particular those with major space capabilities,
should contribute actively to the goal of preventing an arms race in outer space as
an essential condition for the promotion and strengthening of international
cooperation in the exploration and use of outer space for peaceful purposes,
Considering that space debris is an issue of concern to all nations,
Noting the progress achieved in the further development of peaceful space
exploration and applications as well as in various national and cooperative space
projects, which contributes to international cooperation, and the importance of
_______________
1

06-50109

Resolution 2222 (XXI), annex.

A/RES/61/111

further developing the legal framework to strengthen international cooperation in
this field,
Convinced of the importance of the recommendations in the resolution entitled
“The Space Millennium: Vienna Declaration on Space and Human Development”,
adopted by the Third United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful
Uses of Outer Space (UNISPACE III), held at Vienna from 19 to 30 July 1999, 2 and
the need to promote the use of space technology towards implementing the United
Nations Millennium Declaration, 3
Taking note of the actions already taken as well as those to be embarked upon
to further implement the recommendations of UNISPACE III, as reflected in
resolution 59/2 and the Plan of Action of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space, 4
Convinced that the use of space science and technology and their applications
in such areas as telemedicine, tele-education, disaster management and
environmental protection as well as other Earth observation applications contribute
to achieving the objectives of the global conferences of the United Nations that
address various aspects of economic, social and cultural development, inter alia,
poverty eradication,
Taking note, in that regard, that the 2005 World Summit recognized the
important role that science and technology play in promoting sustainable
development, 5
Having considered the report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space on the work of its forty-ninth session, 6
1.
Endorses the report of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space on the work of its forty-ninth session;6
2.
Urges States that have not yet become parties to the international treaties
governing the uses of outer space 7 to give consideration to ratifying or acceding to
those treaties as well as incorporating them in their national legislation;
3.
Notes that, at its forty-fifth session, the Legal Subcommittee of the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space continued its work, as mandated by
the General Assembly in its resolution 60/99; 8

_______________
2

See Report of the Third United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space, Vienna, 19-30 July 1999 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.00.I.3), chap. I, resolution 1.
3
See resolution 55/2.
4
A/59/174, chap. VI.B.
5
See resolution 60/1, para. 60.
6
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/61/20).
7
Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space,
including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies (resolution 2222 (XXI), annex); Agreement on the Rescue
of Astronauts, the Return of Astronauts and the Return of Objects Launched into Outer Space (resolution
2345 (XXII), annex); Convention on International Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects
(resolution 2777 (XXVI), annex); Convention on Registration of Objects Launched into Outer Space
(resolution 3235 (XXIX), annex); and Agreement Governing the Activities of States on the Moon and
Other Celestial Bodies (resolution 34/68, annex).
8
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/61/20),
chap. II.D.

2

A/RES/61/111

4.
Endorses the recommendation of the Committee that the Legal
Subcommittee, at its forty-sixth session, taking into account the concerns of all
countries, in particular those of developing countries:
(a)

Consider the following as regular agenda items:

(i)

General exchange of views;

(ii)

Status and application of the five United Nations treaties on outer space;

(iii) Information on the activities of international intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations relating to space law;
(iv) Matters relating to:
a.

The definition and delimitation of outer space;

b.
The character and utilization of the geostationary orbit, including
consideration of ways and means to ensure the rational and equitable use of
the geostationary orbit without prejudice to the role of the International
Telecommunication Union;
(b)

Consider the following single issues/items for discussion:

(i) Review and possible revision of the Principles Relevant to the Use of
Nuclear Power Sources in Outer Space; 9
(ii) Examination and review of the developments concerning the draft
protocol on matters specific to space assets to the Convention on International
Interests in Mobile Equipment;
(c) Consider the practice of States and international organizations in
registering space objects in accordance with the workplan adopted by the
Committee; 10
5.
Notes that the Legal Subcommittee, at its forty-sixth session, will submit
its proposals to the Committee for new items to be considered by the Subcommittee
at its forty-seventh session, in 2008;
Also notes that, in the context of paragraph 4 (a) (ii) above, the Legal
6.
Subcommittee, at its forty-sixth session, will reconvene its Working Group and
review the need to extend the mandate of the Working Group beyond that session of
the Subcommittee;
Further notes that, in the context of paragraph 4 (a) (iv) a. above, the
7.
Legal Subcommittee will reconvene its Working Group on the item only to consider
matters relating to the definition and delimitation of outer space;
Notes that, in the context of paragraph 4 (c) above, the Legal
8.
Subcommittee will reconvene its Working Group;
9.
Also notes that the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee, at its fortythird session, continued its work as mandated by the General Assembly in its
resolution 60/99; 11

_______________
9

See resolution 47/68.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/58/20),
para. 199.
11
Ibid., Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/61/20), chap. II.C.
10

3

A/RES/61/111

10. Endorses the recommendation of the Committee that the Scientific and
Technical Subcommittee, at its forty-fourth session, taking into account the
concerns of all countries, in particular those of developing countries:
(a)

Consider the following items:

(i) General exchange of views and introduction to reports submitted on
national activities;
(ii)

United Nations Programme on Space Applications;

(iii) Implementation of the recommendations of the Third United Nations
Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
(UNISPACE III);
(iv) Matters relating to remote sensing of the Earth by satellite, including
applications for developing countries and monitoring of the Earth’s
environment;
(b) Consider the following items in accordance with the workplans adopted
by the Committee: 12
(i)

Space debris;

(ii)

Use of nuclear power sources in outer space;

(iii) Near-Earth objects;
(iv) Space-system-based disaster management support;
(v)

International Heliophysical Year 2007;

(c) Consider the following single issue/item for discussion: examination of
the physical nature and technical attributes of the geostationary orbit and its
utilization and applications, including in the field of space communications, as well
as other questions relating to developments in space communications, taking
particular account of the needs and interests of developing countries;
11. Notes that the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee, at its forty-fourth
session, will submit its proposal to the Committee for a draft provisional agenda for
the forty-fifth session of the Subcommittee, in 2008;
12. Endorses the recommendation of the Committee that the Committee on
Space Research and the International Astronautical Federation, in liaison with
member States, be invited to arrange a symposium to address the theme “The use of
the equatorial orbit for space applications: challenges and opportunities”, with as
wide participation as possible, to be held during the first week of the forty-fourth
session of the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee;
13. Agrees that, in the context of paragraphs 10 (a) (ii) and (iii) and 11
above, the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee, at its forty-fourth session, should
reconvene the Working Group of the Whole;
14. Also agrees that, in the context of paragraph 10 (b) (i) above, the
Scientific and Technical Subcommittee could, at any time during its forty-fourth
session, reconvene its Working Group on Space Debris to consider comments
_______________
12
See A/AC.105/848, annex II, para. 6, for item (i); ibid., annex III, para. 8, for item (ii); ibid., annex I,
para. 20, and A/AC.105/869, annex I, para. 22, for item (iii); A/AC.105/823, annex II, para. 15, and
A/AC.105/848, annex I, para. 21, for item (iv); and A/AC.105/848, annex I, para. 22, for item (v).

4

A/RES/61/111

resulting from the referral of the guidelines to the national level and any further
developments, particularly the relationship between the revised draft of the space
debris mitigation guidelines and nuclear power sources in outer space; 13
15. Further agrees that, in the context of paragraph 10 (b) (ii) above, the
Scientific and Technical Subcommittee, at its forty-fourth session, should reconvene
its Working Group on the Use of Nuclear Power Sources in Outer Space and that the
Working Group should continue its intersessional work on the topics described in
the multi-year workplan as amended by the Subcommittee at its forty-second
session and as agreed by the Subcommittee at its forty-third session and the
Committee at its forty-ninth session; 14
16. Agrees that, in the context of paragraph 10 (b) (iii) above, the Scientific
and Technical Subcommittee, at its forty-fourth session, should establish, for one
year, a working group on near-Earth objects, in accordance with the workplan under
this item; 15
17. Endorses the United Nations Programme on Space Applications for 2007,
as proposed to the Committee by the Expert on Space Applications and endorsed by
the Committee; 16
18. Notes with satisfaction that, in accordance with paragraph 30 of General
Assembly resolution 50/27 of 6 December 1995, the African regional centres for
space science and technology education, in the French language and in the English
language, located in Morocco and Nigeria, respectively, as well as the Centre for
Space Science and Technology Education in Asia and the Pacific and the Regional
Centre for Space Science and Technology Education for Latin America and the
Caribbean, entered into an affiliation agreement with the Office for Outer Space
Affairs and have continued their education programmes in 2006;
19. Agrees that the regional centres referred to in paragraph 18 above should
continue to report to the Committee on their activities on an annual basis;
20. Notes with satisfaction the contribution being made by the Scientific and
Technical Subcommittee and the efforts of Member States and the Office for Outer
Space Affairs to promote and support the activities being organized within the
framework of the International Heliophysical Year 2007;
21. Also notes with satisfaction that the African Leadership Conference on
Space Science and Technology for Sustainable Development, the first of which was
hosted by the Government of Nigeria in collaboration with the Governments of
Algeria and South Africa from 23 to 25 November 2005, will be held on a biennial
basis;
22. Notes with appreciation that the Fifth Space Conference of the Americas
was held in Quito from 24 to 28 July 2006 under the auspices of the Office for
Outer Space Affairs, the European Space Agency and the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, and that the Government of Chile
held a preparatory meeting for that Conference on 28 and 29 March 2006, with
_______________
13

See A/AC.105/869, para. 101, and annex II, para. 8.
See A/AC.105/848, annex III, para. 8; A/AC.105/869, annex III; and Official Records of the General
Assembly, Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/61/20), paras. 139–141.
15
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/61/20),
para. 178.
16
Ibid., paras. 81 and 87; see also A/AC.105/861, sects. II and III and annex III.
14

5

A/RES/61/111

support from the Government of Colombia; notes that the theme of the Fifth
Conference was “Regional space cooperation for security and human development”
and that its results were set out in the Declaration of San Francisco de Quito and in
the Plan of Action of the Conference; notes also that Ecuador will serve as
secretariat pro tempore of the Conference for a period of three years, during which
it will be responsible for the implementation of the recommended activities and
programmes, for which purpose it will work in cooperation with the international
group of experts; and notes further that the Sixth Space Conference of the Americas
will be held in Guatemala in 2009;
23. Notes with satisfaction that the Convention on the Establishment of the
Asia-Pacific Space Cooperation Organization was opened for signature in Beijing
on 28 October 2005, that as at 1 June 2006 the Convention had been signed by nine
States and that once the Convention has been ratified by five States, it will enter into
force, thereby establishing the organization, with its headquarters in Beijing;
24. Considers that it is essential that Member States pay more attention to
the problem of collisions of space objects, including those with nuclear power
sources, with space debris, and other aspects of space debris, calls for the
continuation of national research on this question, for the development of improved
technology for the monitoring of space debris and for the compilation and
dissemination of data on space debris, also considers that, to the extent possible,
information thereon should be provided to the Scientific and Technical
Subcommittee, and agrees that international cooperation is needed to expand
appropriate and affordable strategies to minimize the impact of space debris on
future space missions;
25. Urges all States, in particular those with major space capabilities, to
contribute actively to the goal of preventing an arms race in outer space as an
essential condition for the promotion of international cooperation in the exploration
and use of outer space for peaceful purposes;
26. Emphasizes the need to increase the benefits of space technology and its
applications and to contribute to an orderly growth of space activities favourable to
sustained economic growth and sustainable development in all countries, including
mitigation of the consequences of disasters, in particular in the developing
countries;
27. Notes that space science and technology and their applications could
make important contributions to economic, social and cultural development and
welfare, as indicated in the resolution entitled “The Space Millennium: Vienna
Declaration on Space and Human Development”;2
28. Reiterates that the benefits of space technology and its applications
should be prominently brought to the attention, in particular, of the major United
Nations conferences and summits for economic, social and cultural development
and related fields and that the use of space technology should be promoted towards
achieving the objectives of those conferences and summits and for implementing the
United Nations Millennium Declaration;3
29. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the inclusion of the
issue of the use of space technology in the reports submitted by the SecretaryGeneral to major United Nations conferences and summits for economic, social and

6

A/RES/61/111

cultural development, and its inclusion in the outcomes and commitments of those
conferences and summits; 17
30. Notes with satisfaction the increased efforts of the Committee and its
Scientific and Technical Subcommittee as well as the Office for Outer Space Affairs
and the Inter-Agency Meeting on Outer Space Activities to promote the use of space
science and technology and their applications in carrying out actions recommended
in the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development
(“Johannesburg Plan of Implementation”); 18
31. Urges entities of the United Nations system, particularly those
participating in the Inter-Agency Meeting on Outer Space Activities, to examine, in
cooperation with the Committee, how space science and technology and their
applications could contribute to implementing the United Nations Millennium
Declaration, particularly in the areas relating to, inter alia, food security and
increasing opportunities for education;
32. Invites the Inter-Agency Meeting on Outer Space Activities to continue
to contribute to the work of the Committee and to report to the Committee and its
Scientific and Technical Subcommittee on the work conducted at its annual
sessions;
33. Notes with satisfaction that the open informal meetings, held in
conjunction with the annual sessions of the Inter-Agency Meeting on Outer Space
Activities and in which representatives of member States and observers in the
Committee participate, provide a constructive mechanism for an active dialogue
between the entities of the United Nations system and member States and observers
in the Committee;
34. Encourages entities of the United Nations system to participate fully in
the work of the Inter-Agency Meeting on Outer Space Activities;
35. Notes that space technology could play a central role in disaster
reduction;
36. Requests the Committee to continue to consider, as a matter of priority,
ways and means of maintaining outer space for peaceful purposes and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-second session, and agrees that during
its consideration of the matter, the Committee could continue to consider ways to
promote regional and interregional cooperation based on experiences stemming
from the Space Conference of the Americas, the African Leadership Conference on
Space Science and Technology for Sustainable Development and the role space
technology could play in the implementation of recommendations of the World
Summit on Sustainable Development;
37. Notes with satisfaction that the Committee established a closer link
between its work to implement the recommendations of UNISPACE III and the
work of the Commission on Sustainable Development by contributing to the
thematic areas that are addressed by the Commission;

_______________
17

A/61/495.
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–
4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution
2, annex.
18

7

A/RES/61/111

38. Agrees that the Director of the Division for Sustainable Development of
the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat should be invited
to participate in the sessions of the Committee to inform it how it could best
contribute to the work of the Commission on Sustainable Development and that the
Director of the Office for Outer Space Affairs should participate in the sessions of
the Commission to raise awareness and promote the benefits of space science and
technology for sustainable development;
39. Notes with appreciation that the International Committee on Global
Navigation Satellite Systems was established on a voluntary basis as an informal
body to promote cooperation, as appropriate, on matters of mutual interest related to
civil satellite-based positioning, navigation, timing and value-added services, as
well as the compatibility and interoperability of global navigation satellite systems,
while increasing their use to support sustainable development, particularly in
developing countries;
40. Notes the fact that the Office for Outer Space Affairs could integrate into
its programme of work a number of actions identified for implementation by the
Office in the Plan of Action of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
for the further implementation of the recommendations of UNISPACE III 19 and that
some of those actions could be integrated into its programme of work only if
additional staff and financial resources were provided; 20
41. Urges all Member States to contribute to the Trust Fund for the United
Nations Programme on Space Applications to enhance the capacity of the Office for
Outer Space Affairs to provide technical and legal advisory services and initiate
pilot projects in accordance with the Plan of Action of the Committee, while
maintaining the priority thematic areas agreed by the Committee;
42. Agrees that the Committee should continue to consider a report on the
activities of the International Satellite System for Search and Rescue as a part of its
consideration of the United Nations Programme on Space Applications under the
agenda item entitled “Report of the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee” and
invites Member States to report on their activities regarding the System;
43. Requests the Committee to continue to consider, at its fiftieth session, its
agenda item entitled “Spin-off benefits of space technology: review of current
status”;
44. Also requests the Committee, in view of the importance of space and
education, to continue to consider, at its fiftieth session, under its agenda item
entitled “Space and society”, the special theme for the focus of discussions for the
period 2004–2006 “Space and education”, in accordance with the workplan adopted
by the Committee; 21
45. Agrees that the Committee should continue to consider, at its fiftieth
session, its agenda item entitled “Space and water”;
46. Also agrees that a symposium on space and water should be held during
the fiftieth session of the Committee;

_______________
19

See A/AC.105/L.262.
Ibid., annex, para. 6.
21
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/58/20), para. 239;
and ibid., Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/61/20), paras. 245 and 260.
20

8

A/RES/61/111

47. Notes with satisfaction that the Committee agreed to consider, at its
fiftieth session, under its agenda item entitled “Other matters”, the issue of the
future role and activities of the Committee and noted that the Chairman of the
Committee could conduct intersessional, open-ended informal consultations with a
view to presenting to the Committee a list of elements that could be taken into
consideration at its next session;
48. Agrees to include in the agenda of the fiftieth session of the Committee a
new item, entitled “International cooperation in promoting the use of space-derived
geospatial data for sustainable development”, under a multi-year workplan; 22
49. Also agrees that a panel on space exploration activities, including the
participation of the private sector, should be convened during the fiftieth session of
the Committee;
50. Notes with satisfaction that in accordance with the agreement reached by
the Committee at its forty-sixth session on the measures relating to the future
composition of the bureaux of the Committee and its subsidiary bodies, 23 on the
basis of the measures relating to the working methods of the Committee and its
subsidiary bodies, 24 the Group of African States, the Group of Asian States, the
Group of Eastern European States, the Group of Latin American and Caribbean
States and the Group of Western European and Other States have nominated their
candidates for the offices of Chair of the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee,
First Vice-Chair of the Committee, Chair of the Legal Subcommittee, Chair of the
Committee and Second Vice-Chairman/Rapporteur of the Committee, respectively,
for the period 2008–2009;
51. Endorses the composition of the bureaux of the Committee and its
subsidiary bodies for the period 2008–2009, as reflected in paragraph 50 above, and
agrees that the Committee and its Subcommittees should elect their officers at their
respective sessions in 2008 in accordance with that composition;
52. Notes that each of the regional groups has the responsibility to actively
promote the participation in the work of the Committee and its subsidiary bodies of
the member States of the Committee that are also members of the respective
regional groups, and agrees that the regional groups should consider this
Committee-related matter among their members;
53. Requests entities of the United Nations system and other international
organizations to continue and, where appropriate, to enhance their cooperation with
the Committee and to provide it with reports on the issues dealt with in the work of
the Committee and its subsidiary bodies.
79th plenary meeting
14 December 2006

_______________
22

Ibid., Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/61/20), paras. 301–303.
Ibid., Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/58/20), annex II, paras. 4–9.
24
Ibid., Fifty-second Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/52/20), annex I; see also Official Records of the
General Assembly, Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/58/20), annex II, appendix III.
23

9
