General Assembly-Twenty-fourth Session

106
2. Toe conciliation commission shall . make its r~commendations within five months after its appomt~ent. If its r~ommendations are not accepted by the parties t<:, the dispute
within two months after they have been delivered, e~ther
party may bring the dispute before the Court by a wntten
application.
.ARTICLE IV

The present Protocol shall ~ open for signatu~e by a!l
States which may become Parties. to the Conventlo~, until
31 December 1970 at United Nations Headquarters m New
York.
.ARTICLE V
Toe present Protocol is subject to_ ratific:ition. The instruments of ratification shall be deposited with the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations.
.ARTICLE VI

The present Protocol shall remain_ open for accession. by
all States which may become Parties to the Convention.
Toe instruments of accession shall be deposited with the
Secretary-General of the United Nations.
ARTICLE VII

1. The present Protocol shall enter into force on the same

day as the Convention or on the_ thirtieth day f~llow!ns
the date of deposit of the second instrument of ratification
of or accession to the Protocol with the Secretary-General
of the United Nations, whichever day is later.
2. For each State ratifying or acceding to the present
Protocol after its entry into force in accordance with paragraph 1 of this article, the Protocol shall enter into force
on the thirtieth day after deposit by such State of its instrument of ratification or accession.
ARTICLE VIII
The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall inform
all States which may become Parties to the Convention:
(a) Of signatures to the present Protocol and of the
deposit of instruments of ratification or accession in accordance with articles IV, V and VI;
(b) Of the date on which the present Protocol will enter
into force in accordance with article VII.
.ARTICLE IX

The original of the present Protocol, of which the Chinese,
English, French, Russian and Spanish texts are equally
authentic, shall be deposited with the Secretary-General of
the United Nations, who shall send certified copies thereof
to all States referred to in article IV.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, being duly authorized thereto by their respective Governments, have signed
the present Protocol, opened for signature at New York on
16 December 1969.

2531 (XXIV). Settlement of civil claims in con•
nexion with the Convention on Special Missions

The General Assembly,
Noting that the Convention on Special Missions,
adopted by the General Assembly on 8 December
1969, 10 provides for immunity from the jurisdiction
of the receiving State of members of a special mission
of the sending State,
Recalling that such immunity may be waived by the
sending State,
Noting in addition that, as was recalled in the preamble to the Convention, the purpose of immunities is
10 Resolution 2530 (XXIV), annex.

not to benefit individuals but to ensure the efficient
performance of the functions of special missions,
Mindful of the deep concern expressed during the
deliberations of the General Assembly that claims of
immunity might, in certain cases, deprive persons in the
receiving State of the· benefit of a judicial settlement,
Recommends that the sending State should waive the
immunity of members of its special mission in respect
of civil claims of persons in the receiving State when
it can do so without impeding the performance of the
functions of the special mission, and that, when immunity is not waived, the sending State should use its
best endeavours to bring about a just settlement of the
claims.
1825th plenary meeting,
8 December 1969.
2532 (XXIV). Tribute to the International Law
Commission in connexion with the adoption of the Convention on Special Mission•

The General Assembly,
Having adopted the Convention on Special Missions10
on the basis of the draft articles prepared by the International Law Commission, 11
Expresses its deep gratitude to the International Law
Commission for its outstanding contribution to the
codification and progressive development of the rules
of international Jaw on special missions.
1825th plenary meeting,
8 December 1969.
2533 (XXIV). Consideration of principle11 of
international law concerning friendly relations and co-operation among State■ in
accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1815 (XVII) of 18 December 1962, 1966 (XVIII) of 16 December 1963, 2103
(XX) of 20 December 1965, 2181 (XXI) of 12 December 1966, 2327 (XXII) of 18 December 1967 and
2463 (XXIII) of 20 December 1968, in which it
affirmed the importance of the progressive development
and codification of the principles of international law
concerning friendly relations and co-operation among
States,
Recalling further that among the fundamental purposes of the United Nations are the maintenance of
international peace and security and the development
of friendly relations and co-operation among States,
Considering that the faithful observance of the principles of international law concerning friendly relations and co-operation among States in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations is of paramount importance for the maintenance of international peace
and security and the improvement of the international
situation,
Considering further that the progressive development
and codification of the principles of international law
concerning friendly relations and co-operation among
States, so as to secure their more effective application,
11 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-second
Session, Supplement No. 9 (A/6709/Rev.1 and Corr.1), chap.
ter II, section D.

Resolutions adopted on the Reporta of the Sixth Committee

would promote the realization of the purposes of the
United Nations,
Bearing in mind its resolution 2131 (XX) of 21 D~cember 1965,
Convinced of the significance of continuing the effort to achieve general agreement on the statements of
the seven principles of international law set forth in
General Assembly resolution 1815 ( XVII), but without prejudice to the applicability of the rules of procedure of the Assembly, with a view to the adoption of
a declaration which would constitute a landmark in
the progressive development and codification of those
principles,
Recalling that, in its resolution 2499 A (XXIV) of
31 October 1969 concerning the celebration of the
twenty-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, it invited
the Special Committee on Principles of International
Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation
among States to expedite its work with a view to facilitating the adoption of an appropriate document by the
General Assembly during the commemorative session,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee,12 which met in New York from 18 August to
19 September 1969,
1. Takes note of the report of the Special Committee on Principles of International Law concerning
Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Special Committee for the valuable work it has performed and the
progress reflected in the statements of the two principles it discussed;
3. Decides to ask the Special Committee, as reconstituted by the General Assembly in resolution 2103
( XX), to meet in the first half of 1970 at Geneva or
at any other suitable place for which the SecretaryGeneral receives an invitation, in order to continue
and complete its work;
4. Requests the Special Committee, in the light of
the debate which took place in the Sixth Committee
during the present and previous sessions of the General
Assembly and at the 1964, 1966, 1967, 1968 and 1969
sessions of the Special Committee, to endeavour to
resolve, in the light of Assembly resolution 2327
( XXII), the remaining questions relating to the formulation of the seven principles, in order to complete
its work, and to submit to the Assembly at its twentyfifth session a comprehensive report containing a draft
Declaration on all of the seven principles;
5. Calls upon the members of the Special Committee to devote their utmost efforts to ensuring the success
of the Committee's session, in particular by undertaking, in the period preceding the session, such consultations and other preparatory measures as they may
deem necessary;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to co-operate with
the Special Committee in its task and to provide all
the services, documentation and other facilities necessary for its work;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-fifth session an item entitled "Consideration
of principles of internati-:mal law concerning friendly
relations and co-operation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations".

1825th plenary meeting,
8 December 1969.
12 Jbid., Twenty-fourth Session, Supplement No.19 (A/7619).

107

2534 (XXIV). Resolution relating to article 66
of the Vienna Convention on the Law of
Treaties and the annex thereto
The General Assembly,
Taking note of the Vienna Convention on the Law of
Treaties, 13 adopted on 22 May 1969 by the United
Nations Conference on the Law of Treaties, and in particular paragraph 7 of the annex thereto,
Taking note of the resolution 14 relating to article 66
of the Convention and the annex thereto, adopted on
23 May 1969 by the United Nations Conference on
the Law of Treaties,
Considering that, under the terms of paragraph 7
of the annex to the Convention, the expenses of any
conciliation commission that may be set up under article
66 of the Convention shall be borne by the United
Nations,
Noting the arrangements suggested in the note by
the Secretary-General15 on the administrative and
financial implications of the conciliation procedure provided for in the Convention,
1. Approves the provisions of paragraph 7 of the
annex to the Vienna Convention on the Law of
Treaties;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to take action
accordingly.
1825th plenary meeting,
8 December 1969.
2549 (XXIV). Report of the Special Committee
on the Question of Defining Aggreuion
The. General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee on the Question of Defining Aggression on the
work of its session held in New York from 24 February
to 3 April 1969, 16
Taking note of the progress made by the Special
Committee in its consideration of the question of defining aggression and on the draft definition, as reflected in the report of the Special Committee,
Considering that it was not possible for the Special
Committee to complete its task, in particular its consideration of the proposals concerning a draft definition of aggression submitted to the Special Committee
during its sessions held in 1968 and 1969,
Considering that in its resolutions 2330 (XXII) of
18 December 1967 and 2420 (XXIII) of 18 December
1968 the General Assembly recognized the widespread
conv~ction of the need to expedite the definition of aggression,
Considering the urgency of defining aggression and
the desirability of achi~ving this objective, if possible,
by the twenty-fifth anmversary of the United Nations,
l. Decides that the Special Committee on the Question of Defining Aggression shall resume its work in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 2330
( XXII) , at Geneva in the second half of 1970;
1a A/CONF.39/27 and Corr.I.
14 See Official Records of the General Assembly Twentyfourth Session, Annexes, agenda item 94 (a) and (c), document A/7592, para. 12.
1~ Ibid., document A/C.6/397.
16 Ibid., Twenty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 20 (A/7620).
