United Nations

A/ES-10/PV.31

General Assembly

Official Records

Emergency Special Session

31

st meeting
Friday, 15 December 2006, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Al-Khalifa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Bahrain)

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 5 (continued)
Illegal Israeli actions in Occupied East Jerusalem
and the rest of the Occupied Palestinian Territory
Report of the Secretary-General (A/ES-10/361)
Draft resolution (A/ES-10/L.20/Rev.1)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/61/625/Rev.1)
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): It is
truly a difficult position in which I find myself: the
General Assembly Hall is not exactly full of
representatives. Nevertheless, the Assembly is meeting
once again at its resumed tenth emergency special
session to reaffirm the illegality of Israel’s construction
of the separation wall in the occupied Palestinian
territory and to strengthen the international
community’s commitment to the 9 July 2004 advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice on the
illegality of the construction of the wall and the legal
consequences arising from it.
In that regard, international efforts should be
made to ensure the implementation of resolution
ES-10/15, which requested the establishment of a
register to document the damage inflicted on all natural
and legal persons as a result of the construction of the
wall. Such implementation is necessary to safeguard
the legitimate rights of the brotherly Palestinian
people, which have been violated by Israel, and, in
particular, to end Israel’s occupation since 1967 of

Palestinian territory and to emphasize that the
international community does not recognize changes
on the ground made by Israel to affect territory and
border issues through the establishment of an illegal
separation wall.
Despite a two-year delay in the issuance of the
Secretary-General’s report (A/ES-10/361), we firmly
support its recommendations relating to the
establishment of the Register and to the General
Assembly’s undertaking the necessary action in that
regard, based on the guidelines contained in draft
resolution A/ES-10/L.20) submitted by the Arab Group
and the Non-Alignment Movement.
The consequences of the construction of the wall
are not limited to political and legal aspects, but also
extend to its social and humanitarian impact on the
lives of the Palestinian people, who have been
additionally burdened by constraints on their freedom
of movement, resulting in increased unemployment and
economic hardship. The growing number of
checkpoints has led to a decline in the level of medical
services. That, coupled with the constraints imposed on
movement, has led to an increase in the mortality rate.
Palestinians’ hope of living in humane conditions is
dwindling as a result of continued Israeli violations of
their human rights. Even as the United Nations calls
for respect of those rights, Israel continues to violate
them
systematically,
ignoring
resolutions
of
international legitimacy and the rules of international
law, including the 9 July 2004 advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

07-25260 (E)

*0725260*

A/ES-10/PV.31

That
advisory
opinion
emphasized
the
responsibility and obligation of Israel, the occupying
Power, to return land and all immovable property
seized from all natural or legal persons in the process
of constructing the wall in the occupied Palestinian
territory and to compensate the persons in question for
the damage suffered. A register is thus required to
assess the damage and collect claims by means of a
comprehensive institutional framework that can
safeguard the legitimate rights of the Palestinians and
identify the nature of the damages that they have
suffered with a view to assessing the losses and
claiming compensation.
In this regard, I would like to underline the
importance of establishing the office of the Register of
Damage in accordance with regulations that will ensure
that it has the highest degree of independence and
impartiality in its work and of endowing it with the
capacity to investigate the facts in an objective manner,
identifying
damage
and
establishing
rights.
Furthermore, in selecting staff for office of the
Register, individuals should be chosen on the basis of
their competence and integrity. Comprehensive public
campaigns should also be undertaken by the United
Nations to raise awareness among the Palestinian
people about the establishment of the Register and to
provide them with guidance about how to submit
claims and register damage, especially during the
initial phases following the adoption of the draft
resolution today.
Egypt’s position on the wall has been clear since
the very beginning. We have emphasized its illegality
and have warned about the danger that it poses and its
potential consequences for the establishment of a
viable and geographically contiguous Palestinian State.
Egypt has also warned about its potentially
catastrophic consequences for the humanitarian
situation of the brotherly Palestinian people and has
stressed that security concerns do not justify the
construction of the wall. Israel will not achieve
security as long as it continues its occupation and
settlement activities and as long as it continues to
change the situation on the ground by force. The only
way to achieve peace and security is through the
implementation of a just and comprehensive settlement
of the Arab-Israeli conflict based on the principle of
land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative of 2002, the
relevant Security Council resolutions, especially
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002) and

2

1515 (2003), and the Road Map. We underline the
importance of updating the Road Map in accordance
with new time lines that guarantee the carrying out of
final-status negotiations as soon as possible, in order to
fulfil the aspirations of the Palestinian people and the
whole international community for the establishment of
an independent sovereign Palestinian State, with East
Jerusalem as its capital.
The advisory opinion of the International Court
of Justice has particular significance in the light of the
efforts aimed at strengthening the rule of law at the
international level and with regard to enhancing the
possibilities of achieving a just, comprehensive and
lasting peace in the Middle East through final-status
negotiations.
Accordingly, we call on all parties to work
towards that end, to promote the values of law and
justice and to emphasize respect for international law
and its applicability to all countries without
discrimination, selectivity or double standards. By
adopting draft resolution A/ES-10/L.20 today, the
General Assembly will reaffirm that no State is above
the law and that the achievement of peace requires a
commitment to the rules of international legitimacy,
relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions and the implementation of resolution
ES-10/15 acknowledging the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice.
Israel is obliged to respect the international will
and refrain from hampering the work of the Register of
Damage, cease construction of the wall and refrain
from settlement activities, which undermine the
prospects for peace and a two-State solution. This will
lead to the strengthening of confidence-building
efforts, for which Egypt is continuing to work with
both parties, in an effort to achieve the release of the
Palestinian prisoners in return for the abducted Israeli
soldier, the release of Palestinian officials and
parliamentarians and the consolidation of the ceasefire
in Gaza and its extension to the West Bank, in order to
create a favourable atmosphere for the resumption of
negotiations and the start of final-status negotiations
with a comprehensive and substantive vision for
settling the conflict, based on the resolutions and terms
of reference approved by the international community
as embodied in the United Nations.
Mr. Al-Anazi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
The delegation of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia

07-25260

A/ES-10/PV.31

warmly thanks you, Madam President, for having
reconvened this emergency special session. We support
the statement made by Cuba on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
On 9 July 2004, the International Court of Justice
issued an advisory opinion on the construction of the
separation wall in the occupied Palestinian territory.
The Court said that it was contrary to international law
and called on Israel to comply with its international
commitments and to proceed immediately to dismantle
the wall. It also called on Israel to repeal all laws and
regulations relating to the construction of the racist
separation wall. Furthermore, the International Court
of Justice also said that Israel must make reparations
for damage incurred by all natural or legal persons
affected by the construction of the wall.
Historically, all advisory opinions issued by the
Court since 1946 have been fully respected and
complied with. Israel, however, continues to flout
decisions and resolutions, regardless of their source.
The question of the wall is such that the political,
economic, humanitarian and legal consequences and
implications are all interrelated. The construction of
the racist wall has created legal problems, as well as
social, economic, humanitarian and political problems.
The length of the wall is to be 700 kilometres.
Fifty-one per cent of the wall has already been built.
About 13 per cent is currently being built and 36 per
cent has not yet been begun. More than
22 international humanitarian relief organizations have
called for the implementation of the International Court
of Justice advisory opinion. Amnesty International has
said that construction of the wall has had extremely
serious economic consequences, causing 60 per cent of
the Palestinians to live below the poverty line of two
dollars a day. The unemployment rate hovers around
50 per cent.
The wall being built in the occupied Palestinian
territories is contrary to international law. That is a fact
regardless of the arguments and justifications raised.
The Security Council adopted its resolutions 478
(1980) and 497 (1981) on this very matter. Yet the
occupying Power continues to violate these resolutions
through the building of settlements between the Green
Line and the racist separation wall. The settlements are
illegal under international law and their existence is
dependent on the wall, which is illegal. The occupying
Power is seeking to establish an enduring de facto

07-25260

reality. The separation wall can never be legal and in
conformity with international law unless it conforms to
the Green Line.
In fact, the wall is a tool for ethnic cleansing, and
an integral part of a broader policy whereby Israel
reaffirms its racist aspirations and its intention to live
by violating international law. Israel has to be either
for or against international law; there is no middle
ground here.
The construction of the wall has devastating
consequences today, as it will in the future. Israel has
been working on a “road map” of its own to prevent
the establishment of a viable Palestinian political
entity. Seventy-five per cent of the area in and around
East Jerusalem and eighty-five per cent of the area of
the occupied West Bank is affected. Israel is thus
unilaterally imposing its own new reality on the land,
turning the Palestinian territory into a few isolated and
surrounded houses, so that no viable contiguous
Palestinian entity can come about in the future. Israel’s
justification and pretexts for constructing the wall go
beyond security concerns. It aims at plundering the
wealth and water resources of the Palestinians and
simultaneously displacing them.
Israel has destroyed or isolated around 90 water
wells with a capacity of 7 million cubic metres of
water, which the Palestinians have lost. The wall is
also robbing the most fertile land from the West Bank,
which of course worsens the living conditions of many
Palestinian families who are barely surviving at the
brink of the poverty line. That area used to produce
2,000 tons of olive oil per season but this figure is
shrinking daily.
Israel’s pursuit of building the wall is evidence of
the failure of the United Nations ever since resolution
181 (II) was adopted. The wall plunders Palestinian
property, destroys their orchards and uproots their
trees. The wall is being built as a racist project with
well-known financial sources and aims at tightening
the screws on the Palestinian people, leaving most of
the settlements in the West Bank within Israel,
including East Jerusalem.
It is our conviction that if Israel believes that by
building this separation wall it will feel secure, then it
has taken the wrong road to that end, because however
high and long the wall is, it will never make Israel
more secure. Security can only come about through
just and comprehensive peace.

3

A/ES-10/PV.31

We acknowledge that security is a legitimate
requirement for the peoples of the region. Nobody can
deny a people its right to be safe and secure, but we
also have to recognize that the security of one people
cannot be achieved at the expense of that of others.
Here, we would like to ask who really needs
security and safety. Is it the occupying Power? Is it the
State that is armed to the teeth and that has the most
sophisticated and destructive weapons? Is it the
country that possesses weapons of mass destruction? Is
it the country that refuses to join the Treaty on the
Non-proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and that
flouts the decisions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council? Is it the country that violates the
1949 Geneva Conventions? Does that State have such a
need for security that it must insert this cancer, the
wall, into the heart of the Palestinian land?
We greatly appreciate the Secretary-General’s
work within the general framework of establishing the
Register of Damage, even though it has taken some
two years to reach this point. We trust that the Register
will finally be established — and very soon, because
the more time passes, the harder it will be to find
material evidence of damage and the harder it will be
to list displaced persons and persons who have suffered
serious damage.
Meanwhile, the wall is inexorably being built in
the face of indifference on the part of those who could
end its construction and, consequently, of those who
could stop Israel from annexing the land in that area
and linking it to its infrastructure.
We call on all States Members of the United
Nations to support draft resolution A/ES-10/L.20, on
the Register of Damage, so that the Palestinians can
recover their usurped rights. The suffering of the
Palestinian people can be eased only if the hateful and
deplorable wall and occupation are stopped.
Mr. Kabtani (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): Madam
President, my delegation thanks you for having
responded positively to the request to resume the tenth
emergency special session of the General Assembly, to
address the question of Israel’s illegal actions and
construction of the separation wall in the occupied
Palestinian territory and in East Jerusalem.
We thank the Secretary-General for his report
(A/ES-10/361), which came out after a delay of two
years; it gives the general background for the

4

establishment of the Register of Damage. This is
related to the construction of the wall in the occupied
Palestinian territory.
The International Court of Justice, in its advisory
opinion of 9 July 2004, determined that the usurpation
of Palestinian land by Israel places on Israel the
“obligation to compensate … all natural or legal
persons having suffered any form of material
damage as a result of the wall’s construction”.
(A/ES-10/273, para. 153)
In that context, my delegation supports the
Secretary-Genera’s proposal to set up a Register of
Damage at the site of the United Nations Office at
Vienna that would report to the General Assembly and
consider listed damage claims.
My delegation hopes that the United Nations
bodies and specialized agencies, in particular the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East and the United Nations
Development Programme, will cooperate with the
office of the Register so as to facilitate its task and
render it successful.
Successive reports of the Secretary-General, the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
and international observers agree that the separation
wall represents an effective expropriation of
Palestinian land, that it isolates Palestinian territories
from one another, and that it hampers the free
circulation and movement of Palestinian persons and
goods — a clear violation of international law,
including the principle of the inadmissibility of the
acquisition of the territory of others by force. We call
on Israel to halt and cancel the construction of the wall,
in accordance with resolution ES-10/15, adopted at the
tenth emergency special session of the General
Assembly on 20 July 2004.
Attempts to impose faits accomplis on the
Palestinian people and forcibly to change the
demographic and geographic character of the occupied
territories, as well as the expansion of settlements, are
factors that are hampering the peace process and the
creation of an independent, viable and lasting
Palestinian State.
The Middle East region today urgently needs
goodwill initiatives to strengthen confidence-building
between the two parties; it does not need separation
walls. Security cannot be achieved by building

07-25260

A/ES-10/PV.31

psychological or physical barriers, but through a
genuine political will to engage seriously and
responsibly in peace talks and in putting an end to the
occupation, so that the Palestinian people can establish
an independent State on their national soil, with
Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance with
international law and resolutions of international
legitimacy.
In conclusion, my delegation hopes that the draft
resolution before the Assembly will receive support
from Member States.
Mr. Shiweva (Namibia): Madam President, allow
me, on behalf of my delegation, to convey our
gratitude to you for having convened this important
meeting. My delegation associates itself with the
statement made by the representative of Cuba on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement. We also support the
statement made by the ambassador of Palestine.
My delegation is pleased to participate in this
tenth emergency special session to consider the item
“Illegal Israeli actions in Occupied East Jerusalem and
the rest of the Occupied Palestinian Territory”. We
thank the Secretary-General for his report
(A/ES-10/361) provided pursuant to paragraph 4 of
resolution ES-10/15 of 20 July 2004.
It has taken the office of the Secretary-General
more than two years to implement the decisions
contained in paragraph 4 of the aforementioned
resolution on this very crucial issue. Nevertheless, we
appreciate the efforts of the Secretary-General to
provide the General Assembly with a description of the
institutional
framework
required
for
the
implementation of the resolution, in accordance with
the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice of 9 July 2004 on the legal consequences of the
construction of a wall in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including in and around East Jerusalem.
It is no exaggeration to say that the construction
of the separation wall has had devastating political,
economic and humanitarian consequences for the
people of Palestine. This is well documented in the
landmark advisory opinion of the International Court
of Justice, which determined the illegality of the
construction of that wall. The advisory opinion
requested the Government of Israel to stop further
construction and to bring down the wall.

07-25260

However, despite the ICJ opinion and
overwhelming support for General Assembly
resolutions affirming that opinion, Israel continues to
expand its illegal activities, including the construction
of the separation wall.
The establishment of the United Nations Register
of Damage caused by the Construction of the Wall in
the Occupied Palestinian Territory is therefore of
critical importance. We welcome and support this
initiative, which, we hope, will lead to just
compensation for the Palestinian people, in accordance
with the applicable rules of international law.
But it is not enough to have a list of damages in
numerical terms without an accompanying evaluation
or an assessment of the value of the loss or damages.
We would like to see simultaneous action in that
respect.
Namibia concurs with the Secretary-General’s
proposal on the structure, function and headquarters of
the office of the Register of Damage. We also support
the idea of making the office of the Register of
Damage a subsidiary organ of the General Assembly.
Finally, my delegation would like to urge the
Government of Israel to adhere to international law and
to stop and reverse the construction of the wall, as the
latter violates the letter and the spirit of the Road Map
and will make the two-state solution difficult, if not
impossible, to implement. My delegation would like to
reiterate its firm belief in the permanent responsibility
of the United Nations regarding the question of
Palestine in all its aspects and its ultimate resolution in
accordance with the Quartet Road Map and relevant
United Nations resolutions. In that regard, my
delegation supports and co-sponsors the draft
resolution submitted to the Assembly under this agenda
item.
Mr.
Alsaidi
(Yemen):
The
Permanent
Representative of Israel had the audacity this morning
to call those who disagree with Israel’s occupation of
Palestinian and Arab lands the immoral automatic
majority. That is unacceptable. We are neither
contesting the fact that great injustice was done to Jews
nor are we denying the Holocaust. What we are doing
here is contesting the occupation and its consequent
brutalization of the people in the occupied lands. It is
occupation that is immoral, for, just as it brutalizes the
occupied, it corrupts the occupier. A return to civil
discourse would be wise and more efficacious.

5

A/ES-10/PV.31

(spoke in Arabic)
I should like to extend to you, Madam President,
our sincere gratitude for your positive response to the
request for the resumption of the tenth emergency
special session of the General Assembly, to follow up
on the implementation of the 9 July 2004 advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice regarding
the expansionist wall in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem. We would also
like to welcome the report of the Secretary-General
(A/ES-10/361) regarding the establishment of a
Register of Damage resulting from the construction of
the expansionist wall and to express our support for the
establishment by the General Assembly of the office of
the Register of Damage.
In response to General Assembly resolution
A/ES-10/14 of 8 December 2003, requesting an
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
concerning the illegality of the expansionist wall
constructed by Israel inside the occupied Palestinian
territories, including in and around East Jerusalem, the
Court has expressed its firm opinion that the
construction of the wall is not in keeping with Israel’s
duties as an occupying force and that it prevents the
Palestinian people from enjoying their right to selfdetermination. The wall is also an attempt to impose a
fait accompli and to confiscate Palestinian territories.
In this context, former United States President Jimmy
Carter — the architect of the Camp David accords —
in his valuable book entitled Palestine: Peace Not
Apartheid writes that the wall
(spoke in English)
“is projected to be at least three and a half times
as long as Israel’s internationally recognized
border, and already cuts directly through
Palestinian villages, divides families from their
gardens and farmland”.
He writes that, among other Palestinian towns and
villages, the wall has encircled “around 170,000
citizens of Bethlehem, the birthplace of Jesus”.
(spoke in Arabic)
Those measures are in violation of international
law and represent a failure of Israel to fulfil its duties
as an occupying Power. As Israel continues to construct
the expansionist wall, the authorities in charge
continue to establish new settlements and to expand
existing ones. In this regard, paragraph 19 of the

6

Secretary-General’s
report
(S/2006/956)
of
11 December 2006 indicates that, during Mr. Kofi
Annan’s term of office, the number of Israeli settlers
living in the West Bank — excluding East Jerusalem —
has grown from 140,000 to 240,000. The number of
settlers in occupied East Jerusalem has also increased
over the same period from 160,000 to 190,000.
The area currently confiscated for settlements
officially occupies — according to Israeli law — about
40 per cent of the entire area of the West Bank, not
including East Jerusalem. In paragraph 19 of the
report, the Secretary-General states that “in the decade
and a half after the Oslo Accords, Israel more than
doubled its physical presence in the West Bank”,
concluding that this “remains the single biggest
impediment to realizing a viable Palestinian State with
territorial contiguity”.
Former United States President Jimmy Carter is
in agreement with the Secretary-General, writing that
(spoke in English)
“It is obvious that the Palestinians will be left
with no territory in which to establish a viable
State .... The Palestinians will have a future
impossible for them or any responsible portion of
the international community to accept”.
(spoke in Arabic)
These facts unequivocally refute the Israeli
leadership’s claim that Israel wants to see the
establishment of a Palestinian State, living side by side
with Israel in peace and harmony. We wonder how
peace and harmony could prevail given that the rights
of the Palestinian people are being violated and their
lands stolen. Here, I would like to quote again from
President Carter’s valuable book. He writes:
(spoke in English)
“Some showed us the wreckage of their
former homes, which have been demolished by
Israeli bulldozers and dynamite, with claims by
Israel that they had been built too near Israeli
settlements, on property needed by the Israeli
Government, or that some member of the family
was a security threat.
“In assessing these claims, the Israeli
human rights organization B’Tselem explained
that on average, 12 innocent families lost their
homes for every person accused of participation

07-25260

A/ES-10/PV.31

in attacks against Israelis, with almost half of the
demolished homes never occupied by anyone
suspected of involvement in any violent acts
against Israel, even throwing stones”.
(spoke in Arabic)
The continued construction of the wall represents
an insurmountable obstacle to the movement of
Palestinian citizens. It hinders children’s efforts to go
to school and prevents the elderly and women from
receiving the medical care that they need. Israel must
abide by international law and norms. It should also
heed the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice and immediately end its construction of the
expansionist wall, which it is continuing to build on
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem. It is also incumbent upon Israel to remove
the parts of the wall that have already been built and to
repeal all laws and other legislation relating to its
construction. Israel, as the occupying Power, must
make reparations for the damage caused to the
Palestinian people and their property by the
construction of the expansionist wall. It should also
return all agricultural and other lands confiscated for
that purpose.
In that connection, so that members may know
the facts, I should like to quote once again from book
by former President Jimmy Carter to cite examples of
the suffering of the Palestinians, including Palestinian
Christians:
(spoke in English)
“The wall ravages many places along its
devious route that are important to Christians. In
addition to enclosing Bethlehem in one of its
most
notable
intrusions,
an
especially
heartbreaking division is on the southern slope of
the Mount of Olives, a favourite place for Jesus
and his disciples, and very near Bethany, where
they often visited Mary, Martha, and their
brother, Lazarus. There is a church named for one
of the sisters, Santa Marta Monastery, where
Israel’s thirty-foot concrete wall cuts through the
property. The house of worship is now on the
Jerusalem side, and its parishioners are separated
from it because they cannot get permits to enter
Jerusalem. Its priest, Father Claudio Ghilardi,
says, ‘For nine hundred years we have lived here
under Turkish, British, Jordanian, and Israeli
governments, and no one has ever stopped people

07-25260

coming to pray. It is scandalous. This is not about
a barrier. It is a border. Why don’t they speak the
truth?’
“Countering Israeli arguments that the wall
is to keep Palestinian suicide bombers from
Israel, Father Claudio adds a comment that
describes the path of the entire barrier: ‘The Wall
is not separating Palestinians from Jews; rather
Palestinians from Palestinians.’ Nearby are three
convents that will also be cut off from the people
they serve. The 2,000 Palestinian Christians have
lost their place of worship and their spiritual
center.”
(spoke in Arabic)
Finally, I should like to reiterate that the policy of
fait accompli adopted by Israel during its occupation of
the Palestinian territories has proved a total failure.
Israel’s construction of the expansionist wall in order
to impose a new fait accompli will not undermine the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people. All will not
be well and peace will not prevail in the region until
the
international
community
explicitly
and
unambiguously rejects the logic of forcibly annexing
the lands of others and imposing a fait accompli. The
facts of life of our times do not accord with that sort of
logic. Israel must realize that. It must recognize the
right of the Palestinian people to self-determination
and to establish their own independent State, with East
Jerusalem as its capital. It must withdraw its forces
from the Arab territories it has occupied since 1967,
including the Syrian Arab Golan and the occupied
Lebanese territories.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Pakistan shares the view,
which has been expressed by the International Court of
Justice and by the General Assembly, that the
construction of the separation wall by Israel in the
occupied Palestinian territory is illegal. Israel must halt
and reverse the construction of the separation wall.
The illegal nature of the construction of the wall
was clearly established by the 9 July 2004 advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice. The
Assembly, in its resolution ES-10/15, adopted at the
emergency special session on 20 July 2004, demanded
that Israel, the occupying Power, comply with its legal
obligations as set out in the advisory opinion. The
same resolution requested the Secretary-General to
establish a register of damage caused to all natural or

7

A/ES-10/PV.31

legal persons concerned in connection with paragraphs
152 and 153 of the advisory opinion.
It is unfortunate that Israel, in complete disregard
of the legal opinion of the International Court and in
defiance of the clear and strong demand of the
international community, is continuing the construction
of the wall. That has had two obvious and major
consequences. First, it has caused massive human
suffering to the Palestinian people and further
aggravated their plight. The wall has not only robbed
them of their lands, properties and livelihoods; it has
also denied the Palestinian population the right to free
movement and access to economic opportunities, basic
social services, humanitarian assistance and, in many
cases, their own homes and lands.
Secondly, and in a wider perspective, the
construction of the wall, as the International Court also
determined in its advisory opinion, has created a fait
accompli on the ground that could well become
permanent, in which case — and notwithstanding the
formal characterization of the wall by Israel — it
would be tantamount to de facto annexation. The Court
also determined that the construction of the wall
severely impedes the exercise by the Palestinian people
of its right to self-determination and is therefore a
breach of Israel’s obligation to respect that right. The
Court also determined that the construction of the wall
and its associated regime have led to the destruction or
requisition of properties and, further, that the
infringement of the rights of the Palestinian people
resulting from that route cannot be justified by military
exigencies or by the requirements of national security
or public order.
The continued construction of the wall, therefore,
poses a major obstacle to, and undermines, the
objective of a just and lasting solution to the
Palestinian question through the establishment of an
independent, viable and geographically contiguous
Palestinian State with Al-Quds al-Sharif as its capital.
Without a just Israeli-Palestinian settlement based on
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973),
1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003), the prospects for peace
and stability will remain dismal throughout the entire
Middle East region.
The report of the Secretary-General submitted to
the General Assembly pursuant to resolution ES-10/15
(A/ES-10/361), although extremely belated, is the basis
for the convening of this emergency special session.

8

Accordingly, the Assembly is meeting to establish the
United Nations Register of Damage, which will serve
as a comprehensive record of the damage caused to all
natural and legal persons concerned as a result of the
construction of the wall by Israel.
Such a record is indeed necessary for the
fulfilment by Israel of its obligations to make
reparations, including restitution and compensation, for
the damages caused by the construction of the wall, in
accordance with the rules and principles of
international law. At the individual level, the Register
will perhaps be the only ray of hope for justice for
those among the Palestinian people who are adversely
affected by the wall.
Pakistan fully supports the draft resolution
A/ES-10/L.20, submitted by the Arab Group and
sponsored also by the Non-Aligned Movement. In our
view, in deciding to establish the Register of Damages,
this Assembly will not only be following up on the
implementation of its own resolutions and thus
shouldering its responsibility towards the Palestinian
people, but more important, it will be upholding the
supremacy of the rule of law which is essential for the
construction of peace in the Middle East and
throughout the region.
Mr. Sahel (Morocco) (spoke in French): I wish to
extend a message of peace, concern and hope from this
rostrum on behalf of the Kingdom of Morocco at this
resumed tenth special session of the General Assembly
devoted to illegal Israeli actions in occupied East
Jerusalem and the rest of the occupied Palestinian
territories.
First, my message is one of peace, because the
peoples of the region and the Palestinian people in
particular have suffered far too much from decades of
tension, war, deprivation and the denial of their
individual and collective rights.
My message is one of concern, in view of the
progressive worsening of the economic, social and
humanitarian situation of the Palestinian people and the
growing despair among young Palestinians due to a
lack of political future and a conflict that has lasted far
too long.
Finally, it is a message of hope, because despite
everything, I remain convinced that, in spite of the
burden of years of suffering, the peoples of the region
have the ability to overcome their differences and to

07-25260

A/ES-10/PV.31

forge a common future. We must help them do that.
That is the responsibility of the General Assembly, and
that is why our discussion is of particular importance.
Regional disputes can be resolved through
dialogue, consultation, negotiation and a consensual
approach based on respect for international law. Peace
cannot be forged on illegal and punitive actions aimed
at separating and dividing people rather than bringing
them together. That is the basis of the approach
adopted by the International Court of Justice in its
advisory opinion of 9 July 2004, in which it clearly
indicated that
“The construction of the wall being built by
Israel, the occupying Power, in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, including in and around
East Jerusalem, and its associated regime, are
contrary to international law”. (A/ES-10/273,
para. 163)
The International Court of Justice also considered that
Palestinians should be provided reparation for damages
suffered as the result of the construction of the wall.
With that in mind, the General Assembly, in its
resolution ES-10/15 of 20 July 2004, demanded “that
Israel, the occupying Power, comply with its legal
obligations as mentioned in the advisory opinion”
(para. 2).
The General Assembly also decided to establish a
register to record claims for reparations. Unfortunately,
the establishment of the register in Vienna will make it
difficult to record the suffering of the Palestinian
people as their living conditions continue to worsen.
The construction of the separation wall not only
has seriously jeopardized the possibilities for lasting
peace, but has also led to a serious humanitarian crisis
by placing restrictions on the freedom of movement of
the Palestinian people to such an extent that Mr. Jan
Egeland,
United
Nations
Emergency
Relief
Coordinator, has described this situation as a true time
bomb.
Even so, we still need to recall that three quarters
of the population depends on food assistance. Growing
measures aimed at restricting and even halting the
freedom of movement have had a considerable impact
on the enjoyment of human rights including access to
water and the functioning of hospitals, schools, public
services and farming activities. Families have been
separated and numerous Palestinians living near the

07-25260

wall have had to leave their homes, becoming
displaced persons in their own country.
What better example can we cite regarding the
extent of the damage caused by this unilateral measure
of the Israeli Government than the comment made by
Claudio Ghilardi, a priest from the Santa Marta
monastery, whose property has been divided by the
wall? He responded to the allegations of the Israeli
authorities who have attempted to justify the building
of the wall as a means to protect their country from
suicide bombers by saying that the wall is not
separating Israelis from Palestinians, but Palestinians
from Palestinians.
In the end, normal daily life has become frozen.
Of course, all of these measures imposed by Israel
violate the principles of international law and are forms
of
unacceptable
and
reprehensible
collective
punishment.
The Palestinian people thirst for respect and
dignity. The security imperatives of some cannot be
achieved by denying the right to dignity of others.
Peace is forged by taking account of the interests of all.
Continued construction of the separation wall in spite
of the opinion of the International Court of Justice and
the changes that the landscape of East Jerusalem is
currently undergoing do not proceed from an approach
that aims to make peace a priority. On the contrary, it
crystallizes hate by denying the rights of others.
The Kingdom of Morocco fervently hopes to see
peace prevail and trust restored. For that to occur,
justice must be granted to the Palestinian people and
their right to a State with Al-Quds al-Sharif as capital
must be recognized.
This noble and proud people must be supported in
the grave humanitarian crisis that has been imposed
upon it. We call upon the General Assembly
unequivocally to support the United Nations Register
of Damages caused by the construction of the wall,
which we hope will be an effective and transparent
mechanism for reparations for the benefit of the
Palestinian people. That will require appropriate
cooperation from all the United Nations entities
concerned.
The support that the General Assembly will not
fail to provide to draft resolution A/ES-10/L.20, on
which it will take action at the end of our debate will
once again send a strong collective message that law

9

A/ES-10/PV.31

will prevail over force, and that dialogue and peaceful
coexistence among peoples will prevail over denying
the rights of others to live in peace and security in a
safe and viable State. That is the message of solidarity,
unity and peace for the children of Palestine that I
address to this Assembly today.
Mr. Sen (India): Madam President, I thank you
for reconvening this emergency special session of the
General Assembly to discuss the establishment of a
register of damages arising from Israel’s construction
of a separation wall in the occupied Palestinian
territory.
The legal issues that underpin this debate are
clear and have been so ever since the International
Court of Justice ruled unambiguously in paragraph 142
of its advisory opinion of 9 July 2004 (A/ES-10/273)
that “the construction of the wall [is] contrary to
international law”. The steps that are to be taken to
reverse this illegality are also stated in the same
advisory opinion, as is our obligation as members of
the international community not to recognize the illegal
situation arising from that construction. The
International Court of Justice then remitted the matter
back to the United Nations, and especially the General
Assembly and the Security Council, to consider — as
stated in paragraph 160 — what further action would
be required to “bring to an end the illegal situation
resulting from the construction of the wall”.
However, we lack the same level of precision and
clarity regarding the further action that we as the
United Nations are required to take to bring to an end
this illegal situation. The establishment of a Register of
Damage is only one part of the measures that we can
consider. What we undertake today must therefore be
set against a number of other appropriate legal and
political measures, in consultation with all concerned,
as part of a larger vision of establishing a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East.
In that context, several opinions have been
expressed here today, and we have before us both a
report of the Secretary-General and a draft resolution.
The minutiae of the recommendations of the SecretaryGeneral regarding the location of the office of the
Register of Damage, its composition and its privileges
need not detain us here; it is the question of the nature
of the body, its powers and its mandate that is crucial.
We understand the argument that the Register
must be more than a receiving and processing office

10

for complaints. It must be able to establish the
credibility of such complaints and, in so doing, it must
serve as a symbol for the redressal of grievances. There
is merit in calling for the office of the Register of
Damage to help raise awareness of the rights of those
who have lost property, access to family or means of
earning their livelihood, and to help them seek
compensation. There is no doubt that Israel is required
to compensate those who have lost property through
the construction of the wall; indeed, the advisory
opinion states as much, and the payment of
compensation by Israel under its own laws suggests
that this point is not contested.
However, there is also merit in carefully
considering the complex questions posed as a result of
the United Nations establishing a body, at a not
inconsiderable cost, that would have judicial powers
and the power to award damages. Resolving these
complex questions will require more than just
discussions in this forum; it will require a reasoned,
balanced and forthright dialogue between those
concerned, with the assistance of the international
community wherever necessary.
While we are in favour of the draft resolution that
is before us today, as it is a measure that could provide
solace to those aggrieved by the loss of property, I
should underline that the establishment of the Register
of Damage is in itself not a complete solution to the
complex problem posed by Israel’s construction of the
separation wall. Those issues should be resolved in
tandem with other confidence-building measures as
part of an overall effort to achieve a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace in the region.
The separation wall divides villages, families,
students and patients from schools and hospitals, and
farmers from fields. The International Court of Justice
recognized in paragraph 121 of the advisory opinion
that the area between the Green Line and the separation
fence means that “the construction of the wall and its
associated regime create a ‘fait accompli’ on the
ground that could well become permanent, in which
case, … it would be tantamount to de facto annexation”
of Palestinian land.
The Israeli anthropologist Jeff Halper is
concerned that policies resulting in “reconfiguration of
the country from two parallel north-south units —
Israel and the West Bank, the basis of the two-state

07-25260

A/ES-10/PV.31

idea — into one country, integrated east-west” would
make a two-state solution enormously difficult.

extrajudicial killings, home demolitions and atrocious
acts of abduction that have taken place.

Therefore, while urging Israel to stop the
construction of this wall, which may prejudice the
contours of the much-awaited two-state solution, we
urge both sides to the dispute, as well as all other
relevant parties, to address this longstanding problem
and to redouble efforts to enable a solution to emerge
through political dialogue. The absence of any
meaningful political dialogue is not, of itself, enough
reason to cease persevering in efforts to find a peaceful
solution. Since there is no alternative to a meaningful
dialogue, we support the call of the Secretary-General
upon all sides to consider innovative ways to fully
implement the Road Map which would lead, without
delay, to a just, fair and equitable solution to this
conflict, based on all relevant United Nations
resolutions, including Security Council resolutions. We
also call upon the Quartet and all relevant regional
players to work to de-escalate the situation and end the
cycle of violence and counter-violence.

In flagrant defiance of the International Court of
Justice’s advisory opinion, and in full contempt for the
Assembly’s resolution — both of which reaffirm the
illegality of the construction of the wall and call for
construction to cease and the wall to be dismantled, the
Israeli regime continues to build it, with ever more
Palestinian properties being destroyed and ever more
land confiscated, almost on a daily basis.

Mr. Sadeghi (Islamic Republic of Iran): Madam
President, I wish to begin by joining previous speakers
in thanking you for having resumed the tenth
emergency special session of the General Assembly to
follow up the demand made by the Assembly in 2004,
in paragraph 4 of its resolution ES-10/15, to establish a
Register of Damage caused by the Israeli regime’s
construction of the illegal wall in the occupied
Palestinian territory.
The construction of the unlawful separation wall
is yet another flagrant crime committed by the Israeli
regime against the Palestinian people and has made
clear once again that regime’s aggressive and criminal
nature, together with its complete defiance and
contempt for the most basic principles of international
law and international humanitarian law.
Despite the unambiguous opposition of the
international community to the construction of that
illegal wall, the Israeli regime, with war crimes and
crimes against humanity as its signature brand of
aggression, occupation and state terrorism, has
continued and even expanded the construction of the
illegal separation wall with full impunity. It has
therefore added to the suffering and the difficult plight
of the Palestinian people, who, at the same time, have
been suffering, and continue to suffer, from other
Israeli atrocities such as the appalling massacres,

07-25260

In its advisory opinion, the International Court of
Justice clearly determined that the construction of the
wall in the occupied Palestinian territory, and its
associated regime, are contrary to international law and
should therefore be ceased, and the wall dismantled.
Along with the rest of the international
community, we remain deeply concerned at the grave
violations of international law, including the Fourth
Geneva Convention, represented by the Israeli regime’s
continued construction of the wall, among which are
the destruction and confiscation of land and property;
violations of the freedom of movement of the
Palestinian people and of their right to work, worship,
health, education and adequate living standards; and
the eviction of Palestinian civilians from their homes
and lands, shattering apart their families.
The international community must hold the
Israeli regime accountable for its illegal and criminal
actions in the occupied Palestinian territory, and, as the
Court also demanded in its advisory opinion, that
regime must terminate its breaches of international
law; cease forthwith the works of construction of the
wall; immediately dismantle the structure; and repeal
or render ineffective forthwith all legislative and
regulatory acts relating thereto.
The Security Council, which has been
persistently incapacitated by the actions of one of its
permanent members with respect to taking any
meaningful action with regard to the Israeli regime’s
crimes, including those related to the construction of
the illegal wall, must act responsibly and compel that
regime to bring its occupation of the Palestinian and
other Arab territories to an end. That regime should
also be obliged by the Council to put an end to its war
crimes in the region and to cease the construction of
the wall and dismantle it.

11

A/ES-10/PV.31

Based on the Court’s opinion, the Israeli regime
is also under an obligation to make reparations for all
damages caused by the construction of the unlawful
wall in the occupied Palestinian territory. In that
regard, the General Assembly, in its resolution
ES-10/15, requested the Secretary-General to establish
a register of damage caused to all natural or legal
persons concerned, in connection with paragraphs 152
and 153 of the advisory opinion. The international
community has long waited for concrete steps to be
taken to meet this legitimate demand of the Palestinian
people and for such a mechanism to be established so
that
reparations,
including
restitution
and
compensation, would be made for the damages caused
by the construction of the wall.
In that connection, we have noted with
appreciation the measures already taken or under way
to establish this long-awaited register. We therefore
thank the Secretary-General for his report of
17 October 2006 (A/ES-10/361), on the establishment
of the Register of Damage, and look forward to more
concrete steps to be taken in that regard to make that
mechanism fully operational. Indeed, through the
adoption of the draft resolution before the Assembly
today (A/ES-10/L.20), another essential step in that
regard will be taken.
We share the view that the Register of Damage
should include comprehensive documentation of all
damages that have been inflicted on the Palestinian
people because of the construction of the unlawful
wall. Moreover, we are of the view that those damages
should be accurately and thoroughly documented, as
that is important for making reparations, including both
restitution and compensation, to the Palestinian people.
Undoubtedly, the verification and assessment of
damages are important steps in the process and should
therefore be undertaken as soon as possible to expedite
the reparations. We support the idea that the
verification and assessment of damages should be
carried out in tandem with the collection of damage
claims and should not be postponed to a later date,
which might complicate and unnecessarily prolong the
whole process.
Indeed, if the Register of Damage is to carry out
the responsibilities entrusted to it, the cooperation of
United Nations bodies and agencies — particularly
those with a presence in the field — is of paramount
importance. We also believe that, as noted in the

12

statement made by the representative of Cuba on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement, the Register of
Damage should work with effectiveness and use with
efficiency the resources that Member States allocate to
this mechanism, that all verifiable claims should be
duly registered and that the losses and damage caused
by the unlawful wall should be assessed and
reparations made in a timely, impartial and objective
manner. In addition, the Register of Damage should
remain open for claims as long as the separation wall
exists and until the unlawful wall is dismantled and
reparations are fully and completely made.
Before concluding, I wish to reiterate that,
although important, the establishment of the Register
of Damage is only one aspect of the unjust situation
created by the construction of the wall. This dire
situation will be fully rectified in its entirety only when
the construction of the wall is halted, the parts already
completed are dismantled and full reparations are made
to the Palestinian people.
Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I wish to thank you,
Madam President, for convening this timely meeting.
While recognizing the legitimate right of States to
self-defence, in accordance with Article 51 of the
United Nations Charter, Brazil believes that Israel’s
unilateral decision to build a separation wall in the
occupied Palestinian territory cannot be justified and
amounts to a disproportionate response to potential
threats to the security of Israel. That view is reflected
in the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice on the matter, which has been endorsed by
General Assembly resolutions.
Brazil is deeply disturbed by the building of the
wall, as it entails countless violations of international
law, including international humanitarian law. In
addition, it violates the rights of the Palestinian people,
as it affects their lands and causes extensive
destruction of Palestinian property and infrastructure.
It destroys crops and dwellings and separates families.
It jeopardizes the full realization of the human rights of
the Palestinians and victimizes the civilian population.
Furthermore, the building of the separation wall,
in conjunction with other military actions by Israel in
northern Gaza in recent months, worsens an already
tense situation and further fuels violence. The wall is
also a barrier to the long-term prospects for a peaceful
settlement to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

07-25260

A/ES-10/PV.31

Politically, the wall is clearly divisive and
contrary to the spirit of confidence-building that should
permeate the peace process and the ceasefire
agreement recently adopted by the parties. It increases
the sense of despair and frustration among the
Palestinian people, who already suffer from extensive
hardships imposed by checkpoints and roadblocks set
up even inside the occupied Palestinian territories. Its
construction is widely regarded as an attempt to create
a fait accompli and to predetermine the outcome of the
final-status negotiations between Israel and the
Palestinian Authority. It is also viewed as intended to
promote the illegal incorporation by Israel of
considerable portions of Palestinian territory, which we
categorically reject.
Israel should dismantle the wall and return to the
Palestinians their lands and other properties. We also
believe that Israel should make compensation for all
ensuing damages.
Brazil is of the view that it is the responsibility of
all States Members of the United Nations to assist in
the task of implementing the existing resolutions on
this matter and to ensure respect for international
humanitarian law. In that connection, we support the
creation of the United Nations Register of Damage
caused by the Construction of the Wall in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory. We believe that it will not serve
its purpose if it becomes merely a list or record in
documentary form of grievances presented by the
Palestinians, as suggested in the Secretary-General’s
report (A/ES-10/361). It should act as a protocompensation commission so as to prepare the way for
a future full claims-resolution facility. It should be an
organ entitled to confirm the existence of a nexus of
causality between the wall and the damage sustained
by the Palestinians.
The creation of a free, democratic and
economically viable Palestinian State in accordance
with the legitimate aspirations of its people, as
established in Security Council resolutions 242 (1967),
338 (1973), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003), among
others, and within internationally recognized borders is
a sine qua non condition for ensuring peace and
stability to the Middle East.
Brazil stresses the need to put in motion a
political process with precise timetables for the
development of a strategy that, while addressing the
underlying causes of the conflict, brings to fruition the

07-25260

vision of two democratic States, Israel and Palestine,
living side by side in peace and security. Such a
strategy should take into account the Quartet Road
Map, the Madrid terms of reference, the principle of
land for peace and the Arab Peace Initiative.
Those are the main reasons why we will vote in
favour of draft resolution A/ES-10/L.20, presented by
the Arab Group and other sponsors.
Mr. Yousfi (Algeria) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to say that my delegation associates
itself with the statement made by the representative of
Cuba on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
I would also like to highlight the stubborn fact
that, as we have seen over the years and in the light of
the many reports and studies on the situation in the
occupied Palestinian territory that reach the same bitter
conclusion, there is, on the one hand, a Palestinian
people suffering from abuse and daily humiliation and
humanitarian tragedy because of the practices of the
occupying Power, and on the other hand, the impunity
that Israel enjoys as it flagrantly violates human rights
and international humanitarian law and its disdain for
the principles and purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations and the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council, thereby de facto
placing itself above international law.
It is against this the backdrop of abuse and
injustice that we see Israel’s actions in recent years, as
it builds a so-called separation wall that is worthy of
the practices of apartheid. As it enters into this new
kind of aggression against the Palestinian people, the
occupying Power has once again invoked the pretext of
self-defence and the fight against terrorism, arguments
rightly rejected by the International Court of Justice in
its advisory opinion of 9 July 2004. In so doing, Israel
forgets, as usual, that these restrictive measures, which
actually transform the Palestinian territory into an
immense prison, simply feeds the hatred and
encourages radicalization of views and positions about
an occupation that is becoming increasingly intolerable
to the Palestinian people and thus cannot ensure the
security goals that Israel is supposedly seeking to
achieve.
The impact of the construction of the wall were
immediately apparent and crystal-clear; it puts at even
further remove any prospect of attaining the goal of
establishing a viable Palestinian State within secure
and internationally recognized borders, living side by

13

A/ES-10/PV.31

side with its neighbours in peace and security — a goal
that Israel claims to be committed to. The impact has
also been brutal for the population and economic,
social and cultural infrastructure of Palestine. Access
rights to medical care and to water, even drinking
water for the home, have not been spared, and in the
West Bank, the most fertile agricultural lands have
been illegally expropriated, and cities, towns and
villages have found themselves isolated.
Moreover, the route of the wall, which infringes
on Palestinian land, in violation of international law,
confirms the occupying Power’s annexationist
intentions and increases doubts about Israel’s sincerity
about the search for peace and stability in the region.
The route, indeed, seeks to make the annexation of
East Jerusalem irreversible, which is a violation of
Security Council resolution 478 (1980), which declared
such an annexation null and void.
The tragedies that have resulted from
construction of this separation wall, added to those
caused by the daily repression that has spared neither
the civilian population nor the basic infrastructure,
challenge the international community to do everything
possible to compel Israel to comply with the rules of
international law, including international humanitarian
law and, in particular, the Hague Convention of 1907
and the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949. In this
regard, we find it regrettable that it has been three
years now since the International Court of Justice,
pursuant to resolution ES-10/14 of 8 December 2003,
issued its advisory opinion on the consequences of the
construction by Israel of the separation wall in
occupied Palestinian territory, and nothing has been
done to ensure implementation of the opinion to
compel Israel to comply with it. Worse still, Israeli
leaders have not hesitated to reject the opinion and, as
though nothing had happened, continued building the
wall, which I would call a wall of shame.
Yet, in its opinion, the International Court of
Justice not only noted that the construction of the wall
was contrary to Israel’s international obligations and
that the occupying Power has the obligation to
immediately stop construction work on the wall, but it
also reaffirmed Israel’s obligation to make reparation
for all damage done to natural or legal persons
concerned. Moreover, the Court deemed that Israel is
obliged to restore property that was seized and to
provide compensation to the victims of the illegal
expropriations for the harm suffered.

14

Unfortunately, the strong and clear opinion of the
International Court of Justice did not lead the Security
Council, the body principally responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security, to
shoulder its responsibilities and take the necessary
steps to end the illegality into which Israel had entered
by the construction of the separation wall.
My delegation was particularly pleased to see that
the Secretary-General, after a lengthy delay, finally
submitted on 17 October 2006 the report that had been
asked of him by the General Assembly in its resolution
ES-10/15 of 20 July 2004, on the establishment of a
register of damages caused to all natural or legal
persons as a result of the construction of the separation
wall, in connection with paragraphs 152 and 153 of the
International Court of Justice advisory opinion.
Obviously, my delegation would not be interested
in establishing a register with questionable
membership, weak powers and limited flexibility, one
which some parties would be tempted to lock into the
thankless role of a room for registering complaints that
are doomed to be forgotten, and which would
ultimately be another disappointment for the
Palestinians.
We call on Member States to unequivocally
support draft resolution A/ES-10/L.20, on the
establishment of the Register. In so doing, it is our
hope that, as a subsidiary organ of the General
Assembly, it will have strong powers, a clear mission
and adequate human and material resources to enable it
to do its work so that it will not disappoint the
expectations of the natural or legal persons who have
suffered from arbitrary action by Israel.
We sincerely hope that the Register will be able
to do its comprehensive work in registering
applications, verifying them and assessing damage
caused by the construction of the wall, with a view to
providing adequate reparations to applicants, inter alia,
through restitution of their property or compensation
for damages done, in accordance with international
law, international humanitarian law, the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949, all United Nations resolutions on
the question of Palestine and, of course, the 9 July
2004 advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to thank Secretary-General Kofi
Annan for his outstanding and timely report

07-25260

A/ES-10/PV.31

(A/ES-10/361),
which
provides
the
relevant
institutional framework for the establishment of a
register of damage to all natural or legal persons
concerned caused by the construction by Israel, the
occupying Power, of the wall in occupied Palestinian
territory, including in and around East Jerusalem. The
establishment of such a register will be an important
step forward, as it will undoubtedly mark an important
turning point in the implementation of the 9 July 2004
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice,
regarding the legal consequences of the construction of
a wall in the occupied Palestinian territory, including in
and around East Jerusalem.
By adopting resolution ES-10/15 on 20 July
2004, by an overwhelming majority, the General
Assembly demanded that Israel cease its construction
of the wall in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including in and around East Jerusalem, and called for
a return to the situation prevailing prior to
construction, given that the construction did not follow
the 1949 Armistice Line and violated the relevant
provisions of international law. Today, thousands of
Palestinians are separated from their families, lands
and places of employment because of the construction
of the wall. The building of separate road systems for
Israelis and Palestinians and the accelerated
construction of the wall have further limited the
freedom of movement of Palestinians, thereby
worsening the encirclement and isolation of Palestinian
land.
Recently, following her first visit to Israel and the
Palestinian territories as United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Louise Arbour
could not check her frustration and bitterness, and
vigorously denounced the severe impact of the wall
and the system of checkpoints on the lives of
Palestinians. She saw for herself flagrant violations of
human rights against the Palestinian people.
The living conditions in the occupied Palestinian
territories have in fact deteriorated seriously since the
imposition of a sanctions regime, as a result of which
the principal donors have stopped funding the
Palestinian Authority. The Authority now faces
insurmountable difficulties, which have resulted,
among other things, in the failure to pay employees,
disruption in public services and the worsening of the
socio-economic situation.

07-25260

The time has now come to intensify efforts to
establish the necessary conditions for the immediate
resumption of negotiations between the parties, with
the participation of the Quartet and within a very clear
timetable. We believe that future negotiations must
draw on past achievements. A very clear plan is in
place for a final settlement based on the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council — resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003) — as
well as other resolutions and decisions adopted by
representative bodies of the international community.
We urge the Israeli authorities to respond
positively to the readiness of Mr. Mahmoud Abbas,
President of the Palestinian Authority, and to halt
military operations, arrest campaigns, the imposition of
curfews and restrictions on the movement of the
civilian population. Senegal urges the international
community to pressure Israel to strictly apply the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
and General Assembly resolutions reaffirming the right
of the Palestinian people to self-determination, to
immediately stop the building of settlements for
Israelis and to begin to dismantle the wall of
separation.
My country very much hopes that the decisions
and recommendations contained in draft resolution
A/ES-10/L.20, which is now before us, will help to
promote efforts aimed at ensuring that law and justice
prevail.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to
reaffirm that it is essential that, with the assistance and
support of the international community, the main actors
continue to ensure that reason and dialogue prevail in
our efforts to find a peaceful and lasting solution to the
Palestinian question. That solution should be a
negotiated settlement that respects the legitimate rights
of the Palestinian people and the dignity of the Arab
population of the occupied territories, and that respects
the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination and to the establishment of their own
State with East Jerusalem as its capital, living side by
side with the State of Israel.
The President: Before we proceed, I would like
to draw the attention of members to revised draft
resolution A/ES-10/L.20/Rev.1, which has now been
issued in all languages, as well as to the report of the
Fifth Committee issued in English only under
document symbol A/61/625/Rev.1, regarding the

15

A/ES-10/PV.31

programme budget implications of the draft resolution.
The two documents are now being distributed desk-todesk in the Hall.
Mr. Jenie (Indonesia): At the outset, my
delegation would like to associate itself with the
statement made by the representative of Cuba on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement.
On 9 July 2004, the International Court of Justice
(ICJ) handed down a historic opinion on the issue of
the legality of the wall, categorically declaring its
construction and the associated regime in the occupied
Palestinian territory to be illegal and contrary to
international law. The ICJ said that, consequently,
Israel must halt the construction and immediately
dismantle the relevant parts of the wall. Furthermore,
the Court requested Israel to provide compensation to
Palestinian landowners for damage caused by its illegal
acts.
Following the landmark decision of the Court,
this body, in another historic decision, on 20 July 2004
strengthened the authoritative findings of the principal
judicial organ of the United Nations on the illegality of
the construction of the wall and its associated regime
by adopting resolution ES-10/15, in which it requested
the Secretary-General to establish a register of damage.
It was clear from that day, however, that there would
be a long way to go before justice was achieved for the
Palestinian people affected by the construction of the
wall. That was due to Israel’s continuing refusal to
recognize either the advisory opinion of the Court or
the resolution of the Assembly. What we have seen
since then is the obstinacy of the Israeli Government in
continuing construction despite the opposition of the
international community. We express our deepest
concern about that.
The summary report on the October 2006
Consolidated Appeal Process prepared by the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) describes the humanitarian situation
of the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian
territories, which has sharply deteriorated. According
to that report, the population of Gaza is undergoing a
virtual siege of historic dimensions. The Gaza Strip
and the West Bank have become increasingly isolated
from each other as movement and access within and
into those areas have become more difficult. That is a
result of Israel’s continued heavy-handed military
measures and its unilateral policies of establishing

16

physical barriers in the form of checkpoints and
roadblocks, as well as the construction of the wall,
which is planned to be 703 kilometres in length. The
combination of those illegal acts severely hampers the
availability of access to improved standards of living in
the occupied Palestinian territories, thereby worsening
the dire humanitarian situation of the Palestinian
people.
It is against that backdrop that the Assembly is
meeting today to adopt the overdue recommendation of
the Secretary-General on establishing a database of
damage caused as result of the construction of the wall
by Israel. We believe that the time is now ripe for
prompt action by the international community to give
effect to the advisory opinion of the ICJ. Inaction by
the United Nations in halting Israel’s illegal acts will
only promote the erroneous message that Israel is
above international law.
While we welcome the recent ceasefire between
the parties to the conflict, we are of the view that Israel
also needs to demonstrate its goodwill in promoting the
peace process in the region. That should be done by
faithfully adhering to the legal obligations stemming
from the advisory opinion of the ICJ. The dismantling
of the illegal wall and its associated regime constitutes
an important factor in the revival of the peace process
and the fulfilment of a two-State solution based on
relevant resolutions of the United Nations, the Road
Map and the Arab Peace Initiative.
In that regard, we welcome the modalities for the
establishment and implementation of the Register as
presented
in
the
Secretary-General’s
report
(A/ES-10/361),
including
its
structure
and
recommended location at the United Nations Office at
Vienna.
We believe that the establishment of the office of
the Register of Damage as a subsidiary organ of the
General Assembly would be a further step towards
upholding international law on behalf of Palestinians
directly affected by the illegal construction of the wall.
What is also needed is to establish communication with
various United Nations institutions that have already
been in the region so that the office of the Register of
Damage can benefit from their expertise in conducting
the verification and assessment of registered claims.
In conclusion, we hope that the adoption of the
draft resolution to that effect (A/ES-10/L.20) will
facilitate the objective of the Palestinian people to

07-25260

A/ES-10/PV.31

receive
prompt
restitution,
reparations
and
compensation, which are long overdue, for the damage
caused by Israel’s illegal construction of the wall and
its associated regime.
Ms. Mokaddem (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, Madam, my delegation would like to thank
you for presiding over this meeting — of great
importance to Palestinians and to the Arab countries —
to consider the adoption of a draft resolution
(A/ES-10/L.20) concerning the establishment of the
United Nations Register of Damage to compensate
those affected by the construction of the wall on
occupied Palestinian territory. Like all peace-loving
countries, Lebanon strongly supports the draft
resolution. We would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report (A/ES-10/361) submitted under
this agenda item. We also wish to associate ourselves
with the statement delivered by the representative of
Cuba on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
The construction of the racist wall of
separation — which started at the beginning of the
twenty-first century, precisely at the close of an earlier
century that had seen all such walls come tumbling
down — is further evidence of Israel’s use of the
pretext of preserving its security to build its wall. Yet
Israel has occupied the land of the Palestinians for
more than 30 years, while at the same time attempting
to depopulate it in an effort to annex it more easily.
The observer of Palestine and reports from United
Nations specialized agencies have described the
suffering of the Palestinian people under occupation in
great detail.
To whom can the Palestinians appeal, if not to the
United Nations, to at least condemn the suffering to
which they are being subjected and the humiliation and
tragedy that are their daily lot? The wall does not even
follow the 1949 Armistice Line and is being built on
annexed Palestinian land, destroying the land,
resources and houses of Palestinians. The building of
this wall is nothing but an attempt to establish a new de
facto situation, in the hope that that situation will
become irreversible.
The construction of the wall and the
establishment of checkpoints in the West Bank serve to
isolate the Palestinian people, who are being separated
from each other by settlements built on various
pretexts. The construction of the wall and the
settlements is a violation of international law, the Oslo

07-25260

accords and other agreements. The number and size of
these settlements has doubled, according to the
11 December report of the Secretary-General
(S/2006/956) submitted to the Security Council. The
freedom of movement of Palestinians is also being
severely curtailed and their most basic rights are being
flouted. Palestinians in the West Bank are dying a slow
death.
The International Court of Justice issued an
advisory opinion on 9 July 2004, in which it stated that
the construction of the wall was a violation of the
principles of international law and humanitarian law
and urged its dismantling. The Court also said that
Israel must make reparation for all damage caused by
the construction of the wall. That means that they must
provide compensation for all damage caused by the
illegal construction of the wall. The Court also set out
other steps to be taken by the United Nations to put an
end to this illegal situation. On 20 July 2004, the
General Assembly adopted its resolution ES-10/15, on
the illegality of the wall of separation, calling for the
establishment of a United Nations register of damage.
The draft resolution before us today in document
A/ES-10/L.20/Rev.1 is one of the measures that must
be implemented to ensure that the rights of Palestinians
are respected until the wall is dismantled. Neither walls
nor blockades can establish security. Only when the
occupation comes to an end and the rights of the
Palestinian and Arab peoples are restored in
accordance with international law will we be able to
see the light at the end of the tunnel. Without that, all
attempts to establish security will be in vain. Pretexts
and fallacious arguments have been put forward.
Temporary solutions have been proposed. Accusations
have been made. The fact, however, is that the freedom
of many thousands of people is being flouted. There
can be neither peace nor justice unless there is
acceptance and respect for the other.
Mr. Ali (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): My delegation
would like to associate itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Cuba on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement. We would also like to
thank you, Madam President, for convening this
meeting of the tenth emergency special session of the
General Assembly. We also wish to thank the brotherly
country of Qatar, as well as other members of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference and the
Non-Aligned Movement, for endorsing the request for
a resumption of the session. My delegation would also

17

A/ES-10/PV.31

like to thank the Secretary-General for his important
report (A/ES-10/361), which has been submitted in
accordance with resolution ES-10/15, of 20 July 2004,
pertaining to a register of damage caused as a result of
the construction of the wall in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including in and around East Jerusalem, to all
natural or legal persons concerned in connection with
paragraphs 152 and 153 of the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice (ICJ).
Considerable economic, social and humanitarian
damage has been caused to the Palestinians living near
the wall, which has resulted in massive population
displacements and has restricted the free movement of
Palestinians to and from their places of employment. It
has also deprived doctors and patients of access to
hospitals and denied students access to schools and
universities. In addition, trees have been uprooted,
houses demolished and the social fabric frayed. In fact,
the wall divides the city of Jerusalem in half, cutting
off East Jerusalem and isolating the two parts of the
city from each other. In the long run, the wall makes it
difficult to establish an independent, viable Palestinian
State, because Israel has demonstrated its contempt for
the establishment of such a State in accordance with
United Nations resolutions.
The advisory opinion of the International Court
of Justice is quite clear. It calls upon Israel to meet its
obligations under international law, to halt the
construction of the wall, to dismantle the parts situated
within the occupied Palestinian territory and to make
reparations to the persons affected. Measures must be
adopted to compel Israel to comply with those
international obligations, the principles of international
humanitarian law, the Fourth Geneva Convention and
the Charter, so that the wall’s construction is halted
immediately in accordance with the advisory opinion.
The Security Council must shoulder its
responsibility in finding a just, comprehensive and
lasting peace based on the relevant resolutions of
international legitimacy, the principle of land for
peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and Israel’s withdrawal
by Israel from all the Arab lands it has occupied since
1967. That occupation is at the core of the Arab-Israeli
conflict. The Palestinians hope to see their aspirations
to an independent State fulfilled on the basis of justice
and acknowledgement of their rights.
The establishment of a Register of Damage
caused by the construction of the wall in the occupied

18

Palestinian territory is a matter of great urgency and
importance. It is therefore essential that the office of
the Register be set up in such a way as to enable it to
take account of and catalogue such damage. We call on
all representatives to join in adopting draft resolution
A/ES-10/L.20/Rev.1 so that restitution can be made to
the people who have suffered as a result of the wall’s
construction. We hope that, once the draft resolution
has been adopted, its provisions will be implemented
forthwith.
Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): More
than two years have passed by since the issuance of the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
on the separation wall in the occupied Palestinian
territory and the adoption of General Assembly
resolution ES-10/15, which makes Israel, the
occupying Power, responsible for fulfilling its legal
obligations as reaffirmed by the Court and the
Assembly.
We are gravely concerned at Israel’s failure to
comply with its obligations, in accordance with the
Court’s advisory opinion and the General Assembly
resolution, and at its continued violation of the rights
of the Palestinian people without any accountability.
We need not repeat the list of Israeli violations and
practices, which are obvious and well known to all. But
how long will the United Nations remain unable to
address Israel’s illegal practices, which it carries out
intransigently and in defiance of the United Nations
and its highest judicial organ, the International Court
of Justice, and in violation of the Charter of the United
Nations and international law? How long will Israel
continue to dash the legitimate hopes of the Palestinian
people to establish their own independent State on their
national soil?
The International Court of Justice concluded that
Israel has the legal obligation to bring to an end the
illegal situation resulting from the construction of the
wall in the occupied Palestinian territory, to cease
forthwith the construction of the wall and to make
adequate compensation for the damage that it has
caused, to make reparation for that damage by
restoring the status quo ante, to dismantle the parts of
the wall already built and to return all lands
confiscated for the purpose of its construction or pay
damages equal to their value and to provide
compensation for all consequences of its illegal
actions.

07-25260

A/ES-10/PV.31

The road before us is still very long. Today, we
seek the implementation of only some of the
requirements of the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice. Because Israel continues
to flout its obligations under the resolutions of
international legitimacy, and because the Court has
concluded that Israel’s illegal construction of the wall
has legal consequences that are not confined only to
Israel but also extend to other United Nations Member
States, the General Assembly and the Security Council,
Israel is obligated to immediately and fully comply
with all United Nations resolutions and decisions
concerning the rights of the Palestinian people.
We wish to reiterate that the establishment of the
office of the Register of Damage is only a first step
towards full and comprehensive implementation of the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
and the relevant General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions. The efforts of the Assembly and
the Council and of international, regional and
subregional organizations and specialized agencies
should not be limited to the implementation of the
advisory opinion. They should also compel Israel to
comply with other international resolutions in
accordance with international law, including Assembly
and Council resolutions endorsed by the Court in its
advisory opinion, which should be regarded as a
landmark
decision
concerning
specific
legal
obligations under international law in this area.
The mandate of the office of the Register of
Damage should not be limited to registration of the
damage caused to all natural and legal persons
concerned as a result of the construction of the wall, as
stipulated in operative paragraph 3 of the draft
resolution, but should also extend to natural and legal
groups and communities. Moreover, such damage
should not be limited to physical consequences, but
should also include emotional and psychological
effects.
In accordance with paragraph 4 (d) of the draft
resolution, the office of the Register of Damage will be
established at the site of the United Nations Office at
Vienna. However, United Nations agencies and
institutions active in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the Office of the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process should
also provide support and share experiences with the
office of the Register of Damage so as to facilitate its

07-25260

work. The office should be able to visit the occupied
Palestinian territories, particularly the land on which
the wall has been built, so that all those who have
suffered damages resulting from Israeli practices can
register their claims unhindered and unconditionally.
Since the office of the Register of Damage will
be based in Vienna, other United Nations agencies and
offices present on the ground in the occupied
Palestinian territory should redouble their efforts to
ensure the implementation of the purposes and
provisions of the draft resolution, in accordance with
paragraph 14. The office should also take into account
the efforts and achievements of Palestinian civil
society organizations and cooperate with them as
necessary.
The draft resolution before us today, which we
expect to be adopted by an overwhelming majority of
nations that love peace and respect law, justice and
international legality will lead to the establishment of
the office of the Register of Damage. In the registration
of damage claims, the office of the Register of Damage
will, in accordance with operative paragraph 6 (d) of
the draft resolution, be guided by the findings of the
International Court of Justice, general principles of
international law and principles of due process of law.
The responsibilities of the office of the Register
should not be limited to receiving, processing,
investigating and assessing all damage claims resulting
from the construction of the wall, as provided for in
paragraph 8 (c) of the draft resolution. They should
also extend to bridging the gaps and correcting
mistakes in claims when the applicants are unable to
provide adequate evidence or information regarding
their claims owing to practices and restrictions
imposed on them by the Israeli occupation forces.
As long as the Register of Damage remains open
for registration — for the duration of the existence of
the wall in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including in and around East Jerusalem, as provided
for in paragraph 9 of the draft resolution — the office
of the Register must enable applicants to amend claims
in the future when there are reasons for doing so, in
order that such claims properly reflect the actual
damages and losses suffered as a result of the
construction of the wall.
In conclusion, in view of the nature of the office
of the Register and the significant rights and
obligations relating to its establishment, all States and

19

A/ES-10/PV.31

international, regional and subregional organizations
and specialized agencies are legally bound not to
recognize the illegal situation resulting from the
construction of the Israeli wall in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including in and around East
Jerusalem. They are also legally bound not to provide
any aid or assistance that would help to maintain the
fait accompli. They should do their utmost to remove
any obstacles to the submission of claims and should,
upon the adoption of the draft resolution, provide all
possible support and assistance to the office of the
Register of Damage so as to ensure the achievement of
the purposes for which it has been established.
The President (spoke in Arabic): We have heard
the last speaker in the debate on this item.
I now give the floor to the representative of Iraq
to introduce an oral revision to draft resolution
A/ES-10/L.20/Rev.1.
Ms. Tawfiq (Iraq): I would like to inform the
Assembly of the following revision to draft resolution
A/ES-10/L.20/Rev.1. Subparagraph (c) of operative
paragraph 8 should read as follows:
“Receiving and processing all damage
claims and establishing the credibility of the
causal link of those claims to the construction of
the wall for registration in the Register of
Damage”.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The General
Assembly will now consider draft resolution
A/ES-10/L.20/Rev.1, as orally revised.
The General Assembly will now take a decision
on A/ES-10/L.20/Rev.1, entitled “Establishment of the
United Nations Register of Damage Caused by the
Construction of the Wall in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory”, as orally revised. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cape Verde,
Central African Republic, Chile, China,

20

Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Finland, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece,
Grenada,
Guatemala,
Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana,
Haiti,
Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Moldova,
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique,
Myanmar,
Namibia,
Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Australia, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Nauru, Palau, United States
of America.
Abstaining:
Cameroon, Canada, Côte d’Ivoire, Malawi, Papua
New Guinea, Tonga, Uganda.
Draft resolution A/ES-10/L.20/Rev.1, as orally
revised, was adopted by 162 votes to 7, with
7 abstentions (resolution ES-10/17).
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now call
on those representatives who wish to speak in
explanation of vote on the resolution just adopted.

07-25260

A/ES-10/PV.31

May I remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Ross (United States of America): The United
States cannot support resolution A/ES-10/L.20/Rev.1
and has thus voted against. Once again the General
Assembly, meeting in this emergency special session,
is presented with a resolution that fails to contribute
constructively to working towards greater peace and
stability in the region and the realization of the twoState solution.
For the second time in less than one month, the
General Assembly has reconvened the tenth emergency
special session of the General Assembly, which was
first convened in 1997 and remains indefinitely open.
This United Nations mechanism has been subject to
abuse and exploitation for political purposes.
Today the General Assembly is meeting to
consider a resolution on a Register of Damage caused
by the construction of the wall, an issue that does not
rise to the level of extraordinary threat to international
peace and security, which is the original purpose of an
emergency special session.
We take note of the laudable efforts of a number
of delegations to bring this text into full conformity
with the Secretary-General’s report of 17 October
2006, outlining recommendations for the establishment
of the Register. That report was prepared with great
deliberation following the July 2004 emergency special
session and represents the Secretariat’s carefully
considered recommendations.
We also note the resolution’s clear statement that
the active registration of damage through this registry
process does not entail an evaluation or assessment of
the loss of damage claimed. At the same time, and most
importantly, we believe that the registry process set
forth in this resolution remains too ill-defined and too
open-ended in duration to allow us to support it.
The United States prefers to assist the Palestinian
people in other ways. We continue to provide
assistance for basic human needs and civil society and
private sector development. Our financial contribution
to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East alone totalled more
than $135 million in 2006.
The conclusion of a General Assembly-created
registry will not be legally binding on any party.

07-25260

Creation of a registry as set forth in this resolution will
serve only to raise false expectations on the part of the
claimants and divert resources from more important
tasks. Such steps will not assist in fostering peace
between Israel and the Palestinians.
With regard to resources, we strongly oppose the
costs associated with the creation of this open-ended
mandate, at more than $2 million per year, with no
provision for the mandate to be either reviewed or
concluded. This body is committing scarce financial
resources for a political statement.
The creation of this registry does not make a
constructive contribution to peace and once again
raises questions regarding the effectiveness of the
United Nations and its credibility in addressing the
many other grave and pressing problems in the world.
Member States should not support resolutions such as
this but should commit themselves to making the
United Nations a relevant and constructive forum for
addressing the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and other
issues, instead of acquiescing in its evolution into a
purely political organization that cannot reform itself
and pursues a single-minded agenda. This resolution
failed on that score, and we therefore voted against it.
Mr. Bowman (Canada): Canada has made clear
its position that we have serious concerns regarding the
construction by Israel of the barrier within the
Palestinian territories and East Jerusalem. The barrier’s
adverse effect on the precarious humanitarian and
socio-economic situation of the population of the
occupied Palestinian territories is troubling.
While Israel has the right to defend its citizens,
measures taken in that regard must be consistent with
applicable international law. Moreover, Canada has
emphasized the importance of a political solution to
resolve the ongoing conflict in the Middle East and is
concerned at the highly prejudicial impact that the
barrier may have on prospects for peace.
In Canada’s view, any action in the General
Assembly on the question of the barrier should
contribute to advancing a just, lasting and negotiated
settlement to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
When the General Assembly considered the
resolution on the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice on this matter in July 2004, Canada
abstained, in part because of our fundamental concern
that the resolution sought to implement the Court’s

21

A/ES-10/PV.31

opinion as it were a binding decision instead of an
advisory opinion. At that time, we also expressed
concern that the resolution did not adequately reflect
the current situation of the larger conflict and therefore
would not advance the cause of peace.
Canada continues to have this concern. We regret
that the present resolution does not reflect the nonbinding status of the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice. We also have concerns
regarding the scope of the powers given to the
proposed Register. Canada therefore decided to abstain
in the voting on the resolution.
The President (spoke in Arabic): We have heard
the last speaker in explanation of vote.
I give the floor to the observer of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I want to thank the
General Assembly and each and every one of the 162
members that voted in favour of this very technical
resolution whose goal is to implement the International
Court of Justice’s request with regard to restitution and
reparations, and, therefore, compensation. But it is
only one step in that process, as we, like the rest of the
international community, continue to insist that the
wall is illegal and must be dismantled, and that the
process has to be reversed.
We are proud of the General Assembly, which
tonight has set a new record in the context of all
emergency sessions, with 162 positive votes. When we
came to the General Assembly more than two years ago
for a vote on the first draft resolution reflecting the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice,
152 countries voted in favour. Less than a month ago,
at the resumed emergency session, we received 156
votes, and tonight we received 162 votes. We are very
proud of that accomplishment by the highly intelligent,
highly qualified individuals, ambassadors and experts
who made their decisions on the basis of thorough
knowledge. They are not an “automatic immoral
majority”. In fact, this is a very moral majority; it is
upholding international law and the rule of law,
including international humanitarian law.
We did not request this resumption of the tenth
emergency special session. Because the report of the
Secretary-General was submitted to the emergency
special session, we understood that, for technical
reasons, that report could be considered only at a
resumed emergency special session. We fully

22

understand that this specific technical issue does not
reflect a threat to international peace and security, but
we are also good students of the rules of procedure,
and we follow them thoroughly.
I do not want to respond to the insulting and
personal comments made by the Israeli delegation this
morning. However, I believe that when its members do
not conclude from the powerful advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice and the massive vote of
the General Assembly that there is something wrong
with what the Israelis are doing and insult all of us
with such arrogance, calling us the automatic immoral
majority, their verbiage is the verbiage of sore losers.
They have to conclude from the massive message sent
by this body that they are doing something wrong and
that they need to re-evaluate their action.
I will cite some examples of how the General
Assembly has voted so that the Israeli representative
can draw the correct lesson instead of insulting
everyone. When the Assembly voted yesterday on
resolution 61/112, on assistance to Palestine refugees,
173 countries voted in favour, compared with 161 last
year. With regard to resolution 61/113, on persons
displaced as a result of the June 1967 and subsequent
hostilities, 170 countries voted in favour this year,
compared with 161 last year. On resolution 61/114, on
the operations of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, 169
countries voted in favour this year, compared with 159
last year. On resolution 61/115, on Palestine refugees’
properties, 170 voted in favour this year, compared
with 160 last year. On resolution 61/116, on the work
of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli
Practices, 90 voted in favour this year, compared with
86 last year. On resolution 61/117, on the applicability
of the Fourth Geneva Convention, 165 voted in favour
this year, compared with 158 last year. On resolution
61/118, on Israeli settlements, 162 voted in favour this
year, compared with 153 last year. On resolution
61/119, on Israeli practices, 157 voted in favour this
year, compared with 148 last year.
Those are only a few examples from the
distinguished record of the distinguished diplomats that
the Israeli ambassador likes to characterize as an
“immoral majority”. The truly immoral thing, which
needs to be characterized as such, is occupation. Why
does the Israeli ambassador say, among other things,
that this will not advance the cause of peace? Simply
because he and others cannot tolerate the moral power

07-25260

A/ES-10/PV.31

of those resolutions, in which almost all members are
saying that we must uphold international law and will
not tolerate or accept one State’s acting outside
international law. The moral power of those
resolutions, although it may not yet have led to the
termination of occupation and the achievement of
sovereignty for the Palestinian people in their own
independent Palestinian State, is so immense that the
Israeli representative, in a panicked, emotional and
personal way, insulted all of us. I want to thank all
members once again for their massive support. I hope
that the Israeli representative will draw the correct
lessons, instead of cursing all members because they
voted the way we did.
In conclusion, I want to thank everyone once
again and to wish them a very happy holiday.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now call on
the representative of Israel.
Mr. Cohen (Israel): Allow me to point out to the
Member States represented in the Assembly that today
the thirty-first plenary meeting of the tenth emergency
special session is being held. Surely, I share this with
them not out of pride, but more out of embarrassment
for the Assembly, its member States and its emergency
special session mechanism, which has been so blatantly
used and abused for political gain and for the
condemnation of one Member State, 31 times now.
The security fence never was and never will be a
political matter; it was, is and will always be a security
matter. Palestinian terror has made the fence a
necessity. While inconveniences caused by the fence
are reversible, the murder of Israelis by Palestinian
terrorists is not. The fence saves lives. The moment
that there is no longer terror will be the moment that
the fence is no longer necessary.
Yet, if the lifesaving factors of the security fence
were not enough to convince Member States that it is
necessary to guarantee Israel’s peace and security, it
was also explained this morning that a fully functional
and transparent mechanism already exists on the
ground. That mechanism has been responsible for
reviewing some 140 cases brought by Palestinian
complaints to Israel’s high court. In all, close to

07-25260

6.5 million new Israeli shekels, or $1.5 million, has
been paid to Palestinians and organizations that have
petitioned the court.
But the Assembly has just authorized an
enlargement of the United Nations budget — which
means additional dues for Member States and taxes for
their citizens — to allocate $3 million annually for an
ineffective mechanism. That is double the amount of
money that Israel has actually spent on compensating
Palestinians who feel affected by the fence. Three
million dollars of the United Nations budget will now
go to finance a mechanism that includes an office in
Vienna, with an unnecessarily large support staff, for a
process that cannot and will not compensate
Palestinians affected by the building of the security
fence.
The principle that governs the General Assembly
is one State, one vote — what could be referred to, in a
utopian sense, as a democratic system. But, owing to
political and selfish interests, the democracy of the
General Assembly is controlled by an automatic
majority that can and does act as it pleases. These
Member States can be confident, with their majority
status, that any resolution they wish to propose will be
adopted, including lengthy, repetitive and malicious
condemnations of Israel. By now, we are, thankfully,
aware of this abuse of the “one State, one vote”
concept and are confident that such proceedings are not
within the spirit of the United Nations democracy.
Israel voted against this resolution not because it
is against compensating Palestinians who rightfully felt
affected by the fence. Israel’s actions on the ground, its
establishment of a real mechanism and the
compensation paid clarifies any ambiguity on that
issue.
Israel voted against this resolution because it is
yet another example of how politicized and limited in
scope this world body has become.
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with the terms of paragraph 17 of the resolution just
adopted, the tenth emergency special session of the
General Assembly is adjourned.
The meeting rose at 5.40 p.m.

23
