S/PRST/2011/8

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
21 April 2011
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6521st meeting of the Security Council, held on 21 April 2011, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Reports of the
Secretary-General on the Sudan”, the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reaffirms its support for the continued negotiations
between the parties to the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA), including under
the auspices of the African Union High-Level Implementation Panel (AUHIP) and
its chair President Thabo Mbeki. Noting that the conclusion of the CPA Interim
Period on July 9 is soon approaching, the Council urges the parties, meeting at the
highest level, as necessary, to reach agreement on outstanding CPA issues and postCPA arrangements. The Council also encourages the parties to engage with the
United Nations on the future of the UN presence in Sudan.
“The Security Council reiterates its deep concern over increased tensions,
violence, and displacement in the Abyei Area. The Council calls on both parties to
implement and adhere to recent security agreements by withdrawing from the Abyei
Area all forces other than the Joint Integrated Units and Joint Integrated Police
Units allowed under those agreements and to urgently reach an agreement on
Abyei’s post-CPA status. The Council affirms that it is the responsibility of the CPA
parties, including during their negotiations under the auspices of the AUHIP and its
chair President Thabo Mbeki, to reach agreement on the status of Abyei. In this
regard, the Council acknowledges the July 2009 ruling by The Hague’s Permanent
Court of Arbitration, which defines the borders of Abyei.
“The Security Council welcomes the start of the popular consultation process
in Blue Nile State and the rescheduled May 2-4 gubernatorial and state assembly
elections in Southern Kordofan State. The Council expresses its concern about
recent violence in Southern Kordofan, and underscores the responsibility of all
parties to avoid inflammatory rhetoric and to ensure peaceful and credible elections.
The Council also stresses the importance of inclusive, timely, and credible popular
consultations processes, in accordance with the CPA. The Council urges both parties
to reach a security agreement regarding the future of the tens of thousands of troops
from the Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA) from Southern Kordofan and
Blue Nile States. The Council also urges the parties to reach agreement on security
arrangements and to determine the future status of Southerners currently serving in
the Sudan Armed Forces (SAF).

11-30874 (E) 210411

*1130874*

S/PRST/2011/8

“The Security Council is deeply concerned about recent violence between the
SPLA and local militias, specifically in Jonglei, Upper Nile, and Unity States. The
Council calls on the leaders of the Government of Southern Sudan and the SPLA to
find peaceful solutions to the violence, prevent further clashes, and restore calm.
“The Council underlines the need for the CPA parties to promote calm,
including by providing immediate and ongoing reassurance to people of all
nationalities in Sudan, including Southerners in the North and Northerners in the
South, that their rights, safety and property will be respected. The Council urges the
CPA parties to respect their obligations in this regard.
“The Council reiterates in the strongest terms that any obstruction to freedom
of movement of the UN Mission in Sudan (UNMIS) is unacceptable and that
UNMIS requires full and unfettered access throughout the mission area.
“The Security Council will not tolerate any support to proxy militias by either
party to the CPA.
“The Security Council reiterates its deep concern over the serious increase in
violence and insecurity in Darfur, including ceasefire violations, restrictions on
access to vulnerable populations throughout Darfur by UNAMID and the
humanitarian community, attacks by rebel groups, aerial bombardment by the
Sudanese Armed Forces, and the ongoing displacement of civilians. The Council
expresses its deep condolences to the family of the peacekeeper killed on
April 5 and urges the UN-AU Mission in Darfur (UNAMID) and the Government of
Sudan to conduct a full and thorough investigation into the incident.
“The Security Council reaffirms its support for UNAMID, including the
increasingly full implementation of its Chapter VII mandate to deliver its core tasks
to protect civilians and assure humanitarian access, as defined in Resolution 1769
(2007), and recalls the priority given to its efforts in support of the AU-UN led
political process for Darfur. The Council demands that the Government of Sudan
and the armed movements cease hostilities and ensure full and unhindered access,
by land and by air, for UNAMID throughout the mission area and allow
humanitarian workers to provide assistance to all populations in need. The Council
notes the statement made by the Permanent Representative of Sudan to the United
Nations Security Council on April 20, 2011, that his government would issue all
outstanding 1,117 visas for UNAMID personnel, and urgently calls on the
Government of Sudan to do so.
“The Security Council reaffirms its support for the AU-UN led peace process
for Darfur, hosted by the State of Qatar, and the work of Joint Chief Mediator
Djibril Bassole. The Council further reaffirms its support for the principles guiding
the negotiations. The Council strongly urges all other rebel movements to join the
peace process without further delay or preconditions. The Council urges the parties
in Doha to make the necessary concessions to quickly reach a ceasefire and political
agreement and looks forward to the outcome of the upcoming All-Darfur
Stakeholders’ Conference in Doha. The Council believes this conference should be
fully representative of all of Darfur’s populations and interest groups. The Council
reiterates the importance of increased participation of women in the Sudanese peace
processes.
“The Security Council recognizes the potential complementary role that a
Darfur-based Political Process (DPP) could play to ensure the participation and

2

11-30874

S/PRST/2011/8

support of the people of Darfur and better enable them to be involved in the
implementation of the outcome of the Doha peace process. The Council is
nonetheless concerned that important aspects of the enabling environment necessary
for a DPP are not in place, including: (1) the civil and political rights of participants
such that they can exercise their views without fear of retribution, (2) freedom of
speech and assembly to permit open consultations, (3) freedom of movement of
participants and UNAMID, (4) proportional participation among Darfurians,
(5) freedom from harassment, arbitrary arrest, and intimidation, and (6) freedom
from interference by the Government or armed movements. The Council calls on the
Government of Sudan and the armed movements to contribute to the creation of
such an enabling environment for a DPP, working closely with UNAMID as
appropriate, and in particular calls on the Government of Sudan to fulfil its stated
commitment to lift the state of emergency in Darfur.
“The Council also calls on the Government of Sudan to release all political
detainees, to allow free expression, and to undertake effective efforts to ensure
accountability for serious violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law, by whomsoever perpetrated.”

11-30874

3
