United Nations

A/RES/55/59

General Assembly

Distr.: General
17 January 2001

Fifty-fifth session
Agenda item 105

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/55/593)]

55/59.

Vienna Declaration on Crime and Justice: Meeting the
Challenges of the Twenty-first Century

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, in its resolution 54/125 of 17 December 1999, it requested the
Tenth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of
Offenders to submit, through the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal
Justice and the Economic and Social Council, its declaration to the Millennium
Assembly for consideration and action and requested the Commission to give
priority attention at its ninth session to the conclusions and recommendations of the
Tenth Congress, with a view to recommending, through the Economic and Social
Council, appropriate follow-up by the General Assembly at its fifty-fifth session,
Endorses the Vienna Declaration on Crime and Justice: Meeting the
Challenges of the Twenty-first Century, adopted by the States Members of the
United Nations and the other States participating in the high-level segment of the
Tenth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of
Offenders, 1 as contained in the annex to the present resolution.
81st plenary meeting
4 December 2000
Annex
Vienna Declaration on Crime and Justice: Meeting the Challenges of the
Twenty-first Century
We the States Members of the United Nations,
Concerned about the impact on our societies of the commission of serious
crimes of a global nature, and convinced of the need for bilateral, regional and
international cooperation in crime prevention and criminal justice,
Concerned in particular about transnational organized crime and the
relationships between its various forms,

1
See Tenth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, Vienna,
10–17 April 2000: report prepared by the Secretariat (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.00.IV.8).

00 56293

A/RES/55/59

Convinced that adequate prevention and rehabilitation programmes are
fundamental to an effective crime control strategy and that such programmes should
take into account social and economic factors that may make people more
vulnerable to and likely to engage in criminal behaviour,
Stressing that a fair, responsible, ethical and efficient criminal justice system is
an important factor in the promotion of economic and social development and of
human security,
Aware of the promise of restorative approaches to justice that aim to reduce
crime and promote the healing of victims, offenders and communities,
Having assembled at the Tenth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of
Crime and the Treatment of Offenders in Vienna from 10 to 17 April 2000 to decide
to take more effective concerted action, in a spirit of cooperation, to combat the
world crime problem,
Declare as follows:
1.
We note with appreciation the results of the regional preparatory
meetings for the Tenth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the
Treatment of Offenders. 2
2.
We reaffirm the goals of the United Nations in the field of crime
prevention and criminal justice, specifically the reduction of criminality, more
efficient and effective law enforcement and administration of justice, respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms, and promotion of the highest standards of
fairness, humanity and professional conduct.
3.
We emphasize the responsibility of each State to establish and maintain a
fair, responsible, ethical and efficient criminal justice system.
4.
We recognize the necessity of closer coordination and cooperation among
States in combating the world crime problem, bearing in mind that action against it
is a common and shared responsibility. In this regard, we acknowledge the need to
develop and promote technical cooperation activities to assist States in their efforts
to strengthen their domestic criminal justice systems and their capacity for
international cooperation.
5.
We shall accord high priority to the completion of the negotiation of the
United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the
protocols thereto, taking into account the concerns of all States.
6.
We support efforts to assist States in capacity-building, including in
obtaining training and technical assistance and in developing legislation, regulations
and expertise, with a view to facilitating the implementation of the Convention and
the protocols thereto.
7.
Consistent with the goals of the Convention and the protocols thereto, we
shall endeavour:
(a) To incorporate a crime prevention component into national and
international development strategies;

2

See A/CONF.187/RPM.1/1
A/CONF.187/RPM.4/1.

2

and

Corr.1,

A/CONF.187/RPM.2/1,

A/CONF.187/RPM.3/1

and

A/RES/55/59

(b) To intensify bilateral and multilateral cooperation, including technical
cooperation, in the areas to be covered by the Convention and the protocols thereto;
(c)

To enhance donor cooperation in areas with crime prevention aspects;

(d) To strengthen the capability of the United Nations Centre for
International Crime Prevention, as well as the United Nations Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice Programme network, to assist States, at their request, in building
capacity in areas to be covered by the Convention and the protocols thereto.
8.
We welcome the efforts being made by the United Nations Centre for
International Crime Prevention to develop, in cooperation with the United Nations
Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute, a comprehensive global
overview of organized crime as a reference tool and to assist Governments in policy
and programme development.
9.
We reaffirm our continued support for and commitment to the United
Nations and to the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice
Programme, especially the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice
and the United Nations Centre for International Crime Prevention, the United
Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute and the institutes of the
Programme network, and resolve to strengthen the Programme further through
sustained funding, as appropriate.
10. We undertake to strengthen international cooperation in order to create a
conducive environment for the fight against organized crime, promoting growth and
sustainable development and eradicating poverty and unemployment.
11. We commit ourselves to taking into account and addressing, within the
United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Programme, as well as within
national crime prevention and criminal justice strategies, any disparate impact of
programmes and policies on women and men.
12. We also commit ourselves to the development of action-oriented policy
recommendations based on the special needs of women as criminal justice
practitioners, victims, prisoners and offenders.
13. We emphasize that effective action for crime prevention and criminal
justice requires the involvement, as partners and actors, of Governments, national,
regional, interregional and international institutions, intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations and various segments of civil society, including the
mass media and the private sector, as well as the recognition of their respective roles
and contributions.
14. We commit ourselves to the development of more effective ways of
collaborating with one another with a view to eradicating the scourge of trafficking
in persons, especially women and children, and the smuggling of migrants. We shall
also consider supporting the global programme against trafficking in persons
developed by the United Nations Centre for International Crime Prevention and the
United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute, which is subject
to close consultation with States and review by the Commission on Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice, and we establish 2005 as the target year for
achieving a significant decrease in the incidence of those crimes worldwide and,
where that is not attained, for assessing the actual implementation of the measures
advocated.

3

A/RES/55/59

15. We also commit ourselves to the enhancement of international
cooperation and mutual legal assistance to curb illicit manufacturing of and
trafficking in firearms, their parts and components and ammunition, and we
establish 2005 as the target year for achieving a significant decrease in their
incidence worldwide.
16. We further commit ourselves to taking enhanced international action
against corruption, building on the United Nations Declaration against Corruption
and Bribery in International Commercial Transactions, 3 the International Code of
Conduct for Public Officials, 4 relevant regional conventions and regional and global
forums. We stress the urgent need to develop an effective international legal
instrument against corruption, independent of the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime, and we invite the Commission on Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice to request the Secretary-General to submit to it at
its tenth session, in consultation with States, a thorough review and analysis of all
relevant international instruments and recommendations as part of the preparatory
work for the development of such an instrument. We shall consider supporting the
global programme against corruption developed by the United Nations Centre for
International Crime Prevention and the United Nations Interregional Crime and
Justice Research Institute, which is subject to close consultation with States and
review by the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice.
17. We reaffirm that combating money-laundering and the criminal economy
constitutes a major element of the strategies against organized crime, established as
a principle in the Naples Political Declaration and Global Action Plan against
Organized Transnational Crime, adopted by the World Ministerial Conference on
Organized Transnational Crime, held at Naples, Italy, from 21 to 23 November
1994. 5 We are convinced that the success of this action rests upon setting up broad
regimes and coordinating appropriate mechanisms to combat the laundering of the
proceeds of crime, including the provision of support to initiatives focusing on
States and territories offering offshore financial services that allow the laundering of
the proceeds of crime.
18. We decide to develop action-oriented policy recommendations on the
prevention and control of computer-related crime, and we invite the Commission on
Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice to undertake work in this regard, taking into
account the ongoing work in other forums. We also commit ourselves to working
towards enhancing our ability to prevent, investigate and prosecute high-technology
and computer-related crime.
19. We note that acts of violence and terrorism continue to be of grave
concern. In conformity with the Charter of the United Nations and taking into
account all the relevant General Assembly resolutions, we shall together, in
conjunction with our other efforts to prevent and to combat terrorism, take effective,
resolute and speedy measures with respect to preventing and combating criminal
activities carried out for the purpose of furthering terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. With this in view, we undertake to do our utmost to foster universal
adherence to the international instruments concerned with the fight against
terrorism.
3

Resolution 51/191, annex.
Resolution 51/59, annex.
5
A/49/748, annex, sect. I.A.
4

4

A/RES/55/59

20. We also note that racial discrimination, xenophobia and related forms of
intolerance continue, and we recognize the importance of taking steps to incorporate
into international crime prevention strategies and norms measures to prevent and
combat crime associated with racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
forms of intolerance.
21. We affirm our determination to combat violence stemming from
intolerance on the basis of ethnicity, and we resolve to make a strong contribution,
in the area of crime prevention and criminal justice, to the planned World
Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related
Intolerance.
22. We recognize that the United Nations standards and norms in crime
prevention and criminal justice contribute to efforts to deal with crime effectively.
We also recognize the importance of prison reform, the independence of the
judiciary and the prosecution authorities, and the International Code of Conduct for
Public Officials. We shall endeavour, as appropriate, to use and apply the United
Nations standards and norms in crime prevention and criminal justice in national
law and practice. We undertake to review relevant legislation and administrative
procedures, as appropriate, with a view to providing the necessary education and
training to the officials concerned and ensuring the necessary strengthening of
institutions entrusted with the administration of criminal justice.
23. We also recognize the value of the model treaties on international
cooperation in criminal matters as important tools for the development of
international cooperation, and we invite the Commission on Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice to call upon the United Nations Centre for International Crime
Prevention to update the Compendium of United Nations Standards and Norms in
Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice 6 in order to provide the most up-to-date
versions of the model treaties to States seeking to utilize them.
24. We further recognize with great concern that juveniles in difficult
circumstances are often at risk of becoming delinquent or easy candidates for
recruitment by criminal groups, including groups involved in transnational
organized crime, and we commit ourselves to undertaking countermeasures to
prevent this growing phenomenon and to including, where necessary, provisions for
juvenile justice in national development plans and international development
strategies and to including the administration of juvenile justice in our funding
policies for development cooperation.
25. We recognize that comprehensive crime prevention strategies at the
international, national, regional and local levels must address the root causes and
risk factors related to crime and victimization through social, economic, health,
educational and justice policies. We urge the development of such strategies, aware
of the proven success of prevention initiatives in numerous States and confident that
crime can be reduced by applying and sharing our collective expertise.
26. We commit ourselves to according priority to containing the growth and
overcrowding of pre-trial and detention prison populations, as appropriate, by
promoting safe and effective alternatives to incarceration.
27. We decide to introduce, where appropriate, national, regional and
international action plans in support of victims of crime, such as mechanisms for
6

United Nations publication, Sales No. E.92.IV.1 and corrigendum.

5

A/RES/55/59

mediation and restorative justice, and we establish 2002 as a target date for States to
review their relevant practices, to develop further victim support services and
awareness campaigns on the rights of victims and to consider the establishment of
funds for victims, in addition to developing and implementing witness protection
policies.
28. We encourage the development of restorative justice policies, procedures
and programmes that are respectful of the rights, needs and interests of victims,
offenders, communities and all other parties.
29. We invite the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice to
design specific measures for the implementation of and follow-up to the
commitments that we have undertaken in the present Declaration.

6
