United Nations

A/RES/62/60

General Assembly

Distr.: General
15 January 2008

Sixty-second session
Agenda item 105

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 5 December 2007
[on the report of the First Committee (A/62/398)]

62/60.

Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological)
and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction

The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions relating to the complete and effective
prohibition of bacteriological (biological) and toxin weapons and to their destruction,
Noting with satisfaction that there are one hundred and fifty-nine States parties
to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and
Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their
Destruction, 1 including all of the permanent members of the Security Council,
Bearing in mind its call upon all States parties to the Convention to participate
in the implementation of the recommendations of the Review Conferences,
including the exchange of information and data agreed to in the Final Declaration of
the Third Review Conference of the Parties to the Convention, 2 and to provide such
information and data in conformity with standardized procedure to the SecretaryGeneral on an annual basis and no later than 15 April,
Welcoming the reaffirmation made in the Final Declaration of the Fourth
Review Conference 3 that under all circumstances the use of bacteriological
(biological) and toxin weapons and their development, production and stockpiling
are effectively prohibited under article I of the Convention,
Welcoming also the successful outcome of the Sixth Review Conference,
which adopted a Final Document 4 after a gap of ten years, 5 conducted a consensus
article-by-article review of the operation of the Convention and reached decisions
on the continuity of the intersessional meetings of experts and States parties,

_______________
1

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1015, No. 14860.
BWC/CONF.III/23, part II.
3
BWC/CONF.IV/9, part II.
4
BWC/CONF.VI/6.
5
The previous full review was conducted at the Fourth Review Conference in 1996.
2

07-46737

A/RES/62/60

Recalling the decision reached at the Sixth Review Conference to hold four
annual meetings of the States parties of one week’s duration each year commencing
in 2007, prior to the Seventh Review Conference, which is to be held not later than
the end of 2011, and to hold a one-week meeting of experts to prepare for each
meeting of the States parties, 6
1.
Notes with satisfaction the increase in the number of States parties to the
Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of
Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction,1
reaffirms the call upon all signatory States that have not yet ratified the Convention
to do so without delay, and calls upon those States that have not signed the
Convention to become parties thereto at an early date, thus contributing to the
achievement of universal adherence to the Convention;
Welcomes the information and data provided to date, and reiterates its
2.
call upon all States parties to the Convention to participate in the exchange of
information and data agreed to in the Final Declaration of the Third Review
Conference of the Parties to the Convention;2
3.
Takes note of the decision of the Sixth Review Conference, taking into
account the importance of providing administrative support to meetings agreed by
the Review Conference as well as comprehensive implementation and
universalization of the Convention and the exchange of confidence-building
measures, to establish an Implementation Support Unit, funded by States parties, for
the period from 2007–2011, 7 within the framework defined by the Review
Conference;
4.
Notes with satisfaction that the Sixth Review Conference agreed on
several measures to update the mechanism for the transmission of information in the
framework of the confidence-building measures;
Recalls the decisions reached at the Sixth Review Conference, 8 and calls
5.
upon States parties to the Convention to participate in their implementation;
6.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to render the necessary
assistance to the depositary Governments of the Convention and to provide such
services as may be required for the implementation of the decisions and
recommendations of the Review Conferences, including all assistance to the annual
meetings of the States parties and the meetings of experts;
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-third session the
7.
item entitled “Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and
Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their
Destruction”.
61st plenary meeting
5 December 2007

_______________
6

BWC/CONF.VI/6, part III, para. 7.
Ibid., part III, paras. 5 and 6.
8
Ibid., part III, paras. 1 and 7.
7

2
