V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Bearing in mind the Buenos Aires Plan of Action
for Promoting and Implementing Technical Co-operation among Developing Countries, 184 adopted by the
United Nations Conference on Technical Co-operation
among Developing Countries,
Noting that economic co-operation among developing countries, based on the concept of individual and
collective self-reliance, has been identified by the developing countries as a major strategy to promote
their development and as an important means of
consolidating their unity and solidarity,
Recognizing that, in the context of international
economic co-operation, the achievement of the goal
of greater economic co-operation among developing
countries will make an important contribution to the
establishment of the new international economic order,
Reaffirming that efforts by the developing countries
to promote economic co-operation among themselves
do not diminish the responsibilities of all other countries to establish just and equitable economic relations,
1. Takes note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral entitled "Economic co-operation among developing countries" ;185
2. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure,
through the existing machinery, effective co-ordination and implementation of activities within the United
Nations system in support of measures of economic
co-operation among developing countries, by, inter
alia:
(a)
A more effective evaluation of the relevance
of the various activities being undertaken by organizations within the United Nations system to the achievement of the objectives of economic co-operation among
developing countries;

( b) Adaptation, as appropriate, of the organizational arrangements within the United Nations system
to the requirements of promoting economic co-operation among developing countries;

3. Further requests the Secretary-General to continue to include in the medium-term plan of the United
Nations an intersectoral presentation of the activities
envisaged to implement the relevant resolutions of the
United Nations on economic co-operation among developing countries and to promote the same kind of
intersectoral presentation on a system-wide basis;
4. Urges the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system, in accordance with their established procedures and practices,
to support measures of economic co-operation among
developing countries, including, as and when requested,
the continued provision of the necessary secretariat
support services and other suitable arrangements to
facilitate the holding of meetings by the developing
countries in pursuance of the objectives of economic
co-operation among developing countries;
5. Takes note of Trade and Development Board
decision 174 (XVIII) of 17 September 1978 on economic co-operation among developing countries; 186
184 Report of the United Nations Conference on Technical
Co-operation among Developing Countries, Buenos Aires, 30
August-12 September 1978 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.78.II.A.ll and corrigendum), chap. I.
1s:; A/33/367.
186 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtythird Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/33/15), vol. II, annex I.

125

6. Notes the activities undertaken by the secretariat of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development in pursuance of resolution 1 (I) of the
Committee on Economic Co-operation among Developing Countries in support of programmes of economic co-operation among developing countries, 187 and
calls upon that organization to intensify further its
efforts in this area;
7. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development to
continue consultations with a view to submitting
recommendations to the Trade and Development Board
concerning the organizing and convening during 1979
of meetings, as appropriate, of governmental experts
of developing countries and representatives of intergovernmental economic co-operation groupings of developing countries in order to promote the objectives
of subregional, regional and interregional economic
co-operation among developing countries;
8. Urges developed countries to provide appropriate support, as and when requested by the developing countries, for the implementation of measures
of economic co-operation among developing countries;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a comprehensive report on the implementation of the present
resolution to the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth
session.
95th plenary meeting
29 January 1979
33/196.

Protectionism

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of the
New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX)
of 12 December 1974 containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States and 3362 (S-VII)
of 16 September 1975 on development and international economic co-operation, as well as the relevant
resolutions adopted by the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development at its fourth session, held
at Nairobi from 5 to 31 May 1976, 188
Affirming that the expansion of international trade
on an equitable basis should be beneficial to all countries and that trade liberalization in favour of developing countries is an important means of achieving such
expansion,
Recognizing the vital importance of export earnings
to the economies of the developing countries,
Believing that expansion of the exports of developing countries is an important means of financing their
self-sustained growth,
Acknowledging that the accelerated growth of the
economies of the developing countries is a key element
in the over-all improvement of the world economy,
Noting that increasing protectionist measures aggravate inflation in the developed countries, which is
in turn transferred to the developing countries,
187 See
1 ,s See

A/33/367, annex.
Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.IJ.D.10
and corrigendum), part one, sect. A.

126

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

Bearing in mind the widespread and growing concern about the growth of protectionism in developed
countries against the exports of the developing countries,
1. Calls upon the developed countries to adhere
strictly to the commitment concerning the standstill on
new tariff and non-tariff barriers or intensification of
existing ones against the exports of developing countries;
2. Urges the developed countries to eliminate
speedily all forms of protectionist measures and practices against the exports of developing countries, bearing in mind, inter alia, section 1.3, paragraph (a) (x),
of General Assembly resolution 3202 (S-VI) and section I, paragraph 8, of Assembly resolution 3362
(S-VII);
3. Calls upon the developed countries to carry out
structural changes with respect to less competitive
sectors of their economies with a view to expansion
of existing, and creation of new, production capacities
in developing countries.
95th plenary meeting
29 January 1979
33/197.

Transport and Communications Decade
in Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2626 (XXV) of 24 October 1970 containing the International Development
Strategy for the Second United Nations Development
Decade, 3202 (S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the
Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order and 3362 (S-VII) of
16 September 1975 on development and international
economic co-operation,
Noting with satisfaction the initiative taken by the
Organization of African Unity and the Economic Commission for Africa to establish an integrated African
road network and to rationalize Africa's railway systems and other transport systems in order to facilitate
the promotion of multinational economic co-operation
in Africa, intra-African trade and the political, social
and economic integration of Africa, as well as the
work carried out since June 1977,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 2097 (LXIII) of 29 July 1977 on the Transport
and Communications Decade in Africa,
Recalling further General Assembly resolution
32/160 of 19 December 1977, in which,,the Assembly,
inter alia, proclaimed a Transport and Communications Decade in Africa during the years 1978-1988 and
requested the Secretary-General to mobilize all necessary resources to make the Decade a success,
Taking note of resolution ECO(XVIII)/Res.2
adopted by the Executive Committee of the Economic
Commission for Africa at its eighteenth meeting, held
at Khartoum from 2 to 4 May 1978,189 in which measures were proposed for the implementation of the
global strategy and comprehensive programme of work
for the Decade,
189 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Coimcil, 1978, Supplement No. JO, Addendum (E/1978/50/Add.l),
chap. II.

Noting with appreciation the work carried out so
far by the Economic Commission for Africa and the
Organization of African Unity in preparation for the
Decade,
1. Endorses resolution ECO(XVIII)/Res.2 of the
Executive Committee of the Economic Commission for
Afri:::a in which the Committee decided to convene
early in 1979 a meeting of African Ministers concerned
with matters relating to transport, communications,
works and planning, in order to adopt Africa's global
strategy and a comprehensive plan of action for the
implementation of the Transport and Communications
Decade in Africa;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Economic Commission for Africa, as the lead agency
for the Decade, with the necessary financial and staff
resources that will enable it to make all preparatory
arrangements for the Decade, including the preparations for and the convening of the meeting of Ministers
referred to in paragraph 1 above;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General to make
all necessary arrangements, as appropriate, for the
convening of a pledging conference of donor countries
and institutions in the first half of 1979 on the basis
of the global strategy and the comprehensive plan of
action and of specific projects contained therein;
4. Urges the international community, in particular
the developed countries, to give full support and to
contribute substantially to the implementation of the
programmes and projects for the attainment of the
objectives of the Decade.
95th plenary meeting
29 January 1979
33/198.

Preparations for the special session of
the General Assembly in 1980

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 32/174 of 19 December 1977, in which it decided, inter alia, to convene
a special session of the General Assembly in 1980,
Bearing in mind its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and
3202 (S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 3281
(XXIX) of 12 December 1974 containing the Charter
of Economic Rights and Duties of States and 3362
(S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development and
international economic co-operation,
Considering that the General Assembly is requested
to assess at the special session the progress made in
the various forums of the United Nations system in
the establishment of the new international economic
order and, on the basis of that assessment, to take
appropriate action for the promotion of the development of developing countries and international economic co-operation,
Bearing in mind the ongoing process of the preparation of the new international development strategy,
Recognizing the importance of various United Nations conferences held in recent years on major topics
relating to economic and social development,
l. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the
Director-General for Development and International
