TWENTY-SIXTH

YEAR
rd
MEETING:

NEW

3 AUGUST

197 I

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/

1573)

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

............

Page
1

Statement

by the President

. . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

............

1

Adoption

of the agenda

. . . . . .. . , . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . .

............

1

Complaint
by Guinea:
Letter
dated 3 August 1971 from the Permanent Representative
of Guinea to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/lO280)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..I...........

S/PV.1573

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicatesthe supplementin whichit appearsor in which information about it is given.
The resolutionsof the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adoptedin 1964, are publishedin yearly volumesof Resolutionsand Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system,which has beenapplied retroactively to resolutions
adoptedbefore 1 January 1965,becamefully operativeon that date.

FIFTEEN

HUNDRED

AND SEVENTY-THIRD

MEETING

Held in New York on Tuesday, 3 August 1971, at 5.30 p.m.
President: Mr. Piero VINCI (Italy).

Presidency of the Security Council I face the major
responsibilities
that go with it.

FWse!lt: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France, Italy, Japan,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.

Adoption of the agenda
Theagendawasadopted.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 573)
1. Adoption

Complaintby Guinea

of the agenda.

Letter dated 3 August 1971 from the PermanentRepresentative of Guinea to the United Nations addressedto the
Presidentof the Security Council (S/10280)

2. Complaint by Guinea:
Letter dated 3 August 1971 from the Permanent
Representative
of Guinea to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/10280).

5. The PRESIDENT: I havejust receiveda letter from the
representativeof Guinea [S/10280/ requestingto participate in the Council’s discussionof the question before it,
without the right to vote. In accordancewith the usual
practice, and with the consentof the Council, I proposeto
invite the representativeof Guinea to take a place at the
Security Council table in order to participate, without the
right to vote, in its discussion.

Statement by the President
1. Tile PRESIDENT:
Before we proceed to our agenda for
today I am sure that, in spite of the practice now happily
prevailing of dispensing with complimentary remarks, I
shall be forgiven if for a short moment I break what my
delegation already accepts as a rule rather than a practice.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. E.-H. Towe
(Guinea)took a placeat the Secun’tyCouncil table.

2. I wish very simply-and I am sure I am expressing the
sentiment of all members of the Council-to pay a tribute
to my predecessor, Ambassador Kosciusko-Morizet, for the
positive outcome of our previous series of meetings under
his very effective and constructive leadership. At the same
time I should like to extend the Council’s most heartfelt
welcome to Ambassador Sevilla Sacasaof Nicaragua,who
led the Special Mission the Council decidedto sendto the
areathat we were discussingat thosemeetings.

6. The PRESIDENT: This meetingof the Council hasbeen
called, on very short notice, in accordancewith the letter
addressed
to me, on instructions from his Government, by
the Permanent Representative of Guinea to the United
Nations.
7. The first speakeris the representativeof Guinea, on
whom I now call.

8. Mr. TOURE (Guinea) (interpretation from French):
The PermanentMission of Guinea to the United Nations
thanks you for allowing it to participate in this important
debate, the urgent nature of which has not escapedthe
notice of the Council. It alsowishesto thank you for all of
the diligencewhich was used in order to make it possible
for the Council to meet within the required time-limit to
hear the appealwhich we are addressingto it, prompted
only by the hope that the Council might be able to take
4. If I may be allowed to add a personalnote which I
stepsso that a peaceful country which aspiresto peaceand
believe to be fitting for this particular body, I would say freedom, which has given its sovereignadherenceto the
that unfortunately, while the astronautswe seethese days United Nations Charter and which, since its admissionto
the international community is doing its utmost to safewalking on the moon give us a poignant senseof the unity
guardthe guidelinesof the Charter and the essenceof what
anddestiny of mankind, too many dangersof conflict still
exist on our small planet. It is with that double awareness, this Charter says, namely, the safeguardingof peace and
security in the world, may live.
if I may say so, that in assumingfor the first time the
3. I would also like to take this opportunity to convey to
the delegation of the United Statesof America our sincere
congratulations on the Apollo 1.5 ‘mission, which has
thrilled public opinion throughout the world andhasadded
a furtller huge step to the exploration of outer spacecarried
out by the valiant American astronautsand Soviet cosmonauts.

1

I

g, During a recent debate in the Security Council we said
that it was not with a happy heart that mY delegation
appeared
before the Council as a perpetual Plaintiff and set
before you here in the Security CoUnCd
the
continuous
daily acts of aggression of which the Republic of Guinea
has been the victim for twelve years. Indeed, since
1960-just two years after achieving international sovereignty-the Republic of Guinea in a letter had informed the
council of acts of aggressionand violence on our borders
with this enclave which is still under Portuguese domination
and which had become a permanent theatre for these acts.
These aggressionsare characterizedby bombardments, daily
violations of OUTair-space,‘hijackings of our aircraft, our
trawlers,‘kidnappings, the burning of villages, and other
crimes against the peaceful peasant populations. The list
could go on indefinitely, but all of these facts have already
been brought to the attention of the Security COUnCil.
10. One of the most recent of these acts goes back to 22
November 1970. Early in the morning, at a time when the
people in our capital were sleeping, during a month of
fasting, the month of Ramadan, on a foggy ‘morning,
foreign Portuguese forces in a ship with some mercenaries
-more than 300 of them-with small arms, bazookas, and
cannon, landed on our beachesat Conakry itself, occupied
our power plant and military camps, and killed and
slaughtered without distinction with a hatred worthy of the
greatest barbarians of history.
11. Your Council met at that time. It called for an
immediate cessation of these unspeakable attacks against
the territorial integrity and sovereignty of a small defenceless, African State, whose only hope is the international
community with its Charter, our Charter, a Charter which
we have fully but consciously adhered to. At that time the
Council met, as I have said, and a mission of inquiry-something unique in the annals of the Security Council-was sent
to Guinea-to Conakry under the direction of Ambassador
Khatri, the representative of Nepal. The mission of inquiry,
after a stay in Guinea, found incontrovertible and tangible
facts, and a report was made to the Council,1 a report
whose COntentS, whose factual truths and harsh terms were
not lost upon the members of the Council at the time, A
resolution was adopted [290 (1970/J condemning
the
aggressor-Portugal. In that same resolution the Security
Council decided to remain actively seized of the question,
that is it was to follow the future development of the
question.
12. Only a few days after that aggression took place, 1
might even say at the very time when the mission wasin
Guinea, on 27 and 28 November 1970, those same
Portuguese

ColoIlial

forces,

with

mercenaries

among

their

ranks, Were attacking
the Republic of Guinea in the
northern region of its territory, in the regions of Koundara
and Gaoual. The mission in the field wasinformed about
those facts also,

airspace. ln a letter from our Permanent Mission WC
brought
to the
Council’s
attention the seriousness of the
situation which was prevailing at the time and which, most
unfortunately, continues to prevail along our borders wit11
Guinea (Bissau), which is under Portuguese domination.
14. We had not yet reached the end of our misfortunes,
because, as fate would have it, our borders are contiguous
with
those
of a colonial
enclave, this enclave which
Port Ugd
continues to keep under its domination in spite of General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) putting an end to colanialism.
15.
mat
criticism
does Portugal make of the Republic of
Guinea? It is criticizing the Republic of Guinea for being a
conscientious committed member of the international
community
which is scrupulously applying, with the only
means at its disposal all the recommendations of the
Security Council and the General Assembly. Port~gnl
is
criticizing
Guinea for helping the liberation movements. Is
this a crime, Mr. President and distinguished members of
the Council? Is this a crime, I ask. You who have
deliberately taken a decision here in the United Nations to
recognize the legitimacy of the struggle undertaken by the
peoples under the oppression and the boot of Portuguese
colonialism? This colonialism prevents them froril selfdetermination and refuses to realize that we are in the
middle of the twentieth century-even at the end of the
twentieth century, when throughout the world the winds of
freedom have blown, even on the African continent, which
they are still trying to keep in a state of slavery.

16. I shall not dwell on the various aspects of a certain
hired press, which is willing to give credit to the most
chimerical rumours to the effect that we are being seized by
panic in the Republic of Guinea.
17. We are not being seized by panic in the Republic OS
Guinea. We did not wait, on 22 November 1970, for the
arrival of United Nations forces to repel the aggressor. We
did not wait for United Nations forces, on 22 November
1970, to rescue our homeland which they wanted to usurp
and our freedom which they wanted to take away from us.
Because we are prompted by a permanent concern for the
maintenance of peace throughout the world we deemed it
useful and necessary to inform this Council of the
permanent acts of aggression that infringe on international
peace and security-the main reasons for tile existence of
the Security Council-bearing in mind the Iast world
conflicts of bitter memory. But must we also consider that
the violation of international peace and security when it
concerns Africa is not a violation of international peace and
security? 1s the African continent, and especially
the
Republic of Guinea, not part of the world, of the universe?
18. Mr. President and members of the Council, when you
affixed Your signatures to the United Nations Charter at
San Francisco, the Republic of Guinea had not yet been
born; it was st@ living in the dark night of colonialism and
appeared only as a point on the map called, at the time,
French Guinea. You, honourable members of the Council,
have committed Yourselves to defending by al1 means the
Peace, the security and the territorial integrity of alt
countries, whether they be large or small. It is because of

13. Hardly had that mission returned when the Republic
of Guinea again had to bring to the attention of the Council
the continuing overflights and daily violations of its
1 Official Records of the Security Council, Twenty-fifth year,
Special Supplement No. 2.

2

t

cur confidence in you that we are moved to come before
you for a second time, not out of panic but out of an
awareness that the peace, security and territorial integrity
of every country have to be safeguarded by you, members
of the Security Council, by all of us who freely adhere to
the United Nations Charter. It so happens that some
hlembers who call themselves the founding Members of the
United Nations respect neither the spirit nor the letter of
the Charter,

Security Council is the maintenanceof peaceand security
and, hence, the protection, within the framework of the
Charter, of the territorial integrity of a Member State, in
this casethe Republicof Guinea.

19. Our statement before the Security Council is both
clear and precise. It has to be clear becausethe facts that
we bring to your attention are in themselvesinstructive.
Just three weeksagothe Security Council met to considera
complaint brought by Senegalconcerningacts of aggression
and the laying of mines along the border of that country
with the enclave of Guinea (Bissau) under Portuguese
domination. In the courseof that debatewe carefully drew
Lo your attention acts of aggressionthat were being
prepared againstthe Republic of Guinea, acts comingfrom
the territory of Guinea (Bissau),indicating that those acts
of aggression exceeded in magnitude and scope those of
rvllich we had been the victims on 22 November 1970. The
common enemy is always the same-Portugal; this time, by
land, by sea and by air it aimsto attack the Republic of
Guinea,
20. The aggressionthat is beingprepared was brought to
your attention by us in good time, because,in the light of
our experience on 22 November 1970, we think it
preferable to take preventive action rather than to find
ourselves in the next few hours faced with other unspeakable crimes, other deaths aimed only at an innocent
population, at a country that aspiresonly to peace,security
and the safeguardingof its territorial integrity.

23. It is prompted by this unshakableconfidence in the
United Nations Charter that we bring these facts before
you, these facts that speakfor themselves.Once more we
thank the Security Councilfor its diligencein holding this
meeting and we reiterate our confidence in the Council
with respect to all decisionsit may consider appropriate
and effective for safeguardingthe territorial integrity and
the peaceand securityof the Republicof Guinea.
24. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): Mr. President,you certainly expressedthe feelingsof all the membersof the Security
Council when you addressedyour congratulationsto the
out-going President,the Ambassadorof France, Mr. Kosciusko-Morizet,andto the SpecialMissionto Senegal,under
the chairmanshipof the Ambassadorof Nicaragua,which
hasjust returned; and when you referred to all the great
events of the last two weeks. But may I in turn, Sir,
congratulateyou on the efficiency and effectivenesswith
which you called this urgent meeting of the Security
Council in order to examinethe complaintof a Member of
the United Nations,Guinea?Indeed,in congratulatingyou
on the assumptionof the Presidencyof this high organ of
the United Nations,I shouldlike to saythat I am sureyou
bring to this office your alreadywell-knowngreat qualities
of tact, refinement and culture-qualities with which the
history of Italy is replete.
25. In connexion with the matter now before the Council
I wish first of all to point to the fact that operative
paragraph12 of Security Councilresolution290 (1970) of
8 December1970statesthat the Council

21. It was for thesereasonsthat today the GuineanChief
of State, President Ahmed SBkouTour&and we all know
very well his patriotism, his commitment to the causeof
the United Nations and to justice and freedom in Africa
and throughout the world-has addressedto the Permanent
Representative of Guineaand, through him, to the Security
Council, the following message,
which I shallread:

“Decidesto remainactively seizedof the matter”.
The Security Council is now considering a question
pursuantto that decision.
26. In this connexion I wish to expressthe thanks of my
delegationto the Ambassador
of Guineafor having brought
to the urgent attention of the Security Council matters
which are of concernto his country andwhich, in the view
of the Presidentof h& country and of his Government,
presentanimminentdanger.

“ExtremeIy urgent, absolutepriority. We inform you
that our Intelligence Service has today intercepted conversations between OverseasMarine units and two other
headquarters units of the Portuguese Colonial Army
discussing an imminent military aggressionby Portugal
against the Republic of Guinea; first, against the main
points
along the frontier with Guinea (Bissau),particularly Gaoual, Koundara, principally the villagesof Foula
Mori, Soufan, Soutoumore and Missira, second,against
the zone of Conakry. These attacks are presumably
intended to liberate mercenariesand other personsat
present being detained in Guinea.I should like to request
you to place before the Secretary-Generalof the United
Nations a request for an urgent meeting of the Security
Council for the purpose of taking all necessarysteps.We
have alerted all our posts to repel energetically and
instantly all aggression.Signed:Ahmed S6kou Tour&”

27. Now, what can a MemberState of the United Nations
such as Guinea-which is a small State and respectsthe
Charter of the United Nations-do in suchcircumstances?
Cert&ly the first thing it can do is to call for the rule of
law and to invoke the rule of law against the acts of
mercenaries.Is this call justified? Again, I refer to Security
Council resolution 290 (1970). That resolution was
adopted after a SpecialMission of five membersof the
Councilhad goneto Guinea,investigatedthe situation there
and reported its findings. The Security Council in that
resolution290 (1970) endorsedthe findingsof that Special
Mission.As a matter of fact, operativeparagraph1 reads:

22. I stated that we were not moved by panic but rather
by the abiding conviction that the task devolving upon the

“Endorsesthe conclusionsof the report of the Special
Missionto the Republicof Guinea;”
3

32. I therefore submit that the Security Council should

and paragraph 2 :

t&e

‘~strongly condetnns the Government of Portugal for its
invasion of the Republic of Guinea.”
28. But in spite of that resolution and in spite of that
condemnation the Ambassador of Guinea, as we have
heard, has been obliged to report to the Security Council
and to the ‘Members of the United Nations acts of
aggression that have been perpetrated against his country
since that,resoIution was adopted. Indeed, it is significant
to recall that while the Security Council met on 22 and 23
November 1970 to look into the complaints of Guinea, and
while the Special Mission wasinvestigating the situation on
the scene, on 27 and 28 November 1970 Portugal committed other acts of aggressionagainst the Republic of Guinea.
That is referred to in the third preambular paragraph of the
resolution, which reads:

every

necessary

action

COIllIIlHl.SUlIltt?

With

the

COnI*

plaint that has been submitted. 1 am sure that, in your
wisdom, Sir, and the wisdom of the members of the
Security
Council, it will not be difficult to decide on such
action.
33. The PRESIDENT: I thank Ambassador Tomeh for the
l&d remarks addressed to my country and to me person*
ally.

29. So the background to which I have referred-the fact
that as long ago as 1965 and 1969 the Security Council
adopted resolutions concerning the threat against the
African population by Portugal through its colonies in
Africa-is reminder enough that such a threat continues to
exist. That background is a reminder that the Security
Council should be aware of its responsibility and should
come to the assistance of a Member State when that
Member State submits a complaint.

34. Mr. PAR&I (Somalia): Mr.President, I should like
first of all to associate my delegation with the tribute YOU
have paid to the out-going President, the Ambassador of
Prance, and with your remarks on the successful return of
the Special Mission of this Council from Senegal and on the
remarkable feat that has been recently achieved by the
three American astronauts.

36. Last November the Republic of Guinea was the victim
of a vicious attack by external elements whose purpose was
to overthrow the Government and replace it with dissident
elements, to strike at the leadership and headquarters of the
African Party for the Independence of Guinea (Bissau) and
to free certain foreign prisoners in custody in Guinea. When
the attack took place the President of Guir~a quite
properly acted in accordance with the letter and spirit of
the Charter and referred the matter promptly to this
Council. Fortunately, the Guinean armed forces were able
to contain the invaders and drive them back to the sea. But
the Security Council did not respond as speedily as tire
situation demanded as it took several days before a Special
Mission was sent to investigate the situation.

30. It might be asked whether the two facts reported in
the letter of the representative of Guinea, Ambassador
El-Hadj Tour& of today’s date [S/20280/, and the two
facts of which he informed us concerning imminent attacks
on Conakry and other parts of Guinea, are to be taken
seriously or not. I submit that they ought to be taken
seriously because of what Guinea was subjected to in
November 1970 and the acts of aggressionthat have taken
place since the condemnation by the Security Council of
these acts; Guinea has been and continues to be a target of
attacks by Portugal, as indeed is Senegal-and the Security
Council iS awaiting the report of the Special Mission that
Went to Senegal to investigate the acts of aggression by
Portugal against Senegal.

o\rn
WOI
tliiis
Nnt
effe
%&
1UHi
thei
euta

35. Mr. President, it is a great pleasure for my delegation
to participate in this meeting today under your leadership.
Italy and Somalia have enjoyed a long period of friendship,
a friendship that has helped the Somali people in regaining
its independence and in providing for its national develop
ment. In you, Sir, we have a statesman of eminent qualities.
I am sure that during this month, which promises to be a
busy one, we shall benefit from your vast experience.

“Grave+ concernedtha,! the invasion of the territory of
the Republic of Guinea on 22 and 23 November 1970
from Guinea (Bissau) was carried out by naval and
military units of the Portuguese armed forces,and by the
armed attack against the Republic of Guinea on 27 and
28 November 1970.”

ont

rnilil
ltitvr
SOW
IIICI?,

40. ‘T

lions (
held c
siluatic
behalf

iaid !;I
followi
‘L31
P

’ %h
Rep
COtIll’

37. Today, this Council has received another comrnunicntion from President SCkou Tour& calling attention to
Certain information that his security forces have been able
to intercept which points to the probability of another
attack being launched against Guinea.
38. What do we do? There would certainly be no
justification for ignoring such a serious state of affairs
because the whole history of the region is one of continued
aggression against the people ol’ Guinea and the adjacent
territories of Senegal and of Guinea (Bissau) by a foreign
European Power. The least that the Security Council can do
in response to the urgent complaint of President Se’kou
Tour6 is to demand that the territorial integrity and
Political independence of Guinea are respected and to send
a special representative or representatives to Guinea to
cons& the authorities, ascertain the facts and report back
to this Council on the situation in Guinea.

31. I therefore submit that the Security Council should
meet its responsibilities and face the situation. 1 say that
because we the peoples of Africa and Asia know that
coloniahsm and neocolonialism are facts; they are sad and
tragic facts with which we continue to live. I, a representative of a country that is a member of the Security Council,
have Part of my country occupied by a mercenary
army-not to speak of other Arab countries and of
South-East Asia and other parts of Asia. Therefore, when
we raise-and vigorously-the question of the imminent
danger of imperialism and colonialism, we are not just using
words. These are facts of life with which we ure unfor-tunately faced every day of our lives,

39. when the Guinean problem was brought to the
attention of the Security Council in November last year, I
pointed out in my statement to the Council that:
4

“‘3.

poinfc
Senrril
‘$4.
41. In I

speedis;
Council (
caablc i
spansow
ananimo

“Guinea’s experience will certainly have a radical effect
On the manner in which African States will deal with their
Own security problems. It had been hoped that Africa
wOu1d be spared the necessity of having to provide for
this form of defence; but it is obvious that if the United
Vafions cannot devise machinery to enable it to respond
:ff@Xively and immediately to situations involving acts of
l@ression [or threats to the peace] then its Members will
urQ away from the Organization and devise means for
heir own individual or collective security. This would
lltail the diversion of scarce funds from development to
laitary forces, but if that is the price that African States
ave to pay to maintain their independence and national
‘Vereignty , they are willing to pay that price.” (156Ist
t=e%g, p~rff. 134.1

42. The PRESIDENT: I thank Ambassador Farah for the
generous words he addressed to my country and to me
personally I
43. Mr. ISSRAELYAN (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): Mr. President, the tradition that has recently sprung up in the Security Council
of confining ourselves to very brief congratulation to the
President prevents me from saying all that I would have
liked to say, and could have said, about you. Today, for
instance, Mr. President, we were recalling the fact that after
the Second World War diplomatic relations between the
Soviet Union and Italy were restored earlier than diplomatic relations between Italy and certain other permanent
members of the Security Council. We were happy to note
this fact, but I shall not dwell on such matters and shall
simply wish you success in your work in the important
office of President of the Security Council.

The Afro-Asian members of this Council-the delega1s of Burundi, Sierra Leone, Syria and Somalia-have
I close consultations on this question and feel that the
atian warrants immediate action by the Council. On
aIf of the delegations of Burundi, Sierra Leone, Syria
Somalia, my delegation is privileged to present the
‘wing draft resolution fS/I 02811:

note of the letter addressed to the President of

5 Security Council by the Permanent Representative of
linea /S/1 02801,
‘H’rrving heard the statement made by the Permanent
presentative
of Guinea at the 1573rd meeting of the
nncil,

‘Bearing in mind that all States Members of the United
tions must refrain in their international relations from
threat or use of force against the territorial integrity
political
independence of any State, or in any other
nner inconsistent with the purposes of the United
:ions (Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter),

, 1

! [
: /
:

46. The cable addressed to the President of the Security
Council by the Government of the Republic of Guinea
states that:

r
!

47. In the opinion of the Soviet delegation, the Security
Council must take immediate and urgent measures to
prevent the Portuguese colonialists from carrying out their
aggressive plans. The Security Council has already on more
than one occasion considered the question of Portugal’s
aggressive acts against a number of African States. All
members of the Council still have fresh in their memories
the events connected with Portugal’s aggression against the
Republic of Guinea in November 1970, to which previous
speakers have referred.

1 . Demands that the territorial integrity and political
of Guinea be respected;

2. Decides to send a special representative of the
urity Council to the Republic of Guinea to consult the
lorities and to report on the situation immediately;
3. Decides that this special representative be aplted after consultation between the President of the
lrity Council and the Secretary-General;

48. For the first time in the history of the United Nations,
a mission of five members of the Security Council was sent
at that time, strictly in accordance with the United Nations
Charter, to the place where the aggression had taken place.
With documentary evidence and concrete facts that mission
unmasked the Portuguese aggressors who, as we all know,
had carried out a piratical attack on the capital of the
Republic of Guinea.

1 1 Decides to maintain the matter on its agenda.”
n the view of the sponsors of this draft resolution,
is necessary. Equally important is the fact that this
:iI should have all the necessary facts at its disposal to
: it to deal with the situation properly. The CO,,-- trust that this draft resolution will meet the
nOu~ approval of the Council.

49. After considering the information contained in the
report of the Special Mission, the Security Council, as we
5

I

45. The Security Council has not yet concluded its
consideration of Portugal’s acts of armed provocation
against a sovereign State of Africa, Senegal, and we have
already received information about Portugal’s preparations
for a further act of aggression, this time directed against the
Republic of Guinea.

“ . . . on 2 August 1971, the Intelligence Service of the
Republic of Guinea intercepted conversations between
Overseas Marine Units and two other headquarters units
of the Portuguese Colonial Army discussing an immiaggression by
nent”-I
repeat “imminent’‘-“military
Portugal against the Republic of Guinea.” [See S/10280.]

RecuZ2ing Security Council resolutions 289 (1970) and
1 (1970),
jpendence

, /
i /

44. 1 should also like to take this opportunity to voice the
most cordial feelings of gratitude to your predecessor,
Ambassador Kosciusko-Morizet, the Permanent Representative of France to the United Nations.

rrThe Security Council,
“Taking

j j

independent African States and that effective measures be
taken to make a repetition of such acts of aggression
impossible.

all well know, adopted resolution 290 (1970), in which it
solemnly warned Portugal that “in the event of any
repetition of armed attacks against independent African
States, the Security Council [would] immediately consider
appropriate effective steps or measures in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations”,

55. The Soviet delegation has heard the text of the draft
resolution submitted to the Security Council by the
representative of Somalia on behalf of the Afro-Asian
members of the Security Council-Burundi, Syria, Somalia
and Sierra Leone-and declares that it is ready to support it.

50. One would have thought that this would be sufficient
warning to the Portuguese colonialists, coming as it did
from the highest organ of the United Nations-the Security
Council-to
discourage them from encroaching upon the
sovereignty of independent African States. But it was not
enough, and, as the letter from the Permanent Representative of Guinea shows, it is still not enough. Portugal’s latest
acts have shown that it does not wish to abandon its
encroachment upon the independence of the African
countries bordering on its colonies, in which it is barbarously suppressing the national liberation movement.

56. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of the
Soviet Union for his kind remarks about my country and
myself.
57. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): The draft resolution which I
was privileged to introduce a short time ago was handed to
the Secretariat only shortly before the meeting of the
Council commenced, and for that reason it has not been
possible for the Secretariat to process and translate the
document and have it circulated for representatives to be
able to give it the care and attention which it deserves. For
that reason I would propose that the meeting of the
Council should be suspended until 8 o’clock so as to allow
time for the documents to be circulated and for consultations to take place between the different delegations,
However, it is the hope of the sponsors that the Council
will vote on the draft resolution this evening so that the
action called for in the document will be implemented
without delay.

51. Not only Guinea, but other independent African
States, too, have been subjected to attacks by the Portuguese armed forces. The continual and increasingly frequent
acts of armed provocation by the Portuguese colonialists
against independent African States cannot fail to attract the
close attention of the Security Council. These aggressive
acts are a direct continuation of Portugal’s colonial policy,
which has been condemned by decisions of the United
Nations-a
policy directed towards suppressing national
liberation movements in the Territories under its domination .

58. Mr. ISSRAELYAN (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) [VansEated from Russian): I have listened carefully to
the statement by the representative of Somalia; his remarks
were well founded. However, I should like to put the
matter in the following way: given the urgency of this
question and the need for really rapid action, on the one
hand, and in view of the brevity of the draft resolution, on
the other, we could perhaps take an immediate decision on
the text that has been submitted to us. As far as the Soviet
delegation is concerned, we are ready to do this, despite the
fact that the text has not been translated into one of the
working languages of the Security Council, namely Russian.
If other members of the Security Council share this view,
we could, in accordance with the request of the representative of Guinea, supported by all who have spoken at this
meeting, proceed to a discussion of the draft resolution that
has been submitted. This is the point I should like to make,
that is that we should proceed directly to a vote on the
draft resolution.

52. There can be no doubt that the sovereignty and
security of independent African States, and consequently
peace and security on the African continent as a whole, can
be strengthened only if colonial wars against the African
peoples are halted immediately and if all such peoples are
granted independence without further delay in accordance
with the requirements of the famous Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples.
53. The current state of international relations confirms
once again that imperialism is making use of the Portuguese
colonialists in the Ltruggle against the young African States
and against the national liberation movement. It is for this
reason that Portugal enjoys the protection and support of
the imperialist forces and, in particular, of certain friends
and allies in NATO. This is the explanation for Portugal’s
provocative behaviour on the African continent and its
disregard for United Nations decisions.

59. Mr. BUSH (United States of America): At this point 1
shall waive expressing my feelings of high regard for the
President since it is getting late. I hope that he knows how
my delegation feels about his services as President.

54. The Soviet delegation shares the views expressed by
the representatives of Guinea, Syria and Somalia and
considers that the Security Council should approach this
matter with the greatest seriousness and take immediate
measures to prevent this new act of aggression being
prepared by Portugal against the Republic of Guinea. The
Security Council should demand that Portugal respect the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence
of an African State-the Republic of Guinea. The cause of
peace and security requires that the Portuguese colonialists
receive the punishment they deserve for the piratical policy
they have pursued for many years in relation to the

60. I would strongly urge that the Council agree to the
very thoughtful request of the representative of Somalia. 1
saw this draft resolution for the first time some twenty-five
minutes ago, and we would strongly urge, therefore, that
the Council support Mr. Farah’s courteous request that we
be allowed one hour for consultations.
61. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): I asked for the suspension of
the meeting for one hour because it had been brought to
6

my attention that certain delegations wished to consult the
ce+,ponsors on parts of the draft resolution, and in our
anxiety that we should have unanimity on the draft
resolution the co-sponsors asked for this delay. I trust that
it will not be necessary for a vote to be taken on the
proposal for suspension and that the representative of the
Soviet UnioQ will give us his usual co-operation in the
matter so that we can achieve unanimity on the draft
resolution.

“Decidesthat this specialmissionbe appointed after
consultation between the President of the Security
Counciland the Secretary-General;“.
70. That is the revisedtext of the draft resolution; the
changeshave been madein consultationwith all members
of the Council, and I am assuredby thosemembersthat
they will now be in a position to vote in support of the
draft resolution.

62. Mr. ISSRAELYAN
(Union of Soviet Socialist Repubtics) (tnmslated
jkom Russian): As I understood it, the
representativeof Somalia proposedthat we shouldsuspend
themeeting so that the draft resolution could be translated
into
the other working languages.I would have thought
that the English language was perfectly acceptableto the
United States delegation which does not require other
translations. However, it appearsthat time is neededfor
consultations;if time is neededfor this purpose,we have no
objection to meeting the request of the representativeof
the United States and suspendingthe meeting for the
period of time indicated.
63. The PRESIDENT: I think that we have reached a
happy conclusion in that no one objects to a short recess.
Therefore, we shall meet again at eight o’clock, if not
before. I would say that if it is possiblefor us to meet
before eight o’clock, we should do so in view of the
urgency which has been emphasizedby the representative
of the Soviet Union.
T?zemeeting was suspendedat 7.05p.m. and resumedat
8.05p.m.

71. I shouldlike to add onepoint and that is that if this
resolution is adoptedand the specialmissionis appointed,
it is the hope of the sponsorsthat the Presidentof the
Security Council and the Secretary-General,
betweenthem,
will ensurethat the missionis composedof representatives
of ambassadorial
rank,
72. The PRESIDENT: Meribersof the Councilhave heard
the explanationsgivenby the representativeof Somaliaon
behalf of all the sponsorsof draft resolutionS/10281 and
the amendmentsthat have been madein that draft. Are
there any commentsor requestsfor clarification?
73. Mr. LONGERSTAEY (Belgium)(interpretation from
French): I have a slight grammaticaldifficulty with the
French translationof the text. I believethe first operative
paragraph ought to read: “Affirms that the territorial
integrity and political independenceof the Republic of
Guineashouldbe respected;“.
74. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of
Belgiumfor his observation,and assurehim that it will be
reflectedin the final Frenchtext.

75. Mr. DE LA GORCE (France) (interpretation from
64. The PRESIDENT: The draft resolution has now, I
believe,been circulated in the working languages.The text,
French): On the samepoint, and supportingthe remarks
however, has been amended in someplacesand I would
made by the Ambassadorof Belgium,would it not be
therefore ask the representative of Somalia if he would
clearerto say:
kindly read to the Council the full text with the changes
that have been introduced,
“Affirms that the territorial integrity and political
independenceof the Republic of Guineamust be respected”?
65. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): Draft resolution S/10281 has
been circujated and has been the subject of consultation
I shouldlike to know if the distinguished
Ambassadorof
amongthe various delegationscomposingthis Council. As a
Belgium
agrees
with
this
suggestion.
result of those consultations, the following changeshave
beenmade in the draft resolution.
76. Mr. LONGERSTAEY (Belgium)(interpretation from
French): Certainly.
66. The fourth preambular paragraphhasbeen deleted in
its entirety.
77. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): The
Secretariathas taken note of the remarksmade by the
67. In operative paragraph 1, the word “Demands” has representativeof France and alsoof the agreementof the
beenreplaced by the word ‘iAffirms”,
representativeof Belgium.
68. Operative paragraph 2 hasbeen revised and now reads
asfollows:

78. Mr. FARAH (Somalia):The sponsors
of the resolution
originally used the word “Demands”, but in order to
achieve unanimity on this particular paragraphagreedto
the word ‘Affiirins”, However, in order that the senseof
this paragraphbe retained, it is the hope of the sponsors
that the membersof the Council will accept the words
“must be respected”.

“Decides
to send a specialmissionof three membersof
the Seourity Council to the Republic of Guineato consult
the authorities and to report on the situation immediately;“.

69. Operative
follows:

paragraph 3 has been amendedto read as

79. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): I shouldlike to support the
suggestion
just madeby the representativeof Somaliathat
7

t

the English text read: “must be respected”, because it
corresponds exactly with the French wording “doivent t;tre

A vote was taken by show of hands.

respectkes “.

The draft resolution was adopted unanimously. 2

80. The PRESIDENT: As those changes are accepted by
all the members of the Council, we can now proceed to the
vote on draft resolution S/l 028 1.

The meeting rose at 8.15 p.m.
2 See resolution

295 (1971).

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

United
Notions
publicalionr
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

NATIONS
may
bookstore

[ES

PUBLICATIONS
be obtained
or write

PUBLICATIONS

Les publications
der
dbpositoires
du monde

Notions
entier.

Unier
sont
Informez-vous

Nations

Unier,

des venter,

New

HAH

IlOJlYYHTb

Section

from
bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Notions,
Soles Section,

M3AAHHR

York

DES NATIONS

throughout
New York

UNIES

en vente
dons
les libmiries
et les ogencsr
ouprbs
de votre libroirie
ou odrerrez-vous
b:
ou Gcn&ve.

OPI-AHWBAUHH

06bEAHHEHHblX

HAuHfi

~h~211111rJ O~lrnJlJJ:lnI(nn
@h?~JllJCJJllJ~IS
hr[lJfi
~IOiJillO IipJITh
Il JiIJlIitillJ~JS
mIJ%3J1JJCtX II
illCJJTI’TlllJS
NO IJJ’CS ~MfiOllJLS
~rllpa.
&JnO~JITO
CIIpaIlliIJ
06 JJ:l~~lJlJllX
Jl llJJJJIP31 lilJJJilillOY
Wllra:lllllC
J1.1ll IlIIWI!TC
110 JJ;(l)CCy:
Oprnmmaqw~
O~)~~~JJIJ~JJJJJ~IX IIayrril,
Chi~~rw uo
l.lpO~ti;liC
Il3~allIlir,
&IO-tiOl)Ii
Jl.lII SfCellCIJtL.

CGMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

Los publicocioner
de 10s Naciones
en todor
portes del mundo.
Conrulte
Veniar,
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S.

0.50

DE LAS

NACIONES

Unidar
estZln
a LU librero

(or equivalent

en venta
o diriiare

UNIDAS
en librerias
y cosos distribuidoras
a; Nociones
ltnidar,
Seccibn

in other

currencies)

do

82040-July

1973-2,050
