1674th

United Nations

PLENARY MEEIING

GENERAL

(Opening meeting)

ASSEMBLY

Tuesday, 24 September 1968,
at 3 p.m.

TWENTY-THIRD SESSION

NEW

OtJickzl Records
CONTENTS
Page

Agenda item 1:
Opening of the session by the Chairman of the delegation
of Romania . . . . . . • . . . . . . . . . • . . . . . . . . • . . • •
Agenda item 2:
Minute of silent prayer or meditation

•.•....•..••..

1

Address by Mr. Corneliu Mllnescu, Temporary President,
Chairman of the delegation of Romania ..•.•...•••.•

1

Agenda item 3:
Credentials of representatives to the twenty-third session of
the General Assembly:
(a) Appointment of the Credentials Committee ..••.••

3

Statement by the Temporary President

. _ , ....•••....

3

•..•.••..• , ....•..•...

4

Address by Mr. Emilio Arenales. President of the General
Assembly at its twenty-third sessioll , .•......••....

4

Agenda item 20:
Admission of lIeW Members to the United Nu lions ., .. _ .

7

Agenda item 4:
Election of the President

President: Mr. Emilio ARENALES (Guatemala).
Temporary President: Mr. Corneliu MANESClJ
(Romania).

AGENDA ITEM 1
Opening of the session by the Chairman
of the delegation of Romania
1. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (translated from
French): 1 declare open the twenty-third regular session of
the General Assembly.

I

AGENDA ITEM 2

I

Minute of silent prayer or meditation

I

2. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (translated from
French): I invite representatives to stand and observe one
minute of silent prayer or meditation.

The representatives, standing, obsenlcd a minute's silence.
Address by Mr. Corneliu Manescu, Temporary President,
Chairman of the Romanian Delegation
3. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (translated from
French): Gentlemen, the opening of a new session of the

YORK

General Assembly has always been an occasion which
invites reflections on the current status of international
relations and on the problems confronting our Organization.
4. At its twenty-second session, which completed its work
yesterday, the General Assembly decided-for the first
time-to entrust the Presidency of this lofty forum to a
country belonging to the socialist community, Romania.
The delegations of Member States were all agreed in
recognizing that the significance of this choice went beyond
mere respect for the principle of the rotation of the
Presidency. It was, in fact, an expression of the need for all
countries, regardless of the geograpllical region to which
they belong or their social or political system, to participate
on an equal footing in the functioning of the United
Nations and in the direction of its activities by bringing to
it the particular contribu tion of their personality. At the
same time it was a recognition of the role played by the
socialist countries at the world level and in the work of the
Organization.
S. The socialist States have taken the initiative on many
occasions in the United Nations and have put forward more
than one idea which now forms the basis of important
achievements by the United Nations. The participation of
the socialist countries in actions aimed at eliminating the
colonial system, at bringing about a successful conclusion
to the negotiations on disarmament and at promoting the
principles of international ecoIlomic co-operation, to men·
tion only a few examples, has substantially expanded and
strengthened the work of the Organization, while increasing
its links with the processes of the contemporary world.
Romania steadfastly adheres to the idea of building a
society capable of ensuring the full utilization of the talents
and energ.ies of the people and the many-sided development
of the human personality an idea in which it firmly
believes and to the triumph of which it unceasingly devotes
its energies, and it is in this same spirit that Romania works
within the United Nations.
1

6. It has been all the easier for me scrupulously to observe
the rules of this Organization because the principles of
socialist Romania's foreign policy, which have constantly
guided me, are in perfect accord with the Charter of the
United Nations.
7. If a large number of resoll! tions dealing with problems
of peace and security, the development of economic,
industrial, technical and scientific relations, the elimination
of colonialism and social and humanitarian questions could
be adopted by consensus during the twenty-second session,
this was due to the consistent use of the working methods
indicated by the Charter and to joint actions undertaken in
a spirit of understanding and complete equality of rights.
A/PV.1674

2

General Assembly - Twenty-third Session - Plenary Meetings

8. What is essential in the joint search for solutions to the
problems which concern us is that there should be mutual
respect, that arguments should be weighed with complete
objectivity and in good faith, and that positive results
should be steadfastly pursued.

fundamental aspirations to enjoy decent living conditions,
would be considerably facilitated by the elimination of the
sources of tension which persist in various regions of the
globe.

9. I believe that it is precisely owing to the joint efforts of
States and to the fact that certain proposals to improve its
terms were taken into consideration that it was possible to
draw up the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons as a first step on the road to disarmament and a
starting-point towards eliminating the danger of war and,
first and foremost, the danger of nuclear war.

and the suffering which they entail, crises and conflicts
insatiably consume valuable resources which would be
devoted to progress and well-being.

10. Decisive progress in strengthening the security of all
countries cannot be envisaged unless an end is put to the
growing arms race, and particularly to the nuclear arms
race. It requires the systematic continuation of efforts to
achieve effective disarmament measures and the prohibition
and elimination of atomic weapons. Having become a
condition for the survival of mankind, disannament is a
goal towards which the efforts of all States should be
directed.
11. We are witnessing an historic process the evolution of
which is marked by the vigorous affirmation of the desire
of the peoples to forge for themselves a life of freedom and
dignity, capable of promoting their economic and social
progress in accordance with their own aspirations. After the
Second World War, the configuration of the world was
radically changed as a result of the accession to political
independence of an impressive number of nations. These
transformations have a significance which goes beyond
mere changes in the political map of the world. As a result
of the objective process of the liberation of the peoples
from colonial domination and the affirmation of States
which have acquired their independence, the international
community benefits from the participation of new voices in
the debate on the major problems which now concern
mankind, and the effectiveness and authority of the
solutions adopted are thereby at the same time increased.
12. Of course, the long colonial domination has left
behind it many after-effects which weigh heavily upon the
present international situation.
13. Among these, the phenomenon of underdevelopment,
which affects many countries and areas in various continents, occupies a special place. Underdevelopment-that is,
the condition in which large groups of human beings are
deprived of the benefits and advantages of world science
and technology-appears all the more poignant because the
gap between the developing countries and the economically
advanced countries has a tendency to increase, quantitatively as well as qualitatively.

14. What has so far been accomplished in this extremely
important field is still not enough. The United Nations
must show much greater concern-and this is a particularly
urgent task required of it-for supporting the efforts
undertaken in the economic and social sphere by the
developing States themselves.

15. The solution of this crucial problem, which is closely
linked to the material existence of the peoples and their

16. Apart from the moral stigma which attaches to them

17. Peace is indivisible; the duty of safeguarding and
consolidating it is universal.
18. The existence of conflicts such as those in Viet-Nam
and the Middle East has shown how dangerous is the
persistence of hotbeds of tension which, in their turn, breed
new dangers for mankind.

19. In order to promote the establishment of an atmosphere of trust and understanding which will free mankind
from the perils and disastrous consequences of war, it is
more than ever necessary that the actions of all States and
all Governments should be united in a common effort.
20. For our part, we are convinced that, however complex
and difficult these problems may be, the international
community has a duty to work unremittingly in the search
for lasting and equitable solutions that would ensure a
peaceful course in relations between States. What seems to
us essential is continuity of effort. The international easing
of tension, which is indispensable for the organization of a
lasting peace in the world, involves an untiring search for
areas of general interest and ways that would make it
possible to develop peaceful co-operation between nations
by the concerted action of all States, large and small, in
conditions of equality, on the basis of respect for the
personality and dignity of each nation and by taking into
consideration the interests of each people.
21. A year ago, at the opening of the twenty-second
session [1560th meeting}, I ventured to point out that our
Organization and the work which is being carried out in it
represent a stage in the endless struggle through which
mankind is trying to eliminate force and destruction from
international life and to replace them by standards of
rational conduct and peaceful coexistence.
22. At the end of that session, the work which we have
accomplished together shows once again what laborious and
constan t efforts are reqUired to build and to reinforce the
edifice of international legality.
23. It is an objective necessity that makes indispensable in
relations between States respect for the principles enshrined
in the Charter, namely, independence and national sovereignty, equality of rights and non-interference in domestic
affairs. These prinCiples are basic essentials which embody
the desire of the peoples that law and mutual trust should
preVail in international life. They are also the frame on
which it is possible, in our age, to build lasting relations,
marked by mutual esteem, between all States.
24. The twenty-three years of work of the United Nations
bear witness to the fact that, when these principles have
been respected and sustained efforts have been made to

pT(
COl

act

Na

prc
ach
est:
COL

wi~

ma,

25.
fait
tOil

per:

whi

Hi
sma
vigc
role
the

26.

solu
appi
corn
and
Orgl

Statl
phil(

non
righ1

Chin

unql
furn
the (
depr
coun
Unit,
pres!
nnivl

27.
on t

Easte
Presil
AsseJ
28.
the S
co·o~

perfc
29,

repre
COnst
secor
appn
effor
the v
exter

30.

skilfl
unob

3

1674th meeting - 24 September 1968
promote co-operation among nations through the active
contribution of each and of all, the Organization has
achieved significant results. The strengthening of the United
Nations and the increase in its effectiveness are in direct
proportion to the action taken by all Member States to
achieve the purpose for which the Organization was
established, namely, that of harmonizing the efforts of all
countries to eliminate war from international life and to
wipe ou t anachronisms which are incompatible with the
major imperatives of this century.
25. In order to reach the goals proclaimed in the Charter,
faith in progress and in the irreversible advance of mankind
towards civilization must be kept alive, and firmness and
perseverance must be displayed in removing the obstacles
which hinder the normal course of international relations.
It is our duty, the duty of every Member State, large or
small, to act together to impart to the United Nations the
vigour which it needs in order effectively to fill its proper
role in bringing about an easing of international tension and
the development of co-operation among nations.
26. If the United Nations is to be able to promote lasting
solutions, it is particularly important to perceive and
appraise with clear-sightedness the Organization's shortcomings which prevent it from fully accomplishing its task,
and to take resolute action to eliminate them. Our
Organization must provide a framework in which all the
States of the world, irrespective of social system or
philosophical ideas, make a direct contribution to the
normalization of international Hfe. The fact that the lawful
rights in the United Nations of the People's Republic of
China, whose place and role in international life are
unquestionable, have so far not been restored, and the
further fact that a number of other States are kept out of
the Organization, affect the work of the United Nations by
depriVing it of the active support of the peoples of those
countries. We are convinced that it is in the interest of the
United Nations, and of increasing its effectiveness and its
prestige in the world, to ensure in the first place its
universality based on the realities of the modern world.
27. In conclusion, I would ask you to allow me to express,
on this occasion, my warmest thanks to the group of
Eastern European States which nominated Romania to the
Presidency of the twenty-second session of the General
Assembly.
28. At the same time I should like to thank most cordially
the States of the other geographical groups for the spirit of
co-operation they have displayed, thus facilitating the
performance of the duties entrusted to me.
29. I wish to express my deep gratitude to all the
representatives for the efforts they have made to give
constructive consideration to the problems of the twentysecond session of the General Assembly and to find
appropriate solutions. The summarized expression of these
efforts lies in the resolutions adopted during the session,
the value of which, as in other instances, truly reflects the
extent of the work devoted to their elaboration.
30. In appraising these activities, one cannot overlook the
skilful assistance of those who, working together in an
unobtrusive way, have perfonned a variety of tasks here at

the United Nations, and who call see their efforts reflected
in each of the results which have been obtained.
31. I should like to express once again my feelings of
highest consideration for the Secretary-General U Thant,
whose ability, spirit of understanding and straightfOlward·
ness we have had occasion to admire throughout our work
at the United Nations.
32. The session which we have opened today is called
upon to continue the actions so far taken by the United
Nations to strengthen the ideas of peace and justice in the
world and to mark a further milestone on the road towards
the creation of an international climate in which the
resources of all States can be mobilized for the purposes of
creative activity in the service of man and of the advancement of human society.
33. Romania, which participates with confidence and
interest in the work of the United Nations, will continue, so
far as its means allow and on the basis of the principles on
which it has founded its foreign policy, to support the
United Nations, in the belief that the Organization has an
increased role to play in accomplishing the noble task of
developing co·operation among nations and building a
world of peace and confidence among States.

AGENDA ITEM 3

Credentials of representatives to the twenty-third session of
the General Assembly:
(a) Appointment of the Credentials Committee
34. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (translated from
French): In accordance with rule 28 of the rules of
procedure, at the beginning of each session the General
Assembly must appoint, on the proposal of the President, a
Credentials Committee consisting of nine members. I
propose that for the twenty-third regular session the
Credentials Committee should consist of the following
Member States: Austria, Brazil, Costa Rica, Liberia, Mongolia, New Zealand, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Republic of Tanzania, and the United
States of America.
35. If there are no objections, I shall take it that these
countries are hereby appointed members of the Credentials
Committee.
It was so decided.

Statement by the Temporary President
36. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (translated (ronl
French): I wish to draw the attention of Members of the
Assembly to documents A/7237 and A/7238.
37. Document A/7238 contains a letter addressed to me
by the Secretary-General informing the Assembly that one
Member State is "in arrears in the payment of its
contribution to the United Nations regular bUdget within
the terms of Article 19 of the Charter".
38 Document A/7237 contains a letter from the Permanent Representative of the Member State concerned, in

4

General Assembly - Twenty-third Session - Plenary Meetings

which he requests that his State be permitted to particip~te
in the voting and he refers to certain circu~stances. wh~ch
indicate that the failure of his State to pay Its contnbutlOn
is due to reasons beyond the control of that Member State.

39

In this connexion I draw the attention of Members of

th~ Assembly to the s~con d sentence of Article 19 of the

43. I invite Mr. E~io Arenales to come to the rostrum
and assume the PresIdency of the General Assembly.

sincerity, t1
congratulat
the Genera
representee

Mr. Emilio Arenales toole the Chair.

Address by Mr. Emilio Arenales, President of the
General Assembly at its twenty-third session

48. This I,
pay our tr
gable, ideal
as head of
likewise a!
administraJ
humble, si]
and neces£
informatiol
fOf, as we

Charter, which states:
"The General Assembly may, nevertheless, permit such
a Member to vote if it is satisfied that the failure to pay is
due to conditions beyond the control of the Member."
40. On the basis of the letter contained in document
A/7237 from which it appears that the failure to pay was
due to conditions beyond the control of the Member State
concerned the Assembly may wish to permit that Member
to vote u~der the second sentence of Article 19 of the
Charter, pending the advice of the Committee on Contributions with reference to rule 161 of the rules of
procedure. If no one has any comments, I shall take it that
the Assembly agrees to that suggestion.

It was so decided.

AGENDA ITEM 4
Election of the President
41. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (translated from
French): I now invite Members of the General Assembly to
proceed to the election of the President of the twenty-third
regular session of the General Assembly. In accordance with
rule 94 of the rules of procedure, the election will be held
by secret ballot.

A t the invitation of the Temporary President,
Mr. Schuurmans (Belgium) and Mr. Boiko (Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic) acted as tellers.
A Jlote was taken by secret ballot.
Number of ballot papers:
invalid ballots:
Number of valid ballots:
Abstentions:
Number ofMembers voting:
Required majority:
Number of votes obtained:
Mr. Emilio Arenales (Guatemala)
Mr. Benites (Ecuador)
Mr. Pifiera (Chile)

123
1
122

1
121
61

119
1
1

Having obtained the required majority, Mr. Emilio
Arenales (Guatemala) was elected President of the twentythird session ofthe General Assembly.
42. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (tramlated from
French): I extend my most sincere congratulations to His
Excellency, Mr. Emilio Arenales, and it is with great
pleasure that I pass the responsibilities of this high office
into his capable hands.

44. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): I offer
you my profound thanks for this election, which represents
for Guatemala and myself not only a very high honour, but
also a privileged opportunity to be of service, in so far as
the historical circumstances, your wishes and my modest
abilities permit.

45. With the permission of the representatives, I should
like to improvise at this point of my speech a few words of
special thanks to the group of Latin-American nations
which supported my candidature for the Presidency of this
session of the General Assembly. Words fail me to express
how grateful I am to everyone and how deeply and
sincerely I appreciate the support that was given to my
candidature, proposed by Costa Rica, until it was announced by the group on 8 November oflast year.
46. This lofty office with which you have invested me
carries with it obligations, opportunities anit responsibilities
which are of the greatest importance for international
problems, but which can also at times be modest in scope,
such as the task of presiding over debates, the administration of this august parliament and the diplomacy which
can be carried on behind the scenes bya President of the
Assembly with the help of the Secretariat and the goodwill
of delegations. These traditional functions will continue to
preoccupy and keep busy the President of the Assembly.
But, in addition to them, at the same time or at other
times, the President of the Assembly will always be
available to collaborate with the Secretary-General in the
highly delicate matters of world diplomacy which may
require his attention or participation.
47. Before putting forward certain considerations regarding the United Nations, I should like to fulfil the pleasant
duty of paying the warmest tribute to Mr. Corneliu
Mlmescu, Minister for Foreign 'Affairs of Romania who,
until a moment ago, held the office of President of the
General Assembly. This tribute is not a matter of protocol
or tradition but a sincere expression of feeling based on
reliable reports which I have received-to the accuracy of
which my hearers can testify better than anyone else-that
President Manescu has discharged admirably the functions
of his high office, doing honour to the illustrious tradition
of the Presidents of the General Assembly and devoting to
the Organization, particularly the Assembly, the most
meticulous and careful attention, while at the same time
displaying the utmost courtesy towards his collaborators,
towards the Secretariat, and towards the representatives to
this world parliament. It gives me special pleasure to think
that the first President elected from the socialist group of
nations, happily accepted in accordance with resolution
1990 (XVIII) of the General Assembly, has so worthily
communicated the message of culture and civilization of
those European nations. The applause with which all of us
here expressed our appreciation of President Manescu a few
momen ts ago is irrefutable proof, in the thunde r of its very

,•~:::O;':

mation me

I and would

j 49. The t

II
I

I

which we
world circl
appropriat(
the items'
the agenda
Committee
a referenc·
questions'
prejudging
Assembly
President (
should be
particular!)
internation
statesman,
from losinl
and is man
diverse co'
this is nee
real or im
injustice.' J
the natiOJ
communit

50. The 1
responded
the Secon
the Gove
founded v
act of fa:
years the
surely, wl
the rectif
longyean

51. It is
as the Ai
faith and

into the
Member:

52. Thif
the Unit(
were the

'J!0;"c'i' ,"" :~

,,

1674th meeting - 24 September 1968
sincerity, that these sentiments of gratitude, admiration and
congratulation are shared by all the delegations making up
the General Assembly and, indeed, by all those present or
represented here.
48. This leads me, with equal sincerity and spontaneity, to
pay our tribute to the Secretary·General for his indefatigable, idealistic and disinterested endeavours in his capacity
as head of the permanent organ of the United Nations. We
likewise applaud all his collaborators, from the highest
administrative levels to those which are seemingly the most
humble, since all of them are carrying out a co-operative
and necessary function. Our thanks go likewise to the
information media (the press, radio, fIlms and television),
for, as we said in our statement at the close of the Third
Extraordinary Inter-American Conference held at Buenos
Aires from 15 to 27 February 1967, without the infor·
mation medIa the work of the statesman would be sterile
and would not reach the people.
49. The twenty-third session of the General Assembly
which we are opening today begins in highly dramatic
world circumstances. It does not seem either necessary or
appropriate for the President of the Assembly to refer to
the items with which this session will deal, firstly because
the agenda itself has not yet been approved by the General
Committee and the plenary Assembly and secondly because
a reference by the President to the substance of the
questions with which we shall have to deal would mean
prejudging their content and prejudicing the actions of this
Assembly or its President. This does not mean that the
President of the Assembly or the Assembly itself can or
should be indifferent to the extremely grave problems,
particularly those involving violence, which appear on the
international scene. Moreover, one of the main tasks of the
statesman or politician is to keep the people or the peoples
from losing hope. It is deplorable that violence has emerged
and is manifesting itself in the most varied ways in the most
diverse countries and communities. I do not believe that
this is necessarily caused by the absence of change, or by
real or imagined problems of economic, social or political
injustice. Rather it seems to me that violence emerges on
the national or the international scene when peoples,
communities, nations or Governments lose hope.
50. The United Nations was founded on 26 June 1945. It
responded to a longing for peace, justice and progress which
the Second World War had engendered in the nations and
the Governments of the earth. The Organization was
founded with great hopes, and its very establishment was an
act of faith. Nevertheless, in the course of twenty.three
years the hope of the peoples has been fading slowly but
surely, while today young people are calling for the deeds,
the rectifications and the justice for which the world has so
long yearned.
51. It is my hope that this Assembly may be remembered
as the Assembly' of reconsideration and rectification. New
faith and hope, but also greater dynamism, must be infused
into the United Nations. This is the task which confronts
Member States and their delegations represented here.
52. This leads me to put forward a few basic reflections on
the United Nations, its potentialities and limitations, which
were the subject of statements made by me in this world

5

forum in the past but which it may be appropriate to
repeat, not only because their message remains valid, not
only because the disturbing situations to wWch I have
referred still weigh on men's minds, perhaps even more
heavily, but because the words of a President of the
Assembly undoubtedly command much wider attention
than did those of a representative from a small country in
previous years.
53. The scepticism about the effectiveness of the United
Nations which made its appearance many years ago has
increased in the more recent past. The United Nations is
regarded as an elegant annual parliament, at which representatives and delegations .far removed from the realities and
problems of the world believe they are solving them with
resolutions drafted in a very special way which always
permits two or three or more interpretations, but which do
not in fact remedy the evils and situations to which those
resolutions refer. This scepticism and the basis for it are
undeniable and justified to a large extent. Nevertheless,
there are at least two fundamental reasons which sJlOuld
lead us to ponder and revise our opinions, or perhaps our
actions, before conderrming the Organization.
54. Firstly, let us remember that after the Second World
War the United Nations was founded in response to the
anguish of mankind over the gigantic holocaust of the
Second World War and the enormous hardships which it
brought to millions of individuals, to so many homes and
communities and so many nations of the world. As always,
an attempt was made to fmd a scapegoat to blame for the
Second World War. It was not enough to talk of Nazifascism and its leading representatives; it was necessary to
go deeper and to determine what made Nazi-fascism
possible, what made it possible for the. internationaJ
political disequilibrium to degenerate into a war, what was
tile reason, finally why the old League of Nations was
unable to control the situation. Without 118ving to verify
the assertions that were made, it was thought that, by
restoring an international juridical order of co-existence, it
would be possible to eliminate the danger of war and war
itself.
55. Not only was such an attempt made, but it was
proclaimed throughout the length and breath of the earth,
persuading the peoples of the world that the promised era
of a better world in which peace, understanding, equity and
justice would reign was beginning. And the peoples of the
world believed this, as did also, perhaps, many of the
founders who signed the Charter of the United Nations at
San Francisco,' California. Unfortunately, in the last
twenty-three year's we have fIlled libraries with resolutions,
stUdies, reference books, commentaries, legal provisions,
etc., but we have not succeeded in ensuring that there is
always equity and justice in international relations or that
such relations are conducted in an atmosphere of respect
and peace. It is unnecessary, and certainly undesirable, to
quote examples; but it does seem essential to point out that
the founders of the United Nations never had in mind the
establishment of a super-State. The same concern which
continues to exist today regarding our national sovereignty
and our international sovereignty made the founders of the
United Nations conceive a system of a world parliament,
not a super-State, but a parliament with many limitations.
Naturally, if it were a question of using force, the great

6

General Assembly - Twenty·third Session - Plenary Meetings

Powers would not wish to be victims of the dogma of the
legal equality of States and would not wish to find
themselves obliged by a majority vote of small countries to
involve the world in a third holocaust. They therefore
entrusted the most delicate decisions on enforcement to a
Council which they called the Security Council, in which
they also established a veto system, the only juridical
procedure which made it acceptable and possible for the
great Powers to yield part of their sovereignty to a great
parliament of nations which in population and power might
be large, medium-sized, small or tiny. For those who
criticize the veto as anti·democratic, it should be pointed
out that what is wrong is not the use but the abuse of the
veto, that without it the United Nations would not exist,
and that from a democratic point of view it would be
equally objectionable to permit a veto by nations with less
than 5 million inhabitants to bind Powers with 200, 400 or
800 million inhabitants. If the mathematical principle
which identifies the will of the majority with democratic
procedures is correct, it is no less certain that for a century
and a half human ingenuity has been seeking, finding and
devising formulas for parliamentary representation which
have taken into account at times territorial systems, at
times proportional representation systems and at times
mixed systems.
56. To conclude my remarks on this point I should simply
like to state that the weaknesses or limitations of the
United Nations are not those of a body with an independent life of its own; they are not attributable to a
super-State, but are the direct and unavoidable responsibility of the States which founded the United Nations, of
the Governments which now belong to it, and of those who
make up those Governments and their delegations.
57. This leads me to a second reflection on the United

Nations as important as or more so than the first, and
perhaps similar in origin: if the United Nations is not a
super-State, if this world parliament is not equivalent to
national parliaments, inasmuch as its resolutions, even if
unanimous, are no more than mere recommendations to
sovereign national States, if all this is so, then we cannot
ask the United Nations to solve by itself, as a body apart,
the problems of war and peace, the problems of underdevelopment and justice in international relations, and so
on. It is for the Governments of Member States to do in the
national sphere what they propose in the international
forum. A United Nations resolution has no validity or
effect if it is not implemented at the national level, All this
is connected with the modern technology of international
organizations. There is a conscious or unconscious trend
which is to be encountered in practice daily, and inevitably,
in all international organizations now operating: the failure
to define or co-ordinate an international policy linked to
the potential of human and budgetary resources means that
the delegations of Member States to the United Nations,
the specialized agencies and other intergovernmental organizations are detached from reality, and from all the
Governmen ts likewise, as far as human and financial
potential is concerned. In such circumstances, it is a logical
and inevitable phenomenon that the establishment of new
international organizations should be called for, that the
creation of new international projects should be advocated
and that the international life of States should be choked
with a flood of excessive pressures and demands on their

limited resources. But unfortunately that is not all:
Governments, and particularly those of small States, are
also unable to apply at the national level the infinitely
lllultiplying results of the work of international organizations, conferences and committees. This, which also
happens in the United Nations, can lead not only to
scepticism but to the actual failure of an international
organization, and, what is worse, to the failure of a concept
concerning the intelligent and ethical structure of relations
between States.
58. It may be that the massive bureaucracies of the more
powerful Govemments, of the nations with greater human
and financial resources, make it possible to pay intelligent
attention to all these bodies. It may be also that these vast
bureaucracies with large resources can deal with all the
resolutions proposed and adopted by these organizations
and can carry them out at the national level. But
unfortunately this is not so for the majority of States
Members of the United Nations, which are precisely those
that are most in need of these resolutions, of these pl'Ojects,
of the solution of these problems, whether they be
problems of under-development, of economics, of social
justice or of peaceful and constructive relations. This is
what arouses scepticism bu t, unfortunately, can also lead to
the failure of our Organization. It is precisely incumbent on
the sceptics, on those who criticize the ineffectiveness of
this international system, on the small countries which
most vociferously propose international organizations or
resolutions, to re·examine their own national consciences,
the policies of their own countries in regard to international
matters and the need to recognize the limitations of the
human and financial resources of most of our nations-this
last being a phenomenon which is unfortunately tending to
become universal under the pressure of inevitable international economic circumstances.
59. Only in this way can we stop deceiving ourselves by
believing that problems are solved through the arduous
negotiation of resolutions when, in fact, those resolutions
are rarely complied with or carried out at the national level
and, what is worse, rarely mean the same thing for all the
parties to a dis pute.
60. It would be unpardonable for a President of the
Assembly not to refer to what constitutes 85 per cent of
the efforts of our Organization, with achievements that are
less spectacular but more certain and lasting: the problems
of economic development and social change, which are the
field of action of the Economic and Social Council and the
specialized agencies of the United Nations, have confIrmed
once again in the past year that it is possible to build and to
advance in spite of the setbacks, vicissitudes and frustrations, and in spite of the political instability and social
agitation which are simultaneously appearing in so many
parts of the world, We know that in problems of world
trade the structure of economic interdependence sometimes
does not allow the political will to have its way, however
favourable it may be; but we are convinced that that
political will, in the long run, will assert itself, firstly to
change the structure of interdependence and secondly to
enable decisions to be taken which will rectify the
regrettable tendency towards an ever-increasing rate of
progress in the developed countries and a lower rate of
growth in the less developed countries. Let us not forget,

however, tll
taken and c
even interna
have so oftel

61. As I arr
work of the
gratification
Justice, with
for the first
befits the cc
faceted actio

62. Perhaps

in paraphase

and to bear

IE::!:n~:~
i' Nations and

f organization,

of the Charl
coexistence,
standards of
sophy.

63. One las
impatient, fOI
tence Or rela
not forget th[
international
bring about
twenty-three
Nations was ir

64. In conch
United NatioJ
might paraphl
and bear in mi

"East is ea
And here i

Adrnissio~

65. The PR}
cordance with
now like to :iJ
20 of the pro
Members to 1
has been ap]
independent ~
Security Cour
opportunity,
tlIeir requests,
the session. If
manner.
It was so de,

66. The PR
Security COUl

I. ~1i1h meeting -

--------------however, that these decisions, to be effective:, must be
taken and carried out at the national level, and that not
even international resolutions can solve the problems which
have so often been raised and discussed.
r
r

f

I

I
!
1:

I

~,

f

~;

I

I

61. As I am referring to other aspects of the international
work of the United Nations, I should like to record our
gratification at the fact that the International Court of
Justice, without prejudice to its political independence, has
for the first time made a report to the United Nations, as
befits the co-ordination which should exist in the manyfaceted action of this complex of international structures.
62. Perhaps the international moment has come to recall
in paraphase a memorable thought of President Kennedy
and to bear in mind that we should not ask the United
Nations, as an entity apart from ourselves, what it can do
for its Member States, but rather we should ask the Member
States and their peoples what they can do for the United
Nations and for its principles. What is needed is not a new
organization, what is needed is simply a return to the spirit
of the Charter, a retum to those principles of human
coexistence, international as well as national, that are the
standards of a respectable, humanist and political philosophy.
63. One last remark for all those who are sincerely
impatient, for all those who feel frustrated by the impotence or relative impotence of the United Nations. Let us
not forget that the use of force in highly sensitive areas of
international affairs, even through the United Nations, can
bring about precisely that third world war which for
twenty·three years we have avoided and which the United
Nations was in fact founded to prevent.
64. In conclusion, and as a vindication of the organs of the
United Nations and their indefatigable work, perhaps we
might paraphrase again, this time one of Kipling's verses,
and bear in mind that:
"East is east and West is west
And here the twain have met."

AGENDA ITEM 20

Admission of new Members to the United Nations
65. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): In accordance with the procedure followed in the past, I should
now like to invite the General Assembly to consider item
20 of the provisional agenda, entitled: "Admission of new
Members to the United Nations". This special procedure
has been applied previously in order to give recently
independent States which have been recommended by the
Security Council for membership of our Organization the
opportunity, if the General Assembly acts favourably on
their requests, to participate from the outset in the work of
the session. If there is no objection, we shall proceed in tius
manner.

It was so decided.
66. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): The
Security Council has unanimously recommended that the

24 September 1968

7

General Assembly should admit Swaziland to membership
of the United Nations. The Council's recommendation has
been circulated as document A/7231. In this connexion, a
draft resolution (A/L,547 and Add.!) has been submitted
for consideration by the Assembly. May I consider that the
General Assembly decides to accept the recommendation of
the Security Council and to adopt by acclamation the draft
resolution admitting Swaziland to membership of the
United Nations? If there is no objection, it shall be
regarded as adopted.

The draft resolution was adopted by acclamation (resolution 2376 (XXIII)).
67. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): I declare
Swaziland admitted to membership of the United Nations.

The delegation of Swaziland was escorted to its place in
the General Assembly Hall.
68. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): On behalf of the General Assembly, I am very happy to give a
warm welcome to Swaziland as a Member of the United
Nations. I convey to its Government and people the sincere
congratulations of the Assembly on this happy occasion,
together with our best wishes for the future.
69. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): Mr. President,
let me start by saying that I am happy to be the first to
congratulate you on your election as our President. We are
fortunate that our proceedings will be directed by a Foreign
Minister equally distinguished in politics and in the law.
You have the rare additional qualification of haVing already
demonstrated your devotion to international understanding
and international co·operation, both by your earlier service
in UNESCO in Paris and by your previous service in the
United Nations in New York.
70. We welcome you not only for your personal and
national qualifications; we also welcome you as a representative of all the States of Latin America.
71. Permit me to say that, in recent years, there has been
no more striking development at the United Nations than
the rapidly increasing collective influence of those States.
That growing influence has been due to three factors: the
devotion of the States of Latin America to principle; their
belief in the rule of law; and their unity in action. We salute
you as a worthy representative of those virtues.
72. I also wish to speak in gratitude and admiration to our
retiring President, Foreign Minister MAnescu. To him I can
say no more than this: that none of us will forget the
privilege of serving under a President so upright, so elegant
and so outstanding. A number of us had the pleasure, only
a few months ago, to visit his country on United Nations
duty. Having done so, we can more readily understand how
well he represents a people who combine in such admirable
degree the qualities of courtesy, constancy and courage.
73. Today my duty is indeed a happy one. I rejoice to be
able to welcome the new State of Swaziland to this world
Assembly. I rejoice, too, to welcome amongst us the Prime
Minister of Swaziland. It is a proud day for him. He comes
to respond to the welcome of the world. He comes to raise

8

General Assembly - Twenty-third Session - Plenary Meetings

the flag of his country in national dignity and international
equality. He has a right to be proud, for his own
perseverance and his own judgement and his own wisdom
have signally contributed to the result we all celebrate here
today. When he returns to his country, he will carry the
congratulations and sincere good wishes of us all. He can
well do so with a sense of both patriotic and personal
achievement.
74. When I sponsored in the Security Council Swaziland's
application for membership, I reminded the Council that
Swaziland was the last of seventeen African countries
previously under British administration to attain independence. We come to the end of that road today. And it
has been a well-trodden road, a high road which has already
been trodden by many more than a hundred million
Africans. We can reflect today that, in the seventeen
countries of which I speak, and in less than a quarter of a
century, more than a third of the population of the whole
continent of Africa has advanced on this road, the road
through enfranchisement to sovereignty. It is to that
revolutionary transformation that Swaziland has made its
honourable contribution. I have no doubt that the new
Member we now welcome will faithfully fulfil the obli·
gations of the United Nations.
75. We all join in our confident hope that Swaziland will
fulm its destiny in peace and in harmony and in increasing
prosperity.
76. Mr. MOHALE (Lesotho): Mr. President, on behalf of
the Government and people of Lesotho, my delegation
welcomes you and congratulates you on your accession to
the Presidency of the General Assembly at its twenty.third
session. We recall with pleasure the outstanding efforts of
your distinguished predecessor who laboured unswervingly
in bringing about a better political climate among the
peoples of the world. This was a tribute to his personal
qualities as well to the country which he represented. He
played a preponderant role at the twenty-second session of
the General Assembly, especially in diminishing tensions
between the great Powers.
77. My delegation assures you, Mr. President, of its
co-operation. We rely on your diligent leadership to ensure
that the Assembly will successfully find solutions for the
problems confronting the world today, problems which
continue to threaten international peace and security.
78. Although the admission of a new Member to the
United Nations is by now not a novel occurrence in the
annals of this Organization, I feel that there is indeed
something particularly instructive in the admission of the
Kingdom of Swaziland as the 125th Member of this body.
It is instructive in so far as it is a tribute to the fundamental
respect paid by the people and Government of the United
Kingdom to those basic principles of justice and humanity
which, over the centuries, have remained the highest
adornment of Western philosophical tradition.
79. While we do not ignore the base motivations of
colonialism, nor quickly forget its degradation of the
human personality, honesty compels us to recognize that it
was primarily in terms of our appeal to the fundamental
tenets of that same philosophical tradition, based on

natural law, that the colonial Power relinqUished its
control.
80. At a time in history when the nakedness of power so
frequently surfaces in defiance of the laws of humanity and
the international community, the voluntary withdrawal of
the United Kingdom from its last colonial possession in
Africa, save Rhodesia, is worthy of remark. This respect
paid to the legitimate, natural and political rights of a small
but determined people has surely enhanced and strength.
ened the moral fibre of the entire international community,
since every such victory of political emancipation gives
greater reality to the underlying principles of the United
Nations Charter and moves us to the universal conception
of this Organization which its founders envisaged.
81. Situated in a part of the world where the complexity
of human relations challenges the mind of the most
politically astute, Swaziland can be expected to contribute
to the resolution of these issues, not in tenus of any
political or military force but purely in tenus of its own
legacy and national aspirations. The presence of Swaziland
in the councils of the United Nations will thus further
ensure the advance of the international community towards
its common goals.

82. It is my very special privilege, as this month's
Chairman of the Commonwealth States, to extend this
formal welcome to the Kingdom of Swaziland. As the
twenty-eighth member of the Commonwealth, Swaziland
joins a community which has fortunately survived the
unreasonable extremes of modern nationalism and stands as
monument to man's capacity to overcome the limitations
of race, language and culture, in pursuit of goals more in
keeping with the real interests of mankind.
83. On behalf of our own Government and of the people
of the Kingdom of Ulsotho, we take special pride in seeing
Swaziland, as the last of the former High Commission
Territories, achieve independence. Swaziland is linked in
spirit with the Republic of Botswana and my own country,
not only in terms of our common colonial experience,
previous administrative bonds and common perils to our
national existence, but through a determination to seek
what was legitimately our own, namely, the status of free
and independent peoples. Having struggled so long and so
patiently to achieve this goal against what frequently
seemed to be insurmountable odds, I can predict with
confidence that an independence so costly to achieve will
not be sacrificed.
84. We extend to His Majesty King Sobhuza II and the
Swazi people our sincere congratulations on an effort well
completed. We trust that the tenacity of the Swazi nation
in pursuit of national independence will now be exercised
in building up and strengthening this Organization as it
labours to create a true world community.
85. Mr. BALL (United States of America): As the repre·
sentative of the United States, I express our admiration, our
gratitude, indeed our tribute, to two illustrious statesmen,
both Foreign Ministers of their countries, the Presidents of
the General Assembly at its twenty·second and twentythird sessions.

t

~
(

V
s
Y
i1
k
tl
Y

C

n

a
A
le
ye
F
la
!l<

hI
di
cc
of

o
A
di
C

1674th meeting - 24 September 1968
86. With regard to the eminent Foreign Minister of
Romania, Mr. Mlinescu, who relinquished his Presidency at
the end of the twenty-second session yesterday, I can add
very ltttle to what my colleagues from the United States,
my predecessors, have already, on more than one occasion,
said about him. I can add only my own testimony to his
remarkable diplomatic ability and to the grace, the impartiality and the integrity with which he has presided over
this body during the eventful year just passed. He has
brought enduring credit to his country and to himself.

1

f

I

r
!

r r

1

d
r
Is

's
is
le ~
i
d
i
le

,

IS
IS

n

le
Ig
In

in

y,
e,
J[

:k
~e

;0

Iy
Ih

ill

le
~I

m
:d

it

t·
UI1

n,
if

y,

r
~;

:1'

87. Now, at the outset of this twenty-third session, the
General Assembly has turned for leadership from the Old
World to the New, from Europe to the Western Hemisphere, to choose you, Sir, as its next President. Obviously,
you find this Assembly a warm and familiar environment. It
is fIlled with your friends and your admirers. You have
known the international community for many years, and
they have known you, Sir, with respect and affection in
your various capacities: as a valued contributor to the
cultural and intellectual work of UNESCO; as the Permanent Representative of Guatemala to the United Nations; as
a gifted Committee chairman at past sessions of the General
Assembly; as President of the Trusteeship Council; and as a
leader in the Latin American Group. For the past two
years, you have served with distinction as your country's
Foreign Minister. We know you also as a learned and able
lawyer-a profession which, for quite personal reasons, I
hold in special esteem; an ennghtened man, a man of
humane instincts. All these qualities have earned you that
distinction which is now yours and they will, I am
confident, enable you to add new lustre to the high office
of President of the General Assembly.
88. I extend to you, Mr. President, the congratulations
and good wishes of my Government and of the United
States delegation. We shalt give you our goodwill; we shall
give you our best efforts as you perform the arduous task
you are now undertaking, and I am confident that the skill
and dedication that you bring to your office will assist all
of us, the hopeful, anxious, yet determined Members of this
Assembly, to forget our past antagonisms, to transcend our
differences and to advance together the high aims of the
Charter.
89. And now let me say a few words which, on behalf of
my Government, I am most happy to say. The accession of
Swaziland to independence on 5 September marked one
further step in one of the most glorious achievements of
history-the adventurous passage of a thousand million
people, one third of the human race, from colonial
dependence to equal, independent and self-respecting status
in the family of nations-an event, an achievement, that was
accomplished with relatively little bloodshed in view of its
consequence, with relatively little social and economic
dislocation, and all within the fantastically short time-span
of a quarter-century. As was the case with other countries
that have taken this giant forward stride, Swaziland has
promptly applied for membership in the United Nations,
fully aware of all the rights and all the responsibilities
which tllat entails. The United States has supported this
application, and we are pleased indeed that the Assembly
has now unanimously given its approval.
90. We warmly congratulate the leaders and the people of
Swaziland, as we also congratulate the United Kingdom.

9

This is, it seems to us, further proof of the enliglltene d and
creative role Britain has played in the peaceful adaptation
of the world community to the requirements and realities
and spirit of the twentieth century. And though it may
appear as a parochial comment, I cannot avoid noting that
the British approach to the problems of colonialism has
remarkably improved over the last 192 years.
91. As an independent nation, determined to advance the
condition of its people and to make its own way in this
turbulent world, Swaziland wm not always find the road
easy; it will not always fmd progress without its costs and
confusions. But its national assets are sufficient 10 justify
an extremely encouraging prognosis. It can, first of all,
count on the leadership of an enlightened monarch, King
Sobhuza I1, the talents of a gifted people with a will to
progress, a rich endowment of natural resources, and a
continuing fruitful relationship with the United Kingdom
and the Commonwealth. And we can all be sure that
another important asset will prove to be the goodwill and
friendship which Swaziland will find among the Members of
the United Nations.
92. Thus, on behalf of the American people 1 extend every
good wish to the newest Member of the United Nations, the
Kingdom of Swaziland.
93. Mr. PINERA (Chile) (translated from Spanish): First
of all I should like to welcome the newly elected President
of this session of tile General Assembly, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Guatemala, Mr. Emilio Arenales, a
representative of a sister Republic and of one of the o!dest
civilizations in the world, that of the Mayan people, a
people which today, by its own efforts and by assuming its
own responsibilities, is setting an example of what a
so-called under-developed country can achieve. That is
because the qualities and the strength of the people, in the
world which some people refer to as being in process of
development, are the only things able to help them work
out their own paths_ You, Sir, in taking up your post,
worthily and sagaciously represent the international community and, therefore, on behalf of the people and
Government of Chile, I welcome you as one welcomes a
well·loved brother.
94. If I may be allowed, I should like to recall the very
simple, but deeply felt, words of the President of the
twenty-second session of the General Assembly, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Romania, Mr. Corneliu Mi1nescu,
who brought very definite qualities io his Presidency. He
was above all a true comrade of all representatives, and we
know what the feeling of comradeship means. Although
this is a great deal, he was something more. In making his
last statement to us, he reminded us of something that is
not often heard in this house: he spoke to us about the
developing world-and he is a European; he spoke about
peace in justice and he spoke in simple words, which on
that account were great, about what the United Nations
represented; he did not speak about himself or about his
Presidency. He reminded us-and I shall take the liberty of
making a small comment-that all of us here desire what is
called the East-West detente. He also reminded us of the
under-developed world-so, I think, I can interpIet
him-when he referred to the other factor ihat exists in the
world for the detente: the north-south factor, the relations

10

General Assembly - Twenty-third;'

between the powerful, which are generally in the North,
and the weaker, which are found in the South. This
participation of North and South in the detente means, for
my delegation, two simple concepts: the principle of
respect for the less powerful on the part of the great and
true international co-operation between the more powerful
and the less developed, in a direction that leads to the
progress of mankind. For the detente to be achieved, it
must be between East and West, and between N(Jrth and
South; it must be world-wide. That is "lhy, on behalf of my
country, I thank you, President Manescu-l know that in
Europe a person who has been President continues to bear
the title, and you have deserved it-I thank you for your
work as President. I thank YllU also for what you said in
taking your leave. That was not a lesson, it was more than
that: it was a conversation between companions and
comrades.

95. I should also like to do something which my delegation has been doing in the past few years, namely, to pay
a special tribute to the Secretary.General, U Thant. I do so
because I believe that, as Secretary-G~neral, he has done
more than carry out his duty, because I believe that the
raison d'etre of his life is service to peace, and he has given
evidence of this, and because he knows that the so-called
impartiality of the international official can never constitute a limitation on sincere efforts to determine his own
views, within the very clear framework of the Charter, on
the struggle for peace. This he has done with nobility,
courage and dignity, and that is why I venture to pay this
modest tribute to him 011 behalf of Chile.

96. Today, it is the privilege of my country to be among
the first to welcome the admission of Swaziland to
membership of the United Nations. The Swazi people
achieved full independence on 6 September 1968. and
today it is already making its very valuable contribution to
the international community in joining the United Nations.
I know that the Swazi people is small in number, as is
indeed my own. I know tllat the Swazi people has great
problems in its economic, social and cultural development;
that is also true of my own country. But I know that the
Swazi people, through those who represent the Swazi
community, King Sobhuza II and his Prime Minister, Prince
Makhosini, has taken the resolve to find in its own way the
solution to its problems. That is why its admission today to
the community of the United Nations has a touch of
greatness and dignity.

97. We should not like to pass oyer in silence something of
which we are aware, namely that the Swazi people has
serious problems; some of its neighbours practise political
philosophies which we do not share. Therefore, we do not
hesitate today, in welcoming the noble Swazi people and its
representatives, to reaffirm what we have said in other
forums: we believe that the expressions of racism which
still exist in the world must disappear; we know that the
Swazi people will have difficulties. The international
community, including Chile in its own modest way, will
stand by your side.

98. I wanted to make this statement because it is the
position which my country has maintained in the forums
where these problems are discussed. I should not like to
appear as though, by remaining silent, we were ignoring
them.

~._

,:on - Plenary Meetings

-------------------

With all respect, my country has given evidence
throughout the world, in all continents, of the fact that for
us self-determination, non-intervention and the avoidance
of recourse to force are principles which we not only
affirm, but which we defend wherever they appear to be in
jeopardy.
100. I would conclude this statement by welcoming the
Prime Minister of Swaziland, Prince Makhosini, and his
representatives, and by telling them that they bring to this
international community an element which may be small if
measured by the size of their country's population, but
which is great because of what it signifies in this Orgdnization, namely, an element of human dignity and respect
for principles. Therefore, on behalf of Chile, I pay this
modest tribute to the people of Swaziland.
101. Mr. Tarabanov (Bulgaria) (translated from French):
Mr. President, since I am taking tlle floor almost immediately after your election to the high office of President of
the General Assembly, I should like straight away to extend
to you my congratulations and those of the delegation of
the People's Republic of Bulgaria. We hope-indeed, we are
certain-that you will make good use of all the opportunities afforded by the important post you now occupy
and of all your abilities to organize the work of this
Assembly and of the entire session in accordance with the
best democratic and progressive traditions of the Latin
American peoples so as to create the necessary working
atmosphere and climate that will enable constructive
decisions to be reached during this session. The statement
you have just made is already an indication to that effect.

102. Since we are expressing congratulations and thanks,
may I from this rostrum express my satisfaction at the
important work accomplished and the able direction shown
dUring the twenty-second session of the General Asseml::
by the outgoing President, one of our men, who w ..
nominated by the socialist countries to represent them for
the first time as President of the General Assembly. May I
also stress the satisfaction we feel at having been able to
take part in nominating him who was to represent us here
and who has deserved the tribute paid to him just now by
those who have spoken before me.
103. On behalf of the delegations of the Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist Republic, the Republic of Cuba, the
Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, the Hungarian People's
Republic, the Mongolian People's Republic, the Polish
People's Republic, the Socialist Republic of "Romania, the
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic and the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, as well as on behalf of my own
delegation, I now have the honour and the pleasure to
congratulate the new Member of the United Nations, the
Kingdom of Swaziland. Swaziland's accession to independence and its desire to join the great family of the United
Nations are events of undeniable importance in the life and
development of the Swazi people in its struggle to achieve
national sovereignty. We are most gratified at the birth of a
new independent State in the south of tlle African
continent, where millions of Africans are still struggling
against the colonial yoke and racial oppression, for their
freedom and independence and against all the forms of
racial oppression which the colonial Powers have organized
against them.

1(

UJ

st
in

pt

in
cc
to

p(
pe

fn
th
br
S\

l(

as
Mi
to
sti
stI

sel

op

10
ex
an,
in

en:

COl

str,
ani

10'
gre
of
lati
bee
Ass
try
rep
trie
Wll

the

var

wis
YOt

the
co101
We
wal
the
sati
sur
wi{
SOli

of
0tl
1O~

an(

per
Na

1674th meeting - 24 September 1968

f

I
t

j

104. The proclamation of Swaziland's independence is
undoubtedly an important step in the Swazi people's
struggle for a better life; it is an event closely linked to the
irreversible process of the liberation of neighbouring
peoples and of the final liquidation of colonial oppression
in that part of the world. I need hardly stress that the
countries on whose behalf I have the honour and privilege
to speak, by their consistent anti-colonial policy, by their
policy of unreservedly supporting the struggle of the
peoples still under colonial oppression for their rights to
freedom and independent development, have always backed
the efforts and decisions of the United Nations aimed at
bringing about more favourable conditions to enable the
Swazi people to attain independence.
105. In greeting and welcoming Swaziland among us today
as a new sovereign State, we express the hope that, as a
Member of our Organization, it will make its contribution
to the struggle for the national liberation of other peoples
still languishing under the colonial yoke, as well as to the
struggle for the strengthening of international peace and
security and for the development of friendship and co·
operation among peoples.
106. The countries on whose behalf I speak also wish to
express the hope that, with the assistance of all peace.loving
and freedom-loving States, the people of Swaziland will be
in a position to experience further achievements which will
enable them successfully to overcome the burdensome
consequences of colonial domination and to preserve and
strengthen their national sovereignty and their economic
and political independence.
107. Mr. ASTROM (Sweden): It is my pleasant duty and a
great privilege, first of all, to extend on behalf of the group
of Western European and other States our warm congratulations to the very distinguished gentleman who has just
been elected to the high post of President of the General
Assembly. You, Mr. President, represent your own country with dedication, cirsumspection and great skill; you
represent with. equal distinction the Latin American countries; and you are now called upon to represent the
whole membership of the United Nations. We know that
those same qualitites that you have demonstrated in the
various assignments you have held so far, your experience,
wisdom, power of imagination and creative talent will make
you an outstanding leader in the work of this world body in
the coming year. We salute you and we pledge our full
co-operation to you in the fulfIlment of your arduous tasks.

11

newly independent nations have free access to United
Nations programmes of economic and social co-operation
on the basis of complete equality. We look f()Tward to
co-operating with the delegation of the Kingdom of
Swaziland on this basis and in a spirit of goodwill,
understanding and friendship.
110. Mr. TOMER (Syria): Mr. President, to the voices of
those representatives who have preceded me in congratulating you I wish to add my own voice in addressing to you,
on behalf of the Asian group, our heartfelt congratulations
on your election to the Presidency of the General Assembly
at its twenty-third session.· It is equally a pleasure and an
honour to express our tribute to the outgoing President, His
Excellency Mr. Milnescu, the Foreign Minister of Romania,
for the distinguished task that he has performed.
111. Mr. President, your election comes at a time when
dark and heavy clouds hover over the comity of nations,
when a sense of deep crisis faces the conscience of
mankind. But those of us who are famiJiar with your
brilliant career and long experience-either in the United
Nations as a former colleague or in the service of your own
country, Guatemala, as Minister for Foreign Affairs-know
that you will bring to your difficult task the statesmanship,
optimism and dynamism which indeed have been reflected
in the first speech you have delivered to the General
Assembly. In addressing our congratulations to you, we are,
at the same time, congratulating your country for this
well·deserved honour and all Latin American countries,
whose representatives have always distinguished themselves
in the deliberations on the great issues in the United
Nations year after year.
112. As an Arab from South-West Asia I cannot but recall
the long ties and common heritage that, throughout
history, have broUgllt together the two great culiures, the
Spanish and the Arab.
113. It is indeed a great source of satisfaction, as well as
an honour, to welcome into the family of the United
Nations, on behalf of the group of Asian States, heirs of the
oldest civilizatioll in the world, the newest Member of the
United Nations, the Kingdom of SwaziJand. We certainly
rejoice that one more country has been freed from the yok~
of colonialism and that it will have the chance to contribute
to the work of the United Nations. Our heartfelt wishes for
success and prosperity and our sincerest and most genuine
desire for the liquidation of all remnants of colonialism go
to the people of Swaiiland and to their Government and
King.
.

108. I should like now, still on behalf of the group of
Western European and other countries, to extend a very
warm welcome to the new Member of the United Nations,
the Kingdom of Swaziland. I do so with a sense of deep
satisfaction. We are witnessing today how, slowly but
surely, the winds of change reach and penetrate everwidening areas of the world and have now also reached the
southern part of Africa. Two years ago we welcomed two
of Swaziland's sister countries, Botswana and Lesotho.
Gthers may follow.

114. Mr. AZZOUT (Algeria) (translated from French):
Mr. PreSident, may I first of all congratulate you on your
election to the highest office of the General Assembly.
Your outstanding qualities and your knowledge of the
problems of our Organization give us reason to hope that
under your Presidency it will be possible to achieve real
progress, particularly in regard to consolidating the principles of the Charter and international co-operation.

109. It is the obligation of all Member States to recognize
and respect the freedom and sovereignty of newly independent countries, whether they choose to join the United
Nations or not. It is also our obligation to see to it that

115. I should now like to express, on behalf of the African
group. our satisfaction of seeing today the Kingdom of
Swaziland admitted among us. This newly independent
African country will, we are sure, strengthen the inter-

12

General Assembly - Twenty-third Session - Plenary Meetings

national community in its search for the best solutions to
the major international problems.
116. Now tIut we are admitting this African State to the
United Nations, we think also of the peoples of southern
Africa who are still waging a bloody struggle to free their
territories. We feel certain that Mozambique, Angola,
Guinea (Bissau) and, above all, Rhodesia, which is still a
United Kingdom colony, will come to join the family of
free nations. No one can doubt that the prodigious efforts
and tenacious struggle of the African peoples will overcome
the remaining bastions of racism and retrograde colonialism
which are fighting their final rear-guard battle in the
southern part of Africa.
117. On behalf of the African group, I should like to
extend to our sister delegation of the Kingdom of Swaziland our warm congratulations on its accession to independence and its admission to our Organization.
118. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): The
list of speakers on this item having now been exhausted, I
have pleasure in inviting His Excellency, the Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Swaziland, Prince
Makhosini, to address the General Assembly.
119. Prince MAKHOSINI (Prime Minister and Minister for

Foreign Affairs of Swaziland): Through you, Mr. President, may I convey to this Assembly the cordial greet·
ings of His Majesty King Sobhuza II and the people of
Swaziland as well as their best wishes for this session's
successful deliberations.
120. Mr. President, allow me to congratulate you person-

ally on your election to this position of great and grave
responsibilities. I have no doubt that your wisdom, which
has placed you where you are, will enable you to guide this
session towards conclusions which will enhance the pres·
tige, dignity and honour of the United Nations.
121. My preliminary remarks would be incomplete if I did
not pay a tribute to this Organization for its well·known
successes in the endeavour to maintain and to promote
world peace and stability.
122. I wish, at this point, on behalf of my delegation,
Government and country, most sincerely to thank all those
countries which have sponsored our application fdr United
Nations membership, and the rest of the United Nations
Membership for the unanimous acceptance of our application. I wish further to assure all tile representatives of our
resolve to adhere unreservedly to the principles and ideals
of the United Nations as set out in its Charter. Fbr it was
our belief in those principles and ideals which motivated
our application for membership.
123. Twenty-three years ago, after two devastating world
wars, wars that brought untold suffering to humanity as a
whole, this Organization was born in the city of San
Francisco. Since then, the membership of the Organization
has been growing steadily and progressively through the
entrance of sovereign States, large and small. Today the
Kingdom of Swaziland takes its place, ready to contribute
towards the promotion of the best that this Organization
stands for. We are convinced that the United Nations is the

only international body which, given the necessary support,
can preserve world peace and thereby guarantee the
sovereign independence of all States, irrespective of size. In
any event, it is common knowledge that the scourges of the
last world wars are still too fresh in our minds to permit
any departure from the noble cause of peace and justice.

irr

wl

UJi

Tt
an

12

124. Swaziland is a small country in the southern part of
Africa, covering 6,705 square miles, with a population of
400,000. It is bounded on three sides by the Republic of

South Africa and on the remaining side by Mozambique.
Ours is therefore a landlocked country. With South Africa,
Lesotho and Botswana, we belong to a common customs
union and are in a common currency area. Mozambique and
South Africa are vital to our economy as our country's
exports and imports go through them. Of necessity, we
co-operate economically with these neighbours, for, apart
from our local arrangements, we reach the outside world
through them. Consequently, we feel that if economic
sanctions were applied by the United Nations against our
two neighbouring countries, they would adversely affect
our economic development. This does not, however, mean
that we subscribe to those countries' political beliefs, as we
are totally opposed to racial discrimination and apartheid.
We are a non-racial, democratic State governed by a
constitution which recognizes fundamental human rights
and guarantees maximum freedom to the individual, irrespective of race or creed. In these, our belief is both
unshakable and uncompromising.
125. Swaziland will always extend a hand of friendship to
those who are willing to receive and to reciprocate. But
Swaziland will not allow itself to be used as a pawn in the
game of international politics; nor will it allow itself to be
used as a cannon in the ideological cold war. We reserve to
ourselves the right to choose our friends and to judge each
international issue on merit alone; for only in this way can
we contribute objectively and effectively to tile solution of
the problems which militate against the best interests of
this Organization.
126. I now turn to the commendable efforts of this
Organization to solve the many and varied political, social
and economic problems of its Member States, through its
numerous agencies. My country is among those grateful
nations that have benefited from the activities of the
specialized agencies of the United Nations in more than one
field.
127. Earlier, I referred to the successes of the United
Nations in its endeavour to maintain and to promote world
peace and stability. Be that as it may, the Kingdom of
Swaziland is deeply disturbed by the failure of some States
Members of the United Nations to adhere to some of the
princi pies which are laid down in the Charter of the United
Nations and which they claim to espouse. Today we seem
to be living in a world of double-talk. We have known of
countries which, from the rostrum of the United Nations,
have proclaimed themselves as leading democrats; but these
same countries have, under various guises, acted most
undemocratically on a number of occasions. These same
countries have in other quarters served as instruments for
negating the right of all people to self-determination; they
have refused to recognize human dignity and the equality
of all men before the law. Yes, in some cases tile sovereign
independence of some States ha's been violated with

by

ac
is

w<

ca
of
in

WE

W1

I

I

12
nll
st1
wl
is
de

cr,

de

13

WE

m
fu
sh
gil
be

sh

13

he

nll

m;

fo

rn

•
1674th meeting - 24 September 1968
impunity. When such things happen we begin to wonder
what has become to that simple but human saying: "Do
unto others as you would that others should do unto you."
The voice of sanity commands that each of us should live
and let live.
128. We in Swaziland believe in the settlement of disputes
by peaceful means, llot only because we ourselves have
achieved independence peacefully, but because we believe it
is right. Our attitude towards the troubled spots of the
world is that no amount of force will remove the basic
causes of conflict. On the contrary, we believe that the use
of force is a kind of wild justice that should have no place
in this modern world which from experience knows full
well that no permanent settlement or peace can result from
war.
129. The current arms race, which manifests itself in
nuclear stockpiles, alarms us profoundly. In the circumstances, we cannot help but pose the serious question:
whither mankind? The greatest paradox in all phenomena
is that man, whose goal is happiness, is preparing his own
destruction. In this regard we ask: since man is incapable of
creating life, his most precious possession, why should man
destroy life?
130. Only recently 1 States Members of the United Nations
were invited, under resolution 2373 (XXII), to sign a
nuclear non.proliferation treaty. This augurs well for the
future. But the treaty provided that all nuclear countries
should ratify it; unequivocal safety guarantees would be
given to non·nuclear countries; and those States which
believe in force as the only means for resolving differences
should reconsider their attitude.
131. However, the real problem which we are faced with
here, the major threat to world peace, is man himself. For
nuclear weapons do not impose themselves on mall, but it is
man who consciously manufactures those deadly weapons
for the perpetration of man's l'hhumanity to man, which
makes countless thousands mourn.

13

132. Whilst on the subject of the arms race and the
nuclear non-proliferation treaty, it must be realized that,
lIntil all nuclear Powers are brought within the ambit of the
United Nations, until all free States are given the feeling of
belonging, the United Nations will remain not fully
universal and the threat to world peace will continue to
hover over our heads like tIle sword of Damocles.
133. Finally J in the name of humanity, Swaziland appeals
to the conscience of man for a greater bias in favour of the
elimination of ignorance, poverty, hunger and disease. For
these are tlle issues which should concern us primarily, to
the complete exclusion of all man-made problems l if we are
to achieve maximum happiness and enjoy a fuller life.
Speaking of hunger. I recall with sadness the as yet
unresolved question ufland alienation in my country, and I
must thank the United Nations for the support given to my
country on this burning qllestion.
134. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): I wish
to draw the attention of representatives to the last item of
oUt agenda for this afternoon, namely J the proposal to
adjourn the plenary session of the Assembly and to begin
sessions of the Committees so that they may elect their
respective chairmen. This has been the traditional practice.
Nevertheless. in view of the lateness of the hour, I should
like to suggest tllat the remainder of this afternoon's
agenda, namely the establishment of the Committees and
the election of their Chairmen, should be considered at
tomorrow morning's meeting, which will begin at 10.30. I
would request beforehand that representatives be extremely
punctual in their a ttendance. The plenary will meet
tomorrow immediately after the election of the Committee
Chairmen in order to elect the Vice-Chairmen. If there is no
objection, we shall proceed in the manner suggested.

It lVQS so decided.
The meeting rose at 6.30 p.m.

: "
l~

,

I

i

d
! .

Litho in V.N.

"GOI-February 1971-2,300
