S/PV.8816

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8816

th meeting
Thursday, 8 July 2021, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. De Rivière/Mrs. Gasri. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mr. Ochoa Martínez
Mr. Abarry
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. King
Mr. Ladeb
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield
Mr. Dang

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-18300 (E)
*2118300*

S/PV.8816

Peace and security in Africa

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Egypt, Ethiopia and the Sudan
to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Sameh Hassan Shokry Selim, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Egypt; Her Excellency Mrs. Mariam Alsadig
Al Sedeeg Al Mahadi, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Sudan; and His Excellency Mr. Seleshi Bekele
Awulachew, Minister of Water, Irrigation and Energy
of Ethiopia.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Parfait
Onanga-Anyanga, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for the Horn of Africa; and Ms. Inger Andersen,
Executive Director of the United Nations Environment
Programme.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Onanga-Anyanga.
Mr. Onanga-Anyanga (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity
to address the Security Council on the thorny issue of
the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam, better known
by its English-language acronym “GERD”. Allow me
also to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your wise
conduct of the affairs of the Council, which France is
presiding this month.
(spoke in English)
The GERD encapsulates the conflicting narratives,
hopes and fears, challenges and opportunities related
to water usage, security and energy in Egypt, Ethiopia,
the Sudan and the wider Horn of Africa. This is the
second time we are briefing the Security Council on this
issue. The last time was in June 2020 (see S/2020/636).
Since then, despite various attempts at negotiations, the
parties have been unable to agree on a framework of
engagement to settle the remaining contentious issues.
2/28

08/07/2021

While Member States have also acknowledged that
most aspects related to the GERD have been addressed,
we do understand that the parties still have to agree
on some core issues, including a dispute-resolution
mechanism and on drought mitigation, particularly the
filling and operation of the dam in drought years. My
colleague, Ms. Inger Andersen, Executive Director of
the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP),
will provide the Council with more details on the
relevant technical issues surrounding the negotiations.
At the virtual meeting of the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs and Ministers of Irrigation of the three countries
held on 27 October 2020 and chaired by South Africa,
and the virtual tripartite meeting held on 10 January
2021, the parties could not agree on the exact role of
the experts and observers supporting the negotiations
process led by the African Union (AU).
On 6 February, the Sudan put forward a new
proposal contemplating a quadripartite joint mediation
by the African Union, the United Nations, the European
Union (EU) and the United States of America. On
15 March, the Sudan, with the support of Egypt, formally
requested the AU, the United Nations, the United States
and the EU to mediate between the parties regarding
the GERD. Ethiopia, however, preferred fewer changes
to the ongoing AU-led process.
During the talks that took place in Kinshasa from
5 to 7 April this year, which were chaired by His
Excellency President Félix Tshisekedi of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in his capacity as Chairperson
of the AU, the parties were, once again, unable to agree
on a mediation framework.
On 13 April, Sudanese Prime Minister Abdallah
Hamdok offered to activate the dispute-resolution
mechanism at the level of Heads of State and Government
contemplated in the 2015 Agreement on Declaration of
Principles on the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam.
On 21 April, in response to Prime Minister Hamdok’s
invitation, Ethiopian Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed
stated that a meeting of the AU Assembly’s Bureau
should, rather, be the way forward.
Owing to the lack of progress in the talks, President
Tshisekedi stepped up his engagement on the GERD,
and between 8 and 11 May started a regional tour with
visits to Khartoum, Cairo and Addis Ababa. President
Tshisekedi engaged with the parties on the basis of a
two-step approach addressing first the most pressing
issue of the filling of the GERD during the rainy season,
21-18300

08/07/2021

Peace and security in Africa

and, secondly, guarantees for a more comprehensive
agreement on the subsequent filling and operation of
the dam.
On 24 June, President Tshisekedi convened
virtually the Bureau of the African Union Heads of
State for an exchange of information on the GERD.
Unfortunately, no significant progress was registered
in the presence of Ethiopia and Egypt, while the Sudan
decided not to attend.
Also, on 15 June, the League of Arab States met in
Doha and adopted a resolution on the GERD dispute
that, inter alia, called on Ethiopia to refrain from filling
the GERD reservoir without reaching an agreement and
on the Security Council to hold consultations on the
matter. In response, Ethiopia objected to the League of
Arab States communiqué, which it saw as an attempt to
politicize and internationalize the dispute, and stressed
its commitment to AU mediation while reiterating its
plan to move forward with the second filling of the dam
in July.
Meanwhile, we are aware of bilateral interactions
between Ethiopia and the Sudan on the issue of the
GERD as well as of the Sudan’s recent statement
expressing readiness to accept an interim agreement on
the filling of the dam on the condition that a deal be
signed regarding all other points that have been agreed
to date and ensuring the continuity of negotiations
within a set timeline.
While no formal agreement has been reached yet
on this development and we have yet to see the results
of that effort, it is in line with the efforts of a phased
approach proposed by President Tshisekedi, or at least
that appears to be the case.
In the meantime, on 5 July the Government of
Ethiopia wrote a letter to the Governments of Egypt
and the Sudan to inform them of the commencement of
the second-year filling of the GERD. Both Egypt and
the Sudan have objected to that notification, reiterating
their position that any further filling should take place
in the context of an agreed-upon framework.
Each of the countries sharing the Nile waters has
both rights and responsibilities, and, as they agreed
in the 2015 Agreement on Declaration of Principles
on the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam, the use
and management of that natural resource require the
continued engagement of all nations involved, in good
faith, with a view to reaching common ground.

S/PV. 8816

Indeed, the Secretary-General has always
encouraged Member States to pursue negotiations in
that manner. To assist in the process, he has entrusted
UNEP with providing technical advice based on the
best available scientific data and knowledge, with a
view to helping countries reach a mutual understanding
on how to handle this delicate matter.
Clearly, more needs to be done given that recent
negotiations have yielded little progress and that it is
undeniable that this is a matter of critical importance.
We therefore call on all parties to remain engaged and to
avoid making any pronouncements that would increase
tensions in a region that is already subject to a series
of challenges, including the impact of the coronavirus
disease and conflicts.
I would like to take this opportunity to also
commend the work done by the African Union rotating
Presidents, His Excellency Cyril Ramaphosa of South
Africa and the current Chair of the African Union, His
Excellency Félix Antoine Tshisekedi, to facilitate a
mutually beneficial and peaceful outcome.
We believe that together, along with other interested
partners, there is room to move forward with a view
to addressing the matter of the GERD in a peaceful,
constructive and comprehensive manner, in line
with the spirit of cooperation highlighted in the 2015
Declaration of Principles.
The United Nations remains available to promote
a win-win solution in supporting Member States
in navigating this complex issue, where genuine
political will, compromise and good-neighbourliness
are essential.
In closing, I believe that this important issue,
if properly addressed, could offer significant
opportunities for all the parties and countries in the
region and beyond. I would like to once again stress
that cooperation is not a zero-sum game and that a
collective effort could help deliver on the development
potential of the region as a whole.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Onanga-Anyanga for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Andersen.
Ms. Andersen: While shared watercourses
have been the cause of dispute, they can also be the
foundation for cooperation. Indeed, well-planned
hydraulic infrastructure on a shared river course can

21-183003/28

S/PV.8816

Peace and security in Africa

be a source of enhanced collaboration and need not be
a zero-sum game. With integrated planning, damaging
seasonal inundations can be prevented; energy can be
traded; water storage can be optimized; and benefits
can materialize both in terms of development and in
terms of water optimization.
The Blue Nile constitutes a critical water resource
for the peoples of the Arab Republic of Egypt, the Federal
Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and the Republic
of the Sudan. The headwaters of the Blue Nile are in
the highlands of Ethiopia, where the highly seasonal
rains produce 69 per cent of the annual river flow just
between July and September. The Blue Nile merges
with the White Nile at Khartoum, from where the river
flows downstream through the Sudan and into Egypt.
The Nile has delivered fresh water, fed agriculture and
supported livelihoods in those countries for thousands
of years.
Since 2011, Ethiopia has been constructing the
Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam (GERD) on the Blue
Nile. The GERD is a major hydropower project located
in Ethiopia’s Benishangul-Gumuz region. Through the
generation of hydroelectricity, the GERD will enhance
Ethiopia’s energy sources, allowing it to increase
electrification, accelerate industrialization and export
surplus electricity to the region.
Construction of the dam is now nearing completion.
During 2020 the reservoir began to fill for the first time,
and approximately 4.9 billion cubic metres of water
were impounded. The 2021 rainy season is beginning
now, and Ethiopia has announced that additional water
has begun to accumulate in the reservoir.
During the past century, the Nile riparian countries
have developed infrastructure to regulate the river
flow, store water, reduce flooding, supply agriculture
and generate hydropower. While there are a number
of dams in the Nile Basin, including smaller dams
on the Blue Nile, I will here mention only the larger
hydraulic infrastructure located in the Nile Basin in the
three countries.
In the Sudan, the largest infrastructure is the
Merowe Dam, which can store 12.4 billion cubic metres
of water and generate up to 1,250 megawatts. Also of
importance in the Sudan is the Roseires Dam on the Blue
Nile, which is situated approximately 100 kilometres
downstream of the GERD, with a total volume of
5.9 billion cubic metres. Egypt’s most significant
infrastructure is in upper Egypt, namely the High
4/28

08/07/2021

Aswan Dam. Completed in 1970, it can store 162 billion
cubic metres and generate up to 2,100 megawatts. When
finished, the GERD will store 74 billion cubic metres of
water and generate up to 5,150 megawatts.
Any large dam impacts and alters a river’s flow.
Where water is scarce and drought is frequent, as is the
case in the Blue Nile basin, cooperation on a shared river
is the only long-term sustainable option. In the coming
years, two of the world’s largest dams — the High Aswan
Dam and the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam — will
substantially control and regulate the flow of the River
Nile. That infrastructure has important implications
both for human development and the environment.
As mentioned, careful and cooperative basin-wide
management can maximize the opportunities and
positive effects of such major infrastructure and help to
minimize any negative consequences.
The Governments of Egypt, Ethiopia and the
Sudan have made sustained efforts to enhance their
cooperation relating to their transboundary water
resources over the years. Indeed, as we heard from my
colleague, in 2015 they signed an agreement on the
declaration of principles in which they committed to
some core principles, including cooperation, equitable
and reasonable utilization, preventing the cause of
significant harm and the peaceful settlement of disputes.
That declaration of principles was the outcome of a
series of cooperative transboundary efforts undertaken
during the previous years.
As we have heard, the parties have persisted with
those efforts to enhance cooperation, while the African
Union (AU) has played a critical role during recent
years in taking negotiations forward.
The three parties have recognized the tireless efforts
made by the AU Chairpersons to facilitate negotiations
to reach an agreement. Of course, we also applaud
those sustained efforts. While progress has been made
in many areas of the negotiations, consensus has not
been reached regarding some critical aspects, including
arrangements for the management of protracted
drought; development upstream and downstream of
the GERD; and a dispute-resolution mechanism. Some
differences also remain regarding the scope and nature
of the proposed agreement.
At this stage and with other sources of regional
tension increasing, we must recognize that overcoming
the remaining differences among the parties will require
careful, meticulous work, supported by the relevant
21-18300

08/07/2021

Peace and security in Africa

technical and legal experts and with a determination
by the three States to arrive at a cooperative solution in
pursuit of sustainable development for all in the spirit
of one river, one people and one vision.
An agreement on the GERD can and indeed must
be reached. Cooperation among the riparian States
regarding that critical natural resource has never been
more important. As the Governments of Egypt, Ethiopia
and the Sudan have all recognized, the countries are
experiencing rising demand on the water resource, be
it in terms of agriculture or energy demands. That is
due to a combination of factors, including population
growth, urbanization and industrialization.
Effective, cooperative water management also
becomes all the more important in the context of
climate change. Indeed, climate models indicate that
the flow of the Nile will exhibit increasing variability
during the period of modelling up to 2040, leading to
more floods and more intense droughts. It is therefore
imperative that the parties work together to manage
those interconnected challenges. In order to reach
an optimal agreement, trust, transparency and open
engagement will be key.
As we have heard, the United Nations remains ready
to support Egypt, Ethiopia and the Sudan, as well as the
African Union, in their efforts to achieve an agreement
on the GERD that is beneficial to all. Coordination
around hydro-infrastructure in that basin is critically
important. When done right and with strong political
leadership by the riparian nations, it can provide a basis
for deeper, mutually beneficial regional cooperation
around shared natural resources, which would enhance
sustainable development and peace.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Andersen for her briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Empole (Democratic Republic of the
Congo) (spoke in French): I have the honour to read
out a statement by His Excellency Mr. Christophe
Lutundula Apala Pen’apala, Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, on behalf of the President of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Chairperson of
the African Union, His Excellency Mr. Félix Antoine
Tshilombo Tshisekedi.

S/PV. 8816

The Deputy Prime Minister was unable to travel
to New York due to circumstances beyond his control.
Nevertheless, he has asked me to convey his greetings
to you, Mr. President, as well as to the members of
the Security Council and all other participants in
this meeting.
Allow me now, without further delay, to read out
the statement by the Deputy Prime Minister.
“At the outset, I wish to congratulate you,
Sir, on your presidency of the Security Council
for the month of July. I express the satisfaction
of my delegation at seeing France, a country with
whom the Democratic Republic of the Congo
maintains excellent friendly relations, leading the
deliberations of the Security Council.
“I also wish to take this opportunity to express
to the Council the gratitude of the Government
and the people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo for the efforts made by the United Nations
to preserve our sovereignty and territorial integrity,
as well as to guarantee peace and stability in
the country.
“I would also like to thank the Council for
inviting the presidency of the African Union to take
part in this important meeting.
“The Great Ethiopian Renaissance Dam
(GERD) is situated on the Blue Nile, approximately
15 kilometres from the Sudanese border. Its
principal objective is to produce electricity, with
the aim of increasing Ethiopia’s energy supply,
accelerating its industrialization and supplying
energy to other countries in the region. It will be
the largest dam in Africa, 1,800 metres long and155
metres high and with a total volume of 74 billion
cubic metres.
“However, that enormous project, which
seeks to promote regional economic integration,
is causing issues for its immediate neighbours,
namely the Sudan and Egypt. Their economies and
the well-being of their populations depend greatly
on the waters of the White Nile, which is situated
downstream from the Blue Nile. Certain tensions
have therefore been observed between those two
countries and the Federal Republic of Ethiopia for
some years now.
“The conflict around the Great Ethiopian
Renaissance Dam is not a new issue for the Council,

21-183005/28

S/PV.8816

Peace and security in Africa

which is considering it today for the second time
after an open meeting held on 29 June 2020 (see
S/2020/636).
“A number of initiatives have been undertaken
in attempts to resolve the crisis surrounding the
GERD, in particular the tripartite negotiations held
under the auspices of the United States of America
and the World Bank and the consideration of the
issue by the Council on 29 June last year. In the end,
the matter was referred back to the African Union
which, under the leadership of its Chairperson at
the time, His Excellency Mr. Cyril Ramaphosa of
South Africa, began to tackle the resolution of the
dispute in accordance with the principle of African
solutions to African problems.
“There have been several positive developments
to date, especially in the form of the draft agreement
put together by the parties with the assistance of
African Union experts. The proposals put forward
indicate that 90 per cent of the technical problems
have already been resolved. It now remains for the
parties to settle their outstanding technical and legal
differences, including the nature of the agreement
to be signed, the dispute-resolution mechanism and
waterflow management during periods of drought.
“To that end, as the country that holds the
chairmanship of the African Union for the period
2021 to 2022, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has taken a series of diplomatic initiatives
at the highest level, including organizing in April
an in-person ministerial conference in Kinshasa on
the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam (GERD) and
subsequent diplomatic efforts between the President
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
leaders of the Arab Republic of Egypt, the Republic
of the Sudan and the Federal Republic of Ethiopia.
The consultations with the leaders of those three
countries allowed for the sharing of information
on the best ways to resume negotiations on an
agreement that takes into account the interests of
all parties.
“During the most recent meeting of the
Bureau of the African Union Heads of State and
Government on 24 June, the current Chairperson
of the African Union, His Excellency Mr. Félix
Antoine Tshilombo Tshisekedi, gave an account of
the consultations he led. He assured the members
of the Bureau that discussions with the parties
6/28

08/07/2021

were ongoing with a view to restoring trust among
them and finding a consensus on key issues. The
Chairperson promised that, once those discussions
had ended, he would submit a comprehensive
report to the Bureau, which would allow for a more
substantive and timely discussion.
“In the meantime, he requested that everyone
refrain from making statements or taking positions
that could jeopardize or complicate the very
delicate negotiations process under way to find an
African solution. The Bureau congratulated him
and encouraged him to continue his facilitation
efforts. Those efforts, together with the assistance
of observers, have led to the drafting of a summary
document, which will soon be presented to Ethiopia,
the Sudan and Egypt as the basis for negotiations
and for resolving differences. Those differences
relate primarily to the filling and operation of
the dam.
“President Tshisekedi believes that a solution
can be found to the crisis concerning the GERD.
All parties are ready and willing. However, we
must all work to break the wall of mistrust and
ensure all parties that their interests will be taken
into account, thereby guaranteeing a successful
conclusion to the process. To assist in the current
facilitation efforts, the Security Council invited
representatives of Egypt, Ethiopia and the Sudan
to continue discussions, under the auspices of the
African Union and mediation by its Chairperson,
in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity
and the Charter of the United Nations. The
Security Council, whose primary role in resolving
international disputes is indisputable, should
support the African Union and assist the facilitator
in the quest for peace in that volatile area of the
Horn of Africa.
“With the minimum political will, the parties
can reach an agreement on the GERD. They
demonstrated that with the 2015 Agreement on
Declaration of Principles on the Grand Ethiopian
Renaissance Dam, which reflects the commitment
of the three countries to respecting the following
principles — cooperation, the equitable shared use
of the waters of the Nile, security and the peaceful
settlement of disputes.”
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank France for organizing
21-18300

08/07/2021

Peace and security in Africa

today’s meeting on the dispute among Egypt, Ethiopia
and the Sudan with regard to filling and operating the
Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam. I welcome the
participation of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Sudan, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt
and the Minister of Water, Irrigation and Energy of
Ethiopia. Their presence here today is a testament to the
extreme importance they attach to the issue and their
willingness to overcome the differences among their
countries in the context of multilateral frameworks.
I would like also to thank Mr. Parfait OnangaAnyanga, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the
Horn of Africa; Ms. Inger Andersen, Executive Director
of the United Nations Environment Programme; and the
Chargé d’affaires of the sisterly Democratic Republic
of the Congo, who spoke on behalf of the Chairperson
of the African Union, for their valuable briefings.
The Security Council already discussed the issue
last year (see S/2020/636). However, the dispute remains
unresolved among the relevant countries. We hope that
today’s meeting will give new and firm impetus to the
negotiations under the auspices of the African Union,
to help the three countries reach a binding agreement
that respects the vital interests of their peoples, protects
their water security and the right to development,
provides new opportunities for cooperation in the
region and prevents the growth of additional tensions.
The Nile is a very critical shared source of water.
It is the source of livelihoods and development for the
people of Ethiopia, the Sudan, Egypt and the region. In
the light of the current situation related to the Grand
Ethiopian Renaissance Dam, there is an urgent need for
a coordination and cooperation mechanism among the
countries concerned on the use of that water resource
and the resolution of the disputes that might arise.
That would ensure the rights of the upstream country
without harming the rights and interests of downstream
countries at the same time.
In our view, that is not impossible. It requires
political will from all three countries to settle the
outstanding legal and technical issues. They should
refrain from taking unilateral measures, which would
only further complicate the situation, and should
continue constructive negotiations under the auspices
of the African Union in order to reach an agreement
within a reasonable time frame, based on mutual
benefits and interests. The agreement should pave the
way for a promising new era of constructive cooperation

S/PV. 8816

and partnership, as agreed at the second extraordinary
meeting of the African Union Bureau of the Assembly
of Heads of State and Government, held on 21 July 2020,
and in line with the 2015 Agreement on Declaration of
Principles on the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam.
We believe that it is important for the United
Nations and the Security Council to support the
pivotal role of the African Union in sponsoring those
negotiations by sending a clear message on the issue,
as part of cooperation and integration between the
United Nations and regional organizations. The three
countries must be encouraged to resume negotiations
in a constructive way and reach the desired agreement.
That is stressed in the draft resolution that has already
been circulated.
In that regard, I highly appreciate the valuable
efforts of His Excellency Mr. Cyril Ramaphosa,
President of South Africa. We also commend the
intensive efforts of His Excellency Mr. Félix Antoine
Tshisekedi, President of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and current Chairperson of the African Union,
in facilitating and advancing negotiations among the
three sisterly African countries.
We are confident that, with the help of the African
Union and the encouragement and assistance of the
international community, those countries can overcome
their differences and move forward towards a just
negotiated solution, based on mutual understanding,
consensus and cooperation.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): Let
me begin by thanking Special Envoy Onanga-Anyanga,
Executive Director Andersen and the Chargé d’affaires
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, who spoke on
behalf of the African Union, for their briefings today.
I would also like to welcome the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Egypt, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Sudan and the Minister of Water,
Irrigation and Energy of Ethiopia to our meeting today.
The United Kingdom shares strong partnerships with
all three nations and recognizes the vital interests that
each has in Nile waters.
The United Kingdom places strong emphasis on
consensus among parties on developments that impact
a shared natural resource. We are pleased that many of
the key elements needed to reach that consensus on the
Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam are captured in the
2015 Declaration of Principles on the Grand Ethiopian

21-183007/28

S/PV.8816

Peace and security in Africa

Renaissance Dam, in particular the principles not to
cause significant harm and of equitable and reasonable
utilization. Since the Declaration of Principles, the three
parties have continued talks to reach a more detailed
trilateral agreement on the filling and operation of
the dam. We would like to thank African Union (AU)
Chairperson Tshisekedi and former Chairperson
Ramaphosa for their support for the process.
We recognize that reaching agreement requires
compromise by all parties. The United Kingdom notes
Egypt and the Sudan’s disappointment that a resolution
has yet to be reached, as well as the stated commitment
of all three countries to the AU-led talks. The United
Kingdom is confident that, working together with the
ongoing support of the African Union and the wider
international community, Egypt, Ethiopia and the
Sudan have the strength and resolve to reach agreement
to the benefit of all. We call on all three sides to
refrain from actions that undermine negotiations. We
encourage them to engage constructively and urgently
in a spirit of compromise to conclude negotiations and
reach a mutually acceptable agreement.
In conclusion, let me once again reaffirm the United
Kingdom’s strong support for the AU-led process and
the Governments of Egypt, Ethiopia and the Sudan
in their endeavours to reach an equitable, mutually
acceptable agreement.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I thank you, Sir, for holding
this meeting. I also thank the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for conveying the
message of his Minister for Foreign Affairs on behalf
of the Chairperson of the African Union (AU), who is
an actively seized mediator on the matter of the Grand
Ethiopian Renaissance Dam (GERD).
I recognize the legitimate concerns that have
prompted the presence here in the Security Council
of Her Excellency Mrs. Mariam Alsadig Al Sedeeg
Al Mahadi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Sudan; His Excellency Mr. Sameh Hassan Shokry
Selim, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt; and His
Excellency Mr. Seleshi Bekele Awulachew, Minister
of Water, Irrigation and Energy of Ethiopia. I also
thank the Executive Director of the United Nations
Environment Programme and the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Horn of Africa, Mr. Parfait
Onanga-Anyanga, for their briefings.
The human settling of the Nile basin throughout
history has been a source of hope and connection. It is
8/28

08/07/2021

unfortunate that we are discussing it here today in the
Security Council, whose mandate is to deal with dangers
to international peace and security. The basin is home
to more than 257 million people. It covers the territory
of a dozen African countries whose population is close
to half a billion. The majority of them have woken to a
busy day and may not be aware of this meeting in New
York City, but every single one will be impacted by the
statements and decisions made here today.
This meeting directly concerns the GERD and
the three countries represented here, but the story that
arises from it also concerns the 10 countries joined by
the ambition that gave rise to the Nile Basin Initiative in
1999. The objectives of this riparian intergovernmental
partnership are to develop the Nile basin water resources
in a sustainable and equitable way to ensure prosperity,
security and peace for all its peoples.
It seeks to pursue the same aims pursued in the
Declaration of Principles on the GERD within a
framework agreement. The millions of people whom it
serves only desire to throw off the shackles of poverty
and its associated ills of disease and war. They do not
consider such a desire to be a threat to international peace
and security because the legal principles underlying the
initiative are protective of all its members.
Today, the Security Council is considering the
legitimate concerns of two riparian States — Egypt and
the Sudan — arising from the legitimate utilization of
the Nile waters by another riparian State — Ethiopia.
Kenya stands with the three States, recognizing their
equality and that all their people equally deserve
development and prosperity. We pay tribute to His
Excellency President Cyril Ramaphosa of South Africa
who, as Chairperson of the African Union (AU),
initiated the negotiations among the three countries.
We commend the Governments of Egypt, Ethiopia
and the Sudan for their faith and confidence in the
capacity of African Union mechanisms to assist them
to mediate an agreement. We respectfully recognize
and support the mandate of mediation presently
held by His Excellency President Félix Antoine
Tshilombo Tshisekedi, the current Chairperson of the
African Union. We call on all parties supporting the
process to commit their expertise to ensure that it is
adequately resourced.
We direct the attention of the Council to the fact
that the Chairperson is actively seized of the matter,
as reflected in the remarks by the Special Envoy of the
21-18300

08/07/2021

Peace and security in Africa

Secretary-General and the representative of the Foreign
Minister of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
That was reflected in the communiqué of the 24 June
meeting of the Bureau of Assembly of the Heads of
State and Government of the African Union. It reports
that the AU Chairperson travelled to Cairo, Khartoum
and Addis Ababa during the week of 9 May, when he
had encouraging bilateral talks with the Heads of State
and Government.
Kenya recognizes the critical importance of the
principle of subsidiarity in the matter and recommends
it to the Security Council. We call on the parties to
recommit to negotiating in good faith within the AU-led
process in a spirit fired by our shared dream of building
a more united and prosperous Africa by 2063. We urge
them to avoid inflammatory utterances, because making
them is what may lead to tension, as opposed to the
underlying issue of the Nile River and its uses. Kenya
has total confidence that our Egyptian, Ethiopian and
Sudanese brothers and sisters will make the principle of
African solutions for African challenges a reality.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank the briefers for their
important insights. We also welcome the Ministers
and representatives of Egypt, Ethiopia, the Sudan
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo to today’s
meeting. The three parties — Egypt, Ethiopia and the
Sudan — have legitimate interests in the Nile River and
its water resources. A sustainable solution to the issue
of the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam (GERD) can
be found only by the parties themselves.
Much has already been agreed through the
Declaration of Principles on the Grand Ethiopian
Renaissance Dam, which is a good framework to seek
equitable and reasonable use of the Blue Nile. What
remains now is for the parties to reach a consensus
on modalities for future cooperation, based on the
Principles as well as on transparency and trust. That
requires constructive engagement, political will and
courage to find compromise. We call on the three
parties to refrain from any action that could undermine
negotiations and make full use of the good offices of the
African Union, especially through its facilitator role.
Norway encourages Egypt, Ethiopia and the Sudan
to invest politically in an agreement on the GERD that
all parties can benefit from. We are confident that
the return on the investment will be development and
prosperity for the people of all three States and beyond.

S/PV. 8816

Let the GERD and the Nile be a source of opportunities,
not conflict.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): At
the outset, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines expresses
its appreciation to the representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, speaking on behalf of the African
Union, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
the Horn of Africa and the Executive Director of the
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) for
their comprehensive briefings on this very important,
yet complex and sensitive topic.
We also welcome the Foreign Ministers of Egypt and
the Sudan, as well as the Minister of Water, Irrigation
and Energy of Ethiopia ,to today’s meeting and reaffirm
our unwavering solidarity to our sister nations.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines acknowledges
the paramount importance of the River Nile and its
intrinsic value as a transboundary water resource to
each of the parties and, by extension, all riparian States
in order to enhance the quality of life of their peoples.
That was underscored during our meeting last year
(S/2020/636) and is worth repeating today.
Indeed, the Nile is indispensable to the sustainable
and socioeconomic development of each of the parties
and we note their disagreements and credible concerns
pertaining to its usage. We encourage them to assuage
their entrenched positions and continue with the
trilateral negotiations in good faith in order to reach
an amicable, equitable and reasonable agreement. Such
agreements between riparian States become even more
critical as climate change increases both flooding and
drought in the river, as highlighted earlier by the UNEP
Executive Director, Ms. Inger Andersen.
The good offices of the African Union remains
pivotal to facilitate constructive dialogue and
meaningful negotiations. In that context, we are
appreciative and pleased that the African Union is fully
seized of the issue and commend the current mediation
efforts of President Tshilombo Tshisekedi, as well as
those of his predecessor, His Excellency Mr. Cyril
Ramaphosa, President of South Africa.
It is our principled position that the African
Union is best-suited to facilitate the pacific settlement
of disputes on the motherland, and we further
underscore the importance of respecting the principle
of subsidiarity, as well as Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations. More pertinently, the existing

21-183009/28

S/PV.8816

Peace and security in Africa

disagreement is among family members. To that end,
we are fully confident that Egypt, Ethiopia and the
Sudan will resolve their difficulties, as all families do,
with wisdom and harmony.
In conclusion, we underscore that the Nile remains
a beacon of hope and prosperity and a sanctuary for
millions of people. Our sister nations have a common
and shared history that is linked by the Nile and whose
futures will be interwoven by it. Accordingly, it is in
their collective interests to find a palatable solution
to ensure that they can provide a dignified future for
their peoples.
Despite the current setbacks, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines remains very optimistic that the parties
will reach a lasting agreement, especially since they
have already agreed on approximately 90 per cent
of the issues. We hope that the parties recommit to
negotiations, in good faith, under the auspices of the
African Union. We believe that this would benefit
all three parties and ensure the continuation of their
peaceful and harmonious coexistence.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the participation of Mr. Sameh
Hassan Shokry Selim, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Egypt; Mrs. Mariam Alsadig Al Sedeeg Al Mahadi,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Sudan; and
Mr. Seleshi Bekele Awulachew, Minister of Water,
Irrigation and Energy of Ethiopia, in today’s meeting.
We thank Ms. Inger Andersen, Under-SecretaryGeneral and Executive Director of the United Nations
Environment Programme; Mr. Parfait OnangaAnyanga, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
the Horn of Africa; as well as the Chargé d’affaires of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the United
Nations, Paul Empole.
The Russian Federation is closely following
developments in the situation of the Grand Ethiopian
Renaissance Dam being built by Ethiopia on the
Blue Nile. We fully understand the political and
socioeconomic significance of this hydropower project,
the largest on the African continent, for the millions of
people living in Ethiopia, a country that is experiencing
a major electricity shortage. At the same time, we
note the legitimate concerns expressed by Egypt and
the Sudan regarding the possible negative effects the
operation of the dam could have, in the absence of an
agreement, on the inhabitants of those countries during
dry years.
10/28

08/07/2021

We believe there is no alternative to settling this
water dispute through political and diplomatic methods
via negotiations involving the three countries. We are
convinced that the search for a solution must be carried
out in accordance with the spirit and the letter of the
2015 Khartoum Declaration of Principles, taking into
account the progress already achieved trilaterally in
defining the operating parameters of the Ethiopian
hydroelectric complex. Mutual understanding and trust
are necessary. Escalating the situation and making
statements about the possibility of using force are
unacceptable. We will be frank — we are concerned
about the escalation of confrontational rhetoric, which
is not conducive to finding compromise solutions.
We are convinced that differences on socioeconomic
development should not lead to threats to peace and
security. We believe that gradually reaching agreements
on certain aspects of filling the reservoir and the
further operation of the hydroelectric power plant could
lead to a de-escalation among the parties and a help to
gradually reach a comprehensive mutually acceptable
agreement. The best option would be to negotiate such
a document with all the Nile basin countries, which
should participate in determining the parameters of
water use on an equal footing.
We commend the significant involvement of
the African Union in resolving the dispute over the
dam, including the work of its Specialized Technical
Committee on Justice and Legal Affairs. We believe that
the capacity of this authoritative regional organization
to resolve the current water crisis has not yet been
exhausted. We call on the Congolese presidency of the
African Union to step up its efforts in that direction.
In our view, an increase in the number of mediators
or observers in the negotiations will not bring added
value. However, their involvement is possible with the
consent of all parties.
In conclusion, we would also like to make a
concrete proposal. Since all the interested parties are
gathered here in New York, why not hold a round of
negotiations, brokered by the presidency of the African
Union, to resolve the differences over the dam? We
believe that this would be the best possible contribution
of the Security Council to resolving the situation in the
spirit of our shared principle of African solutions to
African problems.
We would like to emphasize the Russian Federation’s
readiness to help resolve this complex problem. Egypt,
21-18300

08/07/2021

Peace and security in Africa

Ethiopia and the Sudan are close friends of our country,
and we sincerely hope that they will soon be able to
resolve outstanding differences, agree on modalities for
further filling the dam’s reservoir and, in general, reach
compromises on its functioning.
We confirm Russia’s readiness to provide
satellite monitoring of the filling of the reservoir
in the event of a request from all participants in the
trilateral negotiations.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of America):
Let me start by thanking you the briefers — Special
Envoy Onanga-Anyanga, Executive Director Andersen
and the representative of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, speaking on behalf of Chairman
Tshisekedi — for the information that they shared with
us today. I would also like to welcome the participation
of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Egypt and the
Sudan and the Minister of Water, Irrigation and Energy
of Ethiopia.
The Horn of Africa is at an inflection point.
Decisions in the weeks and months ahead will have
significant, long-term implications for the people of the
region. The United States is committed to addressing
the interlinked regional crises and to supporting a
prosperous and stable Horn of Africa, so we stand
ready to support collaborative and constructive efforts
by Ethiopia, Egypt and the Sudan to resolve the issues
over the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam (GERD).
We understand that the Nile waters and how these
waters are used are important to all three of these
countries, and we believe that this is an issue that can
be reconciled. A balanced and equitable solution to the
filling and operation of the GERD can be reached with
the political commitment the all parties. Egypt and the
Sudan’s concerns over water security and the safety and
operation of the dam can be reconciled with Ethiopia’s
development needs.
This begins with the resumption of productive,
substantive negotiations. Those negotiations should be
held under the leadership of the African Union (AU)
and should recommence with urgency. This process
should use the 2015 Declaration of Principles on the
Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam signed by the
parties and the July 2020 statement by the Bureau of
the AU Assembly of Heads of State and Government as
foundational references.

S/PV. 8816

We believe that the African Union is the most
appropriate venue to address this dispute, and the United
States is committed to providing political and technical
support to facilitate a successful outcome. We urge the
African Union and the parties to use the expertise and
support of the three official observers — South Africa,
the European Union and the United States — as well as
the United Nations and other partners to help achieve a
positive outcome.
We also urge representatives of the Sudan, Ethiopia
and Egypt to continue to discuss with our Government
the full range of possible means to de-escalate tensions
and to demonstrate flexibility in their approach to
resolving this matter peacefully. We call on all parties
to refrain from making any statements or taking any
actions that might jeopardize the negotiation process
and to commit themselves to a negotiated solution that
is acceptable to everyone. Reaching a solution on the
GERD would pave the way for additional cooperation
on water resources, regional development and
economic integration.
We reaffirm our commitment to working with
Egypt, Ethiopia and the Sudan, as well as our allies
and partners, to ensure that the African Union-led
negotiations resume with urgency and move towards
productive, substantive and constructive ends.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I too would like to thank
the briefers for their insightful briefings.
The heightened tensions surrounding the
Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam (GERD) are
very concerning. Estonia has closely followed the
developments. We have also carefully studied the
letters that the concerned parties have submitted to
the Council.
It is obvious that there is no easy solution to this
question. Therefore, it is twice as important that all
three parties involved be willing to make the necessary
concessions that would allow them to arrive at a fair
and equitable solution. I believe this is achievable if all
involved negotiate in good faith.
We acknowledge the role that the African Union
has played in trying to help to find a solution. However,
we regret that so far no agreement has been found on
the outstanding issues, despite more than a year having
passed since the Council last discussed this matter. We
hope that with the facilitation of the African Union, the
parties will continue to work to come to an agreement

21-1830011/28

S/PV.8816

Peace and security in Africa

in a timely manner. The African Union, as the regional
organization, should remain the main forum for this.
Estonia also supports the continuation of the work of
observers in this process.
It is crucial to find a peaceful solution at the earliest
opportunity before the tensions escalate. We are urging
all parties to refrain from taking any unilateral actions
that might escalate the situation. The best chance of
finding a solution remains through negotiations and not
through escalation.
The time to come to an agreement is now. There
is no more time for any further delays. Estonia fully
supports finding a peaceful solution to this dispute.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I thank our briefers
for their insights. I also want to recognize the presence
of our guests today, the Ministers of Egypt, Ethiopia
and the Sudan and the representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, speaking on behalf of the Chair
of the African Union (AU).
It is our shared conviction that only a negotiated
settlement can offer a solution to this critical issue.
A negotiated agreement stands to benefit millions of
people living in the Blue Nile basin. Ireland recognizes
how fundamental this issue is for all parties, who see the
Nile as a vital natural resource, critical to the livelihoods
and development of the people across Egypt, Ethiopia
and the Sudan. A lasting agreement on how the dam is
managed is absolutely critical to the long-term stability
and development of the entire region.
Clearly, cooperation between the Blue Nile States
has never been more important. Transboundary water
cooperation is a key element in the implementation
of the Sustainable Development Goals. Furthermore,
Egypt, Ethiopia and the Sudan are experiencing firsthand the impacts of climate change, population growth
and rapid urbanization, which will only increase
water-management challenges. Sustained cooperation
over water resources can only strengthen and support
mutually beneficial relationships among neighbours.
We believe that the parties are right to be looking ahead
for their own people’s future, but they need to do this in
relative harmony and together.
We recognize the African Union’s efforts in leading
negotiations on the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance
Dam (GERD). We are encouraged by the leadership
of the African Union and the chairmanship of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, working to facilitate
12/28

08/07/2021

negotiations to find an equitable and peaceful solution
that is acceptable to all parties.
We believe that the African Union-led negotiations
remain the best forum for finding a comprehensive
agreement on the GERD. We encourage the African
Union to continue to draw on the necessary technical
expertise and political support to carry out this highly
complex facilitation role. Ireland fully supports the
efforts of the African Union and the observers to
the process to bring the parties together and find
a negotiated solution, and we encourage the swift
resumption of the talks.
We urge the parties to avoid any actions that
might call into question or damage the prospects of
an accord. We encourage the parties to redouble their
efforts to explore confidence-building measures, to
decrease tensions and build trust. As envisaged in the
Declaration of Principles on the GERD, this could
include establishing a reciprocal information-sharing
arrangement, with the support of observers, to facilitate
mutual sharing of data. Predictability and transparency,
we know, are critical to achieving a settlement.
After a decade of negotiations, we believe that
an agreement on the filling of the GERD should be
within the reach of Ethiopia, the Sudan and Egypt. In
the 2015 Declaration of Principles on the GERD, the
three countries committed to cooperation, equitable
and reasonable utilization, security and the peaceful
settlement of disputes. We hope that the remaining
differences can be overcome with the necessary political
will and a spirit of compromise that will benefit all the
people of the region.
Once again, we urge the parties to return to the
negotiating table. We also understand that, to achieve
that, political support is required. We see our meeting
here today as part of the international community’s
response to that. We will continue to support a
negotiated resolution on the matter. We fully support
the European Union’s role as an observer to the AUled process, and we, as Ireland, stand ready to assist
as needed.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): Let me begin by thanking
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the
Horn of Africa, Mr. Onanga-Anyanga, and Ms. Inger
Andersen, Executive Director of the United Nations
Environment Programme, for their briefings. I welcome
the presence of the Foreign Ministers of Egypt and the
Sudan; the Minister of Water, Irrigation and Energy of
21-18300

08/07/2021

Peace and security in Africa

Ethiopia; and the chargé d’affaires of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo at today’s meeting.
India is closely following the developments on the
Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam (GERD). The river
basin of the Nile encompasses 11 countries in Africa,
which also includes Ethiopia, the Sudan and Egypt.
Therefore, there is no doubt that this is a complex
transboundary water dispute, involving many countries
in the region as well as several legal and technical issues.
We recognize that the parties have already
undertaken several initiatives to address issues arising
out of the construction and filling of the GERD
in Ethiopia. Those include the establishment of an
international panel of experts in 2012 to examine
the dam’s design and construction plans, a follow-up
Tripartite National Committee in 2014 and the 2015
Declaration of Principles on the Grand Ethiopian
Renaissance Dam. We believe that those initiatives,
particularly the 2015 Agreement on Declaration of
Principles, provide a good basis to continue negotiations
aimed at reaching an amicable solution that protects the
interests of all three countries. It goes without saying
that Nile water usage should benefit the people of all
the countries, while respecting the rights of both upperand lower-riparian States.
The Chairpersons of the African Union (AU) — South
Africa in 2020 and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in 2021 — have made commendable efforts to
facilitate a meaningful discussion together with the
observers. There were many meetings of the African
Union on the issue last year. We understand from the
26 June AU communiqué that the tripartite negotiations
have brought about agreement on 90 per cent of the
issues, although not all the issues.

S/PV. 8816

and socioeconomic aspects. India is of the view that the
countries should continue their bilateral engagements,
as well as cooperate fully in a focussed manner with the
AU, to reach a mutually acceptable, long-term solution
to the relevant issues. Only such a solution will endure
and serve the developmental needs of upper- and lowerriparian regions. We also urge other countries concerned
to support the efforts of the AU in that regard.
Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for the Horn of Africa, Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga,
and Ms. Inger Andersen, Executive Director of the
United Nations Environment Programme, for their
excellent briefings. I commend the representative of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo on delivering the
statement on behalf of the current Chairperson of the
African Union. I am pleased to note the presence of the
Ministers of Egypt, Ethiopia and the Sudan among us.
This is the second time that the Security Council has
taken up the issue of the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance
Dam (GERD) (see S/2020/636), an infrastructure project
with immense potential, the operationalization of which
has unfortunately been a source of misunderstanding
among Egypt, Ethiopia and the Sudan for many years.
The presence of the representatives of those countries at
the Security Council attests to the evident will of three
neighbours to resolve the misunderstanding peacefully
and amicably

As a lower- and upper-riparian State, India is only
too aware of how difficult such negotiations can be. It
is important that the AU continue with those efforts in
good faith. We call on Ethiopia, Egypt and the Sudan to
work constructively with the AU-led processes, with a
view to resolving the outstanding issues in a purposeful
manner and with the urgency it deserves. Since the AU
is seized of the matter, it is important that all parties
engage urgently to find a way forward.

The Niger fully supports the negotiation process
under way through the good offices of President Félix
Antoine Tshilombo Tshisekedi, current Chairperson
of the African Union, and calls on the parties present
to demonstrate greater political will by providing the
committee on technical and legal issues, which was
established as part of the outcome of the 26 June 2020
meeting of the Extraordinary African Union Bureau
of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government,
with the opportunity to develop compromise proposals,
so that their adoption can enable the resolution of the
remaining 10 per cent of issues as soon as possible.
It is equally important that the parties refrain from
any comments or actions that could undermine the
negotiation process under way.

Based on our own experience, we know that
transboundary-water disputes should ideally be resolved
through mechanisms agreed upon by the primary
stakeholders and taking into account the respective
rights and issues of technical details, historical usage

One can have differences among brothers, but
among brothers, one must overcome them, as peaceful
coexistence is priceless. Successful examples in this area
exist in Africa. As a member of a water-management
organization, namely, the Niger Basin Authority, the

21-1830013/28

S/PV.8816

Peace and security in Africa

Niger would like to share its experience in the joint
management of the exploitation of the natural resources
of the Niger basin.
The nine States of West and Central Africa, which
make up the Niger basin, have in effect agreed on a
management strategy for the efficient and sustainable
use of the waters of the Niger River by any State under
the authority of the Niger Basin Authority, established
in 1980. That successful example of cooperation in
water resources development can effectively serve as
a source of inspiration for an accelerated solution to
the GERD issue, especially with a view towards the
sustainable development and management of the waters
of the Nile among all riparians in future.
In conclusion, the Niger welcomes the communiqué
issued at the conclusion of the virtual meeting of the
Bureau of the Assembly of the African Union Heads
of State and Government on June 24, which reaffirms
the organization’s commitment to remain seized of the
dispute, and, based on the principle of subsidiarity,
calls on all parties to prioritize reaching a regional and
African solution to the GERD issue. To that end, we
remain convinced that, under auspices of the African
Union, the parties will spare no effort to ensure that the
GERD is a source of shared development and prosperity,
which will contribute to the strengthening of solidarity
and cooperation among the three countries.
Egypt, Ethiopia and the Sudan are major countries
of the great civilizations in Africa and have helped in
the settlement of numerous crisis in the continent. I am
certain that they will be up to the task of meeting the
challenge at hand.

08/07/2021

technical, developmental and security perspectives. We
must take of all of them into account.
We regret that, despite the good offices of the
African Union leadership, the process continues to
lack substantial progress. We are concerned that the
dispute could exacerbate tensions in the region and
relations among the three countries, which would be of
significant consequence not only for the Horn of Africa
but for the entire continent.
We have taken note of the positions of the three
countries, which have been articulated in several
letters to the Security Council. While the Council
must focus on all matters that could potentially pose
a threat to international peace and security, in this
case a preventive approach must be sought at all times,
consistent with Chapter VI of the Charter of the United
Nations. Mexico’s position with regard to international
disputes, especially those affecting several countries at
the same time, has been to promote, above all, a peaceful
and mutually acceptable solution for all parties, based
on dialogue.
Moreover, as this is an issue that affects three
African countries, and based on Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations, we consider it particularly
important that the international community support
the efforts of the African Union to bring the positions
of the three countries closer together and resume
negotiations, taking into account the proven capacity of
that regional organization to seek African solutions to
problems affecting the continent.

Mr. Ochoa Martínez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral
Onanga-Anyanga,
Executive
Director
Andersen and the representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, who spoke on behalf of the
Chairperson of the African Union, for their briefings.
We also welcome the Foreign Ministers of Egypt and
the Sudan, and Minister of Water, Irrigation and Energy
of Ethiopia.

We call on the parties to continue the dialogue in
good faith and to move towards an agreement on the
filling and operation of the dam so that a satisfactory
and beneficial solution for all three countries and the
region as a whole can be reached within a reasonable
period of time. Mexico supports regional mediation
as well as all actions aimed at facilitating political
dialogue and technical understanding. The continued
involvement of the African Union is welcome and very
necessary in that regard.

Mexico has closely followed the tripartite
negotiations among Egypt, Ethiopia and the Sudan on
the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam. We recognize
the importance of the Nile for the livelihoods and wellbeing of the three countries. We therefore understand
that the issue can be viewed from specific political,

Mexico urges all parties to refrain from any actions
that could jeopardize negotiations or undermine the
spirit of goodwill necessary to reach an agreement.
Likewise, any dissuasive or pressurizing actions should
be avoided in order to prevent unnecessary escalations
of tension.

14/28

21-18300

08/07/2021

Peace and security in Africa

Just as the representative of the Niger mentioned
earlier, Mexico also has a long history of shared
management of transboundary water resources, both on
its northern and southern borders. We are therefore well
aware of the great relevance and complexity involved
in the administration of such a vital resource as water.
One example is the International Boundary and Water
Commission, which was established by Mexico and the
United States in 1889. Mexico has also established a
similar mechanism with Belize and Guatemala.
Those institutions are devoted to implementing
boundary and water treaties between our neighbouring
nations and have allowed for the construction, operation
and maintenance of relevant infrastructure for the
management of cross-border rivers. Perhaps they could
serve as a model, with the necessary adaptations on
a case-by-case basis, in future rounds of negotiations
among Egypt, Ethiopia and the Sudan. We would be
happy to provide further details on those arrangements
if useful to the parties.
Nevertheless, even with agreements of that nature
in place, we must remember that the management of
water resources is never immune to potential disputes.
That is why a shared reference framework and the
appropriate mechanisms to deal with disputes are key,
so as to prevent any escalation from the technical to the
political level.
Finally, I wish to underscore that Mexico will
continue to follow developments on the ground and will
constantly seek to support, here and in other forums,
a peaceful and negotiated solution, as well as any
preventive diplomacy efforts.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I would like to begin by
warmly welcoming the Foreign Ministers of Egypt and
the Sudan and the Minister of Water, Irrigation and
Energy of Ethiopia to our meeting today. I also welcome
the Chargé d’affaires of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, on behalf of the Chairperson of the African
Union, to this meeting. I would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Horn of
Africa and the Executive Director of the United Nations
Environment Programme for their insightful briefings.
Water resources play a critical role in supporting
the livelihoods of billions of people on Earth and its
countless ecosystems. The sustainable and equitable
use of water resources is therefore vital for securing
peace, stability and economic development, as well as
the protection of nature. Therefore, we are concerned

S/PV. 8816

by the increasing tendency of the utilization of many
international watercourses in a manner that may not
ensure the legitimate rights and interests of riparian
countries, especially downstream countries.
The adverse effects of that tendency, compounded
by those of climate change, have posed significant
challenges to the security, stability and development
of many regions, including in Africa, where the lives
of millions of people depend upon shared rivers. We
believe that the use of water resources for development
purposes is a legitimate right of any party concerned,
be it a water-surplus or water-deficit country. We
also believe that best practices on transboundary
watercourses include the adequate exchange of views,
consultations and the full implementation of legal
frameworks among stakeholders concerned in order to
address outstanding issues.
Furthermore, the utilization of international
watercourses must be in line with international law and
the commitments of the countries concerned, with a
view to harmonizing the interests of riparian States, both
upstream and downstream, to ensure the sustainable
use and equitable sharing of water resources. We would
like to emphasize the importance of fostering the
further codification and development of international
law regarding the sustainable use of transboundary
watercourses, including through the implementation
of the United Nations Convention on the Law of
Non-Navigational Uses of International Watercourses.
With regard to the Blue Nile River, we take note
of the positions of the relevant parties, including those
elaborated in the recent letters addressed to the President
of the Security Council. We support the efforts of the
parties directly concerned to promote the sustainable
and equitable utilization of water resources, including
through cooperation, consultations and negotiations on
the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam (GERD) project.
It is our wish that all the parties concerned will build
upon the results already achieved and fully implement
the 2015 Agreement on Declaration of Principles on
the GERD project. We take note of the efforts by all
sides over the past year during negotiations. However,
given the ongoing fragile situation in the region, it
is important that the parties concerned uphold the
principle of settling disputes through peaceful means,
continue their dialogue and meaningful negotiations
and take into account one another’s views and legitimate
interests in a spirit of neighbourly brotherhood and good

21-1830015/28

S/PV.8816

Peace and security in Africa

faith, as well as in accordance with international law
and the 2015 Agreement on Declaration of Principles.
As we have stated time and again here, we continue
to support the important role of the African Union (AU)
in upholding its responsibility to promote negotiations
and mediation on regional issues, as it has done over
the past year on the GERD issue. Given the continued
stalemate, we believe it is high time that the AU
accelerate its efforts in assisting the three countries
to resolve the outstanding issues, including legal and
technical questions. In that connection, all parties
should refrain from any measures that could escalate
tensions or undermine the opportunity to achieve a
negotiated solution to the issue.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt,
Mr. Sameh Shokry Selim; the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Sudan, Mrs. Mariam Al Mahadi; and the
Minister of Water, Irrigation and Energy of Ethiopia,
Mr. Seleshi Bekele Awulachew, to today’s meeting.
China thanks the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mr. Christophe
Lutundula Apala Pen’apala; the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for the Horn of Africa,
Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga; and the Executive
Director of the United Nations Environment
Programme, Ms. Inger Andersen, for their briefings.
Egypt, Ethiopia and the Sudan are all at an
important stage of development, and the River Nile
is of great significance to the life and development of
all three countries. China supports the three countries
in reaching an agreement on transboundary water
cooperation through dialogue and consultation for the
sustainable management and utilization of the Nile’s
water so that all riparian countries can benefit from it.
China believes that, through joint efforts, the
completion of the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam
(GERD) can become a tripartite development project to
enhance mutual trust and win-win cooperation. China
attaches great importance to the issue of the GERD and
appreciates the fact that, in 2015, the three countries
signed the Agreement on Declaration of Principles
on the GERD following a dialogue and the holding of
multiple rounds of negotiations under the auspices of
the AU. The AU has made many efforts to facilitate the
tripartite negotiations. China appreciates the active role
played by President Tshilombo Tshisekedi and President
Ramaphosa, as current and former AU Chairpersons.
16/28

08/07/2021

China notes the positions expressed in the very
recent letters sent to the Council by the Foreign
Ministers of Egypt, Ethiopia and the Sudan. The
utilization of transboundary water resources involves
national interests upstream and downstream, which is
very complex and sensitive. China fully understands
the legitimate concerns of Egypt, Ethiopia and the
Sudan regarding the GERD.
On this issue, China remains consistent in its
position that the parties should resolve their differences
through dialogue and consultation in order to achieve
mutual benefit and win-win results. African countries
have a fine tradition in resolving regional problems
through dialogue and consultation. Egypt, Ethiopia
and the Sudan are all important countries in the region
and good friends of China. My country sincerely
hopes that the three countries will resume dialogue
and consultation in the spirit of friendly cooperation
as soon as possible, as well as reach an agreement
expeditiously on a solution that is acceptable and
beneficial to all three.
China looks forward to the AU’s continued proper
role in that regard. The international community,
including the Council, should support the three
countries in resolving their differences through
dialogue and consultation and, to that end, create an
environment conducive to jointly maintaining peace,
stability and development in the African region. China
stands ready to continue to play a constructive role
alongside all the parties.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.
I welcome the Foreign Ministers of Egypt and the
Sudan and the Minister of Water, Irrigation and Energy
of Ethiopia to the Security Council. I would like to
thank Mr. Onanga-Anyanga, Ms. Andersen and the
Chargé d’affaires of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo for their briefings.
I would like to stress three points on the issue
under consideration.
First, the responsibility of the Security Council is to
prevent the prolongation of this dispute from becoming
a threat to the maintenance of international peace and
security. That is why it was important for this meeting
to take place. All parties have legitimate interests, but
after 10 years of negotiations, trust has eroded. In the
21-18300

08/07/2021

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV. 8816

absence of prior agreement, the continued filling of the
dam reservoir is exacerbating tensions.

Programme, as well as Mr. Onanga-Anyanga, Special
Envoy for the Horn of Africa, for their remarks.

At a time when regional stability is under threat,
the priority is to avoid compounding each country’s
current challenges. Those challenges include the
democratic transition in the Sudan, whose success is a
priority for France, and the challenges facing Egypt in
meeting the needs of its population. Also included are
the development challenges in Ethiopia. The conflict
in Tigray has fueled other tensions, particularly in the
Al-Fashaga triangle area.

Egypt, a nation of over 100 million souls, is facing
an existential threat. A grand structure of mammoth
proportions has been constructed across the artery that
bequeaths life to the people of Egypt. A colossal wall
of iron and steel has arisen along the banks of a great
and ancient river and has cast a long, dark shadow over
the future and fate of the people of Egypt. With every
brick and every layer of mortar, the Grand Ethiopian
Renaissance Dam (GERD) grows higher, its reservoir
grows larger and it continues to constrict the lifeblood of
innocent millions living downstream of this giant dam.

Secondly, we call on the countries of the region to
show political will in order to resolve their differences
through dialogue, with the support of the African
Union. The solution can come only from dialogue
among the parties. We call on them to refrain from any
action that could hinder the continuation of discussions
and the achievement of a negotiated solution.
France commends the efforts of the African Union
chairmanship to support the negotiations, especially
the personal engagement of President Ramaphosa, and
now, President Tshilombo Tshisekedi. Those efforts
must continue and be intensified. We encourage the
United Nations to continue to bring its expertise to bear
on the process and urge the three parties to accept a
more active role for observers in the negotiations.
Thirdly, France is convinced that an agreement can
quickly be reached between the parties on the filling
and management of the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance
Dam. There are elements of convergence, which must
form the basis of negotiations, under the auspices of
the African Union. France solemnly calls on Ethiopia,
Egypt and the Sudan to demonstrate responsibility,
compromise and cooperation in order to settle the
outstanding issues expeditiously. France will remain
mobilized so that a negotiated solution can be found as
soon as possible.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Egypt.
Mr. Selim (Egypt): At the outset, I would like to
extend my congratulations to Ambassador De Rivière
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council. I
also thank Under-Secretary-General Inger Andersen,
Executive Director of the United Nations Environment

Last year, on 29 June 2020, Egypt came before
the Security Council (see S/2020/636) to warn the
international community of this burgeoning danger that
was brewing on the horizon. We alerted the world to
the impending first filling of the GERD and cautioned
against the costs of seeking to establish exclusive
control over a river on which our survival depends. We
implored this organ to act with vigilance and vigour to
avert an escalation of tensions that could jeopardize the
peace in a fragile region. We called upon our brethren
with whom we share the riches of the Nile to exercise
responsibility and to recognize that the future and
fortunes of our peoples are intrinsically intertwined.
And yet, within days of the meeting on the question
of the GERD, the Rubicon was crossed. Ethiopia
commenced the unilateral filling of the GERD, and its
Foreign Minister declared, with no small measure of
impudence, “the river became a lake ... the Nile is ours”.
Nonetheless, Egypt’s response to this assault on
the river was to act with restraint and pursue the path
of peace by seeking a settlement to this crisis through
an equitable agreement that preserves the interests
of all three parties. We wholeheartedly embraced the
initiative of the then Chairperson of the African Union,
President Cyril Ramaphosa of South Africa, to initiate
negotiations under the auspices of the African Union,
and we engaged in a whole year of talks convened and
facilitated by our African brethren to forge an African
solution to this intractable problem.
And yet we have failed. After a year of abortive
negotiations and despite the tireless efforts of the
Chairpersons of the African Union and our international
partners, we find ourselves again confronted by the
reality of the unilateral execution of the filling of the
GERD, without an agreement to protect downstream

21-1830017/28

S/PV.8816

Peace and security in Africa

communities against the dangers of this dam. Indeed,
in a further demonstration of its obstinacy, Ethiopia
announced, on 5 July 2021, a mere three days before the
convening of today’s meeting, that it had commenced the
second year filling of the GERD, without an agreement.
This blatant act of unilateralism is not only a
manifestation of Ethiopia’s irresponsibility and its
callous indifference to the damage that the filling of
this dam could inflict upon Egypt and the Sudan, but
it also illustrates Ethiopia’s bad faith and its attempt
to impose a fait accompli in defiance of the collective
will of the international community as expressed and
embodied in the holding of this Security Council
meeting to discuss and take action on the question of
the GERD. In this regard, I take note of the European
Union’s issuance of a statement today expressing regret
that Ethiopia has begun executing the second filling
without an agreement — and commend it for that. I
encourage the Security Council and its member States
to take a similar position in response to this deeply
troubling development — something that has not been
displayed in today’s statements.
This persistent practice of unilateralism
betrays Ethiopia’s disregard, if not its contempt, of
international law and reflects its underlying policy
objectives of seeking to arrest the Nile and transform
this transboundary river of life into an instrument of
political influence and control, all of which threatens
to undermine peace and security in the region. This is
why Egypt has elected to again bring the question of the
GERD before the Security Council.
Ethiopia’s unrelenting unilateralism, the continued
failure of negotiations and the absence at this juncture
of a viable path towards a political settlement of this
matter have all impelled Egypt to call upon the Security
Council to intercede expeditiously and effectively to
prevent an escalation of tensions and to address this
situation, which could, as stated in Article 34 of the
United Nations Charter, endanger the maintenance of
international peace and security.
We have come to this Chamber out of an abiding
faith in the value of international law and an unwavering
belief in the virtue of multilateralism as a vehicle for
promoting peace and preventing conflict and strife. We
are driven by a commitment to the principles enshrined
in the United Nations Charter and an enduring
confidence in the capacity of the Security Council to
discharge its duty to maintain international peace and
18/28

08/07/2021

security by taking the necessary action in relation to
the question of the GERD. Indeed, the great value to
humankind of this body is its ability and authority
to act pre-emptively to protect and uphold the peace
and not to stand by in a state of indifferent abeyance
as the rights of nations and indeed their very existence
are threatened.
Egypt has engaged in a whole decade of negotiations
on the GERD. Since Ethiopia unilaterally commenced
the construction of this dam without fulfilling the duties
incumbent upon it as an upstream State to notify and
consult its downstream co-riparians, Egypt has sought
to reach an agreement on the GERD that would preserve
the rights of our three countries — Egypt, the Sudan
and Ethiopia — and promote their common interests.
Our hope was and remains to conclude a legally
binding agreement that enables Ethiopia to achieve its
developmental objectives by generating hydropower
from the GERD expeditiously, efficiently and
sustainably. This reflects the fact that Egypt was and
remains committed to Ethiopia’s stability and prosperity,
and it also exemplifies Egypt’s long-standing policy
of engendering and expanding cooperation with our
co-riparians throughout the Nile basin.
However, any agreement on the GERD must be
equitable, reasonable and legally binding. It must
include provisions to mitigate the adverse effects of
this dam, especially during periods of drought. It must
prevent the infliction of significant harm on the riparian
interests of Egypt and the Sudan. It must guarantee
the safety, functionality and resilience of downstream
dams. And it must ensure that Egypt’s water security is
not imperilled by the filling and operation of what will
become Africa’s largest hydropower facility.
Realizing this objective of concluding a fair and
balanced agreement on the GERD is not unsurmountable,
nor is it beyond reach. Indeed, the continued failure of
negotiations is not due to a lack of scientific solutions
to the outstanding technical issues, nor is it because we
lack the requisite legal expertise to draft an agreement.
Rather, the singular source of our failure has been
and remains Ethiopian intransigence. This reality is
best reflected in the following statement from the
letter addressed by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Ethiopia to the Security Council on 23 June 2021:
“Filling and operating the GERD without
seeking agreement from Egypt and [the] Sudan
is the bare minimum of the exercise of this
21-18300

08/07/2021

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV. 8816

sovereign prerogative as a riparian country of an
international watercourse”.

8 January 2021 from Ethiopia’s Minister of Water in
which he stated,

The sentiment in this statement is the root of the
problem. It demonstrates that the cause of this crisis is
political. It reveals that Ethiopia is operating under the
assumption that it is engaging in negotiations on the
GERD out of comity or charity.

“Ethiopia does not have an obligation emanating
from law or practice to acquire agreement from
downstream countries to construct the GERD or
any future water development project”.

Ethiopia has conveniently decided to ignore the
realities of geography and appears to be under the
illusion that the Blue Nile is an internal river that it can
exploit to its exclusive benefit. And it seems to presume
that this watercourse, which freely and naturally flows
to the territories of its co-riparians, can be subjected to
its sovereignty and placed under its dominion.
This unfortunate posture has thwarted every effort
to reach an agreement and has been echoed in the
positions that Ethiopia has adopted throughout a decade
of negotiations. For instance, Ethiopia refuses to sign a
legally binding agreement. It has even objected to calling
the instrument being negotiated an “agreement”; it has
proposed to designate the text as merely “guidelines
and rules”. Ethiopia has refused to include any form
of binding dispute resolution provisions and insists on
codifying an unlimited right to alter and amend the
GERD agreement whenever it so desires.
Ethiopia has sought to justify these unreasonable
positions by invoking some mythical injustice that had
been wrought upon it by so-called colonial treaties or
by an unfair status quo. Nothing can be further from
the truth. Ethiopia was never a colony and has never
concluded a treaty relating to the Nile under the threat
of coercion or compulsion.
Moreover, Egypt has never objected to Ethiopia’s
right to harness the resources of the Blue Nile.
However, Egypt expects and indeed demands that its
upstream co-riparian complies with its international
legal obligations, which require it to prevent the
infliction of significant harm against the interests of its
downstream neighbours.
Ethiopia is also seeking to use the GERD
negotiations as a backdoor through which to consecrate
an unlimited and an unregulated right to construct
future projects along the Blue Nile and has demanded
that its co-riparians sign a hydrological blank check
that grants it unrestricted control of the river. This
was expressed in no uncertain terms in a letter dated

This policy was put into practice when the Prime
Minister of Ethiopia announced, on 30 May 2021,
that his country plans to construct over a hundred
dams over the coming fiscal year without even the
slightest mention of the interests or equities of its
co-riparians, as if Ethiopia holds exclusive proprietary
rights over the Nile and the other rivers that it shares
with its neighbours, which was especially apparent
in the damage inflicted by Ethiopia on Lake Turkana
in Kenya.
Despite Ethiopia’s persistent pattern of bad faith and
in spite of its incessant unilateralism, Egypt continued
to negotiate in good faith and with a genuine political
will to reach an equitable agreement. For a whole
decade, we explored every avenue and exhausted every
opportunity to conclude a document that would enable
Ethiopia to fill and operate the GERD while mitigating
its harmful downstream impacts. We sought an
agreement that would become an instrument of regional
integration and collaboration and that would herald a
new era of cooperation among our three countries.
We sought an agreement through years of fruitless
trilateral negotiations during which Ethiopia effectively
torpedoed our efforts to undertake joint studies on the
socioeconomic impacts of the GERD and to assess its
environmental impacts, and, as a result of Ethiopia’s
obstructionism, we now have no impartial scientific
record of the adverse effects of this mega-dam.
Egypt also accepted an invitation to participate
in negotiations facilitated by the United States of
America and the World Bank Group, in which Ethiopia
participated fully and freely, and that led to the
drafting — after 12 rounds of intensive negotiations — of
a comprehensive agreement on the filling and operation
of the GERD, which Egypt signed but which Ethiopia
rejected. We also engaged in negotiations held
upon an invitation from His Excellency the Prime
Minister of the Sudan, which, despite the significant
progress achieved, were ultimately undermined by
Ethiopian intransigence.

21-1830019/28

S/PV.8816

Peace and security in Africa

Moreover, for a whole year, since the previous
meeting convened by the Security Council on the
question of the GERD, Egypt participated actively in
the negotiations led by the African Union.
We engaged in this AU-led process with a sense of
optimism and faith in the ability of our African brethren
to facilitate the adoption of an agreement on the GERD.
We worked diligently to implement the instructions
of the Bureau of the Assembly of the African Union at
the summit level to reach a legally binding agreement
on the filling and operation of the GERD, and we
welcomed the constructive engagement of our partners
from the European Union and the United States in
that process.
However, after a year of faltering negotiations,
and despite the highly appreciated good offices and
untiring efforts of His Excellency President Cyril
Ramaphosa of South Africa and His Excellency
President Félix Tshisekedi of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo during their respective periods as Chair
of the African Union, the AU-led process failed to yield
the desired agreement.

08/07/2021

its operation, thereby posing a grave danger to our
rights and interests.
Furthermore, despite claiming to support the
granting of an enhanced role to our partners who
attended the AU-led negotiations as observers, the
reality is that during the latest ministerial meeting, held
in Kinshasa from April 4 to 6, upon the kind invitation
of President Félix Tshisekedi, Ethiopia rejected every
proposal submitted by the Sudan and Egypt to augment
the AU-led process and expand the role of our partners
in order to assist us in reaching an agreement on
the GERD.
As such, I find it deeply disheartening that I must
report to the Security Council that the AU-led process,
in its current format, has reached an impasse. A
whole year of negotiations was expended in fruitless
talks while Ethiopia continued the construction of the
GERD and has now reached the point of continuing to
unilaterally fill its reservoir.
Throughout those winding and arduous processes
and at every juncture of the negotiations, Ethiopia
remained implacable.

Our three countries were even unable to execute
the simple task of compiling a complete text of a zero
draft of the GERD agreement that provides a record
of their negotiating positions, and countless weeks
were exhausted in ineffectual virtual meetings and
disagreements on peripheral matters of procedure.

It refused every proposal and rejected every idea
presented by Egypt that would have guaranteed that
Ethiopia would be able to generate hydropower from the
GERD at optimal levels of efficiency while protecting
downstream States against the potential harms of
this dam.

More troublingly, throughout this process,
Ethiopia effectively derailed the AU-led negotiations.
It repeatedly attempted to redirect the talks towards
reaching non-binding arrangements for the filling of
the GERD or for the appointment of focal points for the
exchange of technical data.

Ethiopia also blocked every compromise formula
submitted to us by our international partners and
continued to adopt inflexible positions designed to
evade and elude any commitment to protect, or even
provide minimal safeguards to, the interests of Egypt
and the Sudan. Even our efforts to engender confidence
and build bridges of trust between our countries came
to naught.

While those ideas may appear reasonable to
the untrained eye, the reality is that these Ethiopian
proposals contravene the instructions of the Bureau of
the Assembly of the African Union at the summit level,
which directed us to agree on the rules governing both
the filling and the operation of the GERD.
More importantly, the practical effect of those
Ethiopian proposals is to deny downstream States any
meaningful protection against the adverse effects of
the GERD and entitle Ethiopia to fill its reservoir and
activate its massive turbines without instituting rules to
mitigate the harmful impacts of the dam and regulate
20/28

We signed the 2015 Agreement on Declaration
of Principles on the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance
Dam to affirm our commitment to reaching a fair and
equitable agreement on the GERD. We presented a plan
to establish a common infrastructure fund to broaden
the horizons of cooperation between our countries.
We proposed to contribute to the financing of the
GERD to turn this dam into a symbol of friendship and
brotherhood between our peoples, and we suggested
extending our power lines to help energize Ethiopia and
21-18300

08/07/2021

Peace and security in Africa

assist in its quest for development; and still Ethiopia
remained unyielding in its intransigence.
As a result, the two downstream States are now left
vulnerable to the evils of the GERD.
We have no independently verifiable guarantees
regarding the safety and structural stability of the
GERD, and, as such, 150 million Sudanese and
Egyptians are condemned by Ethiopia to live under
the harrowing spectre of a towering structure that can
hold up to 74 billion cubic metres of water without
assurances regarding its safety or reliability.
Nor do we have any protection against the
incalculable damage that the GERD could inflict
during future periods of drought. At a time when
the river grows dry and the land gets parched under
the searing sun, and the livelihood of Egyptians is
imperilled, Ethiopia is unwilling to release the waters
of the Blue Nile to quench the thirst of the downstream
valley. Indeed, that is the crux of the problem.
All that Egypt has called for and sought is a binding
agreement that includes an insurance policy against the
harmful impacts of the GERD on Egypt’s water security
by designing a mechanism through which our three
countries could cooperate to collectively bear the burden
of addressing future periods of drought. Unfortunately,
however, Ethiopia remains steadfast in its rejection of
any form of agreement that provides any meaningful
measure of protection to the interests of downstream
States. It is therefore not an overstatement to affirm
that for Egypt the GERD is an existential threat.
Our estimates and scientific models indicate that
this mega-dam can wreak incalculable damage on
Egypt, despite the precautionary measures that we have
taken in anticipation of Ethiopia’s unilateral filling of
the GERD and our tireless efforts at conservation and
water reuse.
For us, the harm that the GERD might inflict will
affect every aspect of the lives of the Egyptian people
like a malignant plague.
In the absence of an agreement that regulates its
filling and operation, the GERD can cause cumulative
water shortages in Egypt amounting to 120 billion cubic
metres. It will diminish access to clean drinking water;
it could deprive millions of farmers of the water they
use to irrigate their fields; it will rob countless families
of their income and livelihood; it will destroy thousands
of acres of arable land; it will increase desertification

S/PV. 8816

and degrade the riparian ecosystem; and it will increase
vulnerability to the effects of climate change. That is a
situation that Egypt cannot, and will not, tolerate.
It is therefore imperative for the international
community to exert every effort, including by acting
through the Security Council, to pre-empt that
eventuality and prevent the GERD from becoming a
threat to the very existence of Egypt. That requires the
Council to unequivocally call upon the parties to reach
an equitable agreement on the GERD, within a defined
timeline, and to encourage them to work diligently and
with earnestness to achieve that objective forthwith.
Otherwise, if its riparian rights are jeopardized, or if
its survival is imperilled, Egypt will be left with no
alternative but to uphold and protect its inherent right
to life, which is guaranteed by the laws and customs of
nations and the imperatives of nature.
The fact that Egypt has brought this matter — which
is of the greatest consequence — to the attention of
the Security Council for a second time is a testament
to our unshakable faith in the ideals of the Charter
of the United Nations as expressed in its Preamble,
which affirms our collective commitment to “practice
tolerance and live together in peace with one another as
good neighbours” and to “unite our strength to maintain
international peace and security”.
We come here in search of a viable path towards a
peaceful, amicable and negotiated solution to this crisis
and to avert the dire consequences of our inability
to reach a settlement to the matter. Our hope is that
the Security Council will recognize the gravity of
the situation and fulfil its responsibility to maintain
international peace and security. Our expectation is
that the Council will take the necessary measures to
ensure that the parties engage in an effective process of
negotiations that can yield an agreement that serves our
collective interests.
Indeed, the people of Egypt — and peoples
throughout the region — are watching the deliberations
of the Security Council today with great interest and
high hope. They look to the United Nations and to the
Council as the guarantors of peace and the custodians
of the collective will of our human family. They are
confident that the Council will not fail in the discharge
of its responsibilities in that regard.
It is in that spirit that I wish to underscore that, in
executing the unique responsibility conferred upon the
Security Council to maintain international peace and

21-1830021/28

S/PV.8816

Peace and security in Africa

security, the members of the Council are instructed,
pursuant to Article 24 of the Charter, to act on behalf
of the general membership of the United Nations and
in furtherance of the noble purposes for which the
Organization was established and the principles that
guide and inspire its work.
It therefore behoves the members of the Council to
consider the matter that is before us today not from the
narrow lens of their respective national interests, but
in the light of their collective responsibility to act on
behalf of the international community to preserve the
peace and uphold the principles of justice and equity.
Accordingly, Egypt calls upon the Security Council
to adopt the draft resolution on the question of the
GERD that was circulated by the Republic of Tunisia.
As evident from the text of that draft resolution, we
do not expect the Council to formulate solutions to the
outstanding legal and technical issues, and neither do
we request that the Council impose on the parties the
terms of a settlement of a riparian dispute.
Rather, the draft resolution is political in nature.
Its purpose, which we believe is eminently balanced
and constructive, is to relaunch negotiations according
to an augmented format that retains and enhances the
leadership of the Chairperson of the African Union
and that enables our international partners, including
the United Nations, to use their expertise in this area
to aid our three countries in their quest to conclude,
within a reasonable time frame, an equitable agreement
on the GERD.
Indeed, if anything , the draft resolution aims at
implementing and effectuating the outcomes of the two
meetings of the Bureau of the African Union Assembly
that were held on the matter, which instructed the
parties to expeditiously finalize, with the assistance
of our partners attending those talks as observers, the
text of a legally binding agreement on the filling and
operation of the GERD and called upon them not to take
unilateral measures that could jeopardize that process.
Adopting that draft resolution would reaffirm
the Security Council’s resolve to upholding its
responsibility to maintain international peace and
security and would send an unequivocal signal of
reassurance that it remains committed to the peace and
prosperity of our African continent — while a failure
to take effective action on the question of the GERD
would be a disheartening dereliction of duties.
22/28

08/07/2021

Finally, I assure you, Mr. President, and members
of the Council that Egypt will exert every effort
to reach an agreement on the GERD that upholds
the unbreakable bond of brotherhood between our
countries and that reflects the timeless kinship among
the peoples living along the banks of the Nile River.
I call upon my colleagues, brothers and sisters in the
Sudan and Ethiopia, to embrace that spirit and redouble
our efforts to secure a future of peace and prosperity
for our countries and our peoples.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Sudan.
Mrs. Al Mahadi (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me to congratulate you, Mr. President, at the beginning
of this statement, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of July, and to
wish you all the best. I also congratulate the Permanent
Representative of Estonia on its success in presiding
over the Council last month. I would like as well to
express my thanks and appreciation to the members
of the Council in general, and France in particular, for
their generous response in organizing this meeting on
the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam, which is an
extremely important issue for my country and highlights
the interest of the United Nations in partnering with the
African Union and working to promote international
peace and security in Africa and the world.
I thank Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Horn of Africa,
and Ms. Inger Andersen, Executive Director of the
United Nations Environment Programme, for their
valuable briefings. I also thank President Tshilombo
Tshisekedi of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
for the statement delivered on his behalf. I appreciate
all the other statements delivered by the members of the
Council, to which I listened along with their valuable
and useful proposals on the management of international
rivers. I also salute my brothers Mr. Sameh Shoukry,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt, and Mr. Seleshi
Bekele Awulachew, Minister of Water, Irrigation and
Energy of Ethiopia. I also salute my colleague who
accompanies me, Professor Yasir Abbas, Minister
of Irrigation and Water Resources of the Republic of
the Sudan.
The Sudan expresses its appreciation for the role
and efforts of the African Union since the beginning
of its involvement in the process of negotiating with
the three countries on the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance
21-18300

08/07/2021

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV. 8816

Dam. We highlight the leadership of the process by the
African Union and continue to cooperate with it in that
context, with the aim of finding a just and equitable
solution that is accepted by all parties.

capabilities from Egypt. The three countries could also
ensure the provision of qualified labour. The dam would
offer an enlightening example of regional cooperation
in that way.

As we address the Security Council today, looking
forward to its help and positive role in resolving this
thorny conflict, we confirm at the outset that the
Sudan recognized, and continues to recognize, the
rights of neighbour Ethiopia in the current and future
exploitation of the Nile waters. We have supported the
Renaissance Dam from the outset and are well aware
that its benefits will not be limited to neighbouring
Ethiopia alone, provided that it is filled and operated
under a legal agreement among the three countries in
accordance with international law and the principles
of equitable and reasonable exploitation of transiting
water resources and without causing significant harm
to downstream States, preserving the foundations
of human rights and promoting the customs of goodneighbourliness between States.

The Sudan underscores the importance of a binding
legal agreement on filling and operating the dam for
the following reasons: first, safeguarding the security
of the populations of the Sudan and Egypt; secondly,
safeguarding Sudanese dams; and, thirdly, safeguarding
the Sudan’s strategic security.

We are aware of the benefits of the Renaissance
Dam for the Sudan in terms of flood prevention and
regular flow throughout the year. Those benefits will
materialize if the Grand Dam is filled and operated in
such a way that the Sudan is aware of how it is filled
and operated, one of the applicable principles of wellestablished norms and laws in cross-border rivers all
over the world. We in Africa have vivid and successful
measures that have helped stabilize States sharing
transboundary rivers, such as the example of the
significant experience of four countries of West Africa
that have continued to consistently and jointly manage
the Senegal River since 1972. Another eight African
countries have jointly operated the Niger River under a
legally binding agreement since 1980.
However, without an agreement on filling and
operating the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam, the
loss of its benefits could imperil half of the Sudan’s
population and all the population of Egypt. The
Renaissance Dam — this huge African project — could
serve as an ideal model for constructive cooperation
for more than 250 million African citizens if it is
used effectively and on the basis of cooperation
and complementarity.
The Sudan has vast expanses of fertile and arable
land that could provide the three countries, the region
and the entire world with sustainable food security,
electricity from Ethiopia and transformative processing

A huge dam such as the Renaissance Dam — whose
reservoir capacity is 74 billion cubic metres and which
is located a few kilometres from the Sudanese borders
and without coordinated safety measures with the
communities living downstream — poses a direct
threat to those communities and their security.
With regard to safeguarding the security of
the population, millions of Sudanese have lived for
thousands of years on the banks of the Nile and its
tributaries. They rely mainly on river agriculture, but
the Renaissance Dam could change their way of life and
decrease the area of cultivatable floodplains by 50 per
cent. It is a price that we are willing to pay as long as
those communities are able to benefit from a regular
flow of the Nile while enjoying protection from the
devastating effects of flooding.
We cannot accept, however, that the filling and
operating methods for the dam, adopted unilaterally,
should be used to terrorize those citizens, undermine
their dignity and violate their human rights, which
Ethiopia did a few months ago by invoking its selfdeclared right to decide unilaterally on how to operate
its dams. Since last November, Ethiopia has unilaterally
closed the Tekezé dam on the Setit River, which
originates in Ethiopia. That led to drought for a large
area of land downstream.
In early June, Ethiopia once again unilaterally
notified the Ministry of Irrigation of the Sudan that
it would open the dam to allow the flow of nearly
2.5 billion cubic metres of water over a period of two
weeks only. Consequently, the Ministry used the media
to notify residents on the banks of the Setit River of the
need to evacuate their homes within a mere three days.
One can only imagine those people’s panic and terror as
a result of that decision.
Furthermore, last July Ethiopia filled the
Renaissance Dam, for 2020, with 5 billion cubic

21-1830023/28

S/PV.8816

Peace and security in Africa

metres of water without prior notification, which led
to a sudden drop in the water level of the Blue Nile
and the stoppage of many water stations for more than
three days in the capital Khartoum, not to mention the
considerable economic and political consequences,
which the entire world witnessed.
Finally, the Minister of Water, Irrigation and
Energy of Ethiopia sent a letter to us on 5 July
confirming Ethiopia’s determination to fill the dam for
the second year in a row, although we notified them of
the considerable damage that had occurred and would
occur to the Sudan as a result of this unilateral filling.
Ethiopia has clearly demonstrated through its
actions how it will behave towards Sudanese citizens in
the absence of a legally binding agreement, in disregard
of the rights of neighbourly countries, and use its
capability to unilaterally operate the dams that stand
on its territories in order to threaten the security and
safety of the citizens of the Sudan.
Concerning the protection of Sudanese dams, the
Roseires Sand Dam, as pointed out by Ms. Andersen,
is located 100 kilometres from the Renaissance Dam
and is less than one-tenth of its size in terms of water
capacity. Along with other dams, it irrigates 70 per
cent of the Sudan’s agricultural projects and generates
almost 40 per cent of the electricity in the Sudan.
Therefore, without the regular and systematic provision
of information on how the Renaissance Dam is to be
filled and operated, the safety and the security of the
Roseires Dam will be seriously jeopardized. Its ability
to generate electricity and provide water for significant
strategic projects, which is part of the Gezira project, as
well as other projects on which the Sudan depends for
its food security and agricultural investment, would be
doomed to failure.
With regard to protecting the strategic security of
the Sudan, as we underscored earlier, 70 per cent of the
Sudan’s existing irrigated agricultural projects depend
on the country’s dams in the Blue Nile basin. It is
therefore vital for us to be kept up to date on the filling
and operating of the Renaissance Dam in order for us
to operate the Roseires Dam, so that the Sudan can
plan now and in the future for its agricultural projects.
As everyone is aware, the Sudan is currently open to
the world following the success of its great revolution,
made possible by the ultimate sacrifice of Sudanese
youth and the courageous and tenacious leadership
24/28

08/07/2021

of the women and men of the Sudan, which dazzled
the world.
The Sudan has been removed from the list of
State sponsors of terrorism. The Sudanese revolution
succeeded in breaking us from the yoke of totalitarian
rule, under which Sudanese had lived in terror. That
rule targeted the communities of Darfur, the two
regions and the eastern part of the Sudan. None of the
Sudanese provinces were spared its criminal acts. The
world celebrated the great revolution, undertaken by
a civil-military partnership that represents the unique
Sudanese model presented to the world. It managed to
achieve peace by signing the Juba Peace Agreement.
The Sudan is determined to pursue its efforts
towards achieving peace. The Prime Minister of the
Sudan, Mr. Abdullah Hamdok, is currently chairing the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, where
we are working to realize regional stability in East
Africa and neighbouring countries in West Africa. The
Sudan has carried out deep economic reforms based
upon its faith in cooperation with the rest of the world.
Indeed, at the Paris Conference, France celebrated the
return of the Sudan to the international community and
introduced it to the world delightfully by highlighting
the opening of the Sudan to the world for constructive
cooperation and smart partnerships in all areas, where
agricultural investment would be preponderant.
Therefore, Ethiopia’s attempt to disrupt the Sudan’s
agricultural capabilities by imposing its hegemony
in a unilateral manner with regard to the filling and
operating of the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam
is extremely dangerous and threatens our promising
emerging agricultural renaissance and the Sudan’s
widespread strategic agricultural projects. Our relation
with Ethiopia, which is our neighbour for better or
worse, is characterized by a special relationship of
cooperation, solidarity and concern to safeguard our
common interests by strengthening relations between
our two brotherly peoples, which means that together
we need to go forward towards satisfying ends that
maintain this relationship while Ethiopia puts a stop to
further harm to the Sudan.
Based upon our faith in regional cooperation, the
Sudan has participated, effectively and in good faith,
in all the rounds of tripartite negotiations on the Grand
Ethiopian Renaissance Dam since they began in 2011.
I wish to underscore here the colossal efforts made by
the Sudan to persuade its two neighbours, Egypt and
21-18300

08/07/2021

Peace and security in Africa

Ethiopia, to sign the Agreement on Declaration of
Principles in Khartoum in March 2015.
We also wish to underline the initiative of Prime
Minister Abdullah Hamdok in June 2020, which
was aimed at continuing negotiations on the few
remaining controversial issues following the end of
the Washington, D.C., round in early 2020. The Sudan
responded to the initiative of His Excellency the
President of South Africa and former Chairperson of
the African Union at its 2020 session to find an African
solution to the dispute, as per the slogan “African
solutions for African problems”.
The Sudan participated effectively in all the
negotiating rounds, which lasted for more than
six months. However, the failure to improve the
negotiating mechanism by conferring a greater role
on experts resulted once again in a failure to reach an
agreement. Moreover, the Sudan maintained its positive
involvement by participating in the last round called
for by the President of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and current Chairperson of the African Union.
In that regard, the Sudan submitted a proposal to
bolster the African negotiation mechanism by granting
it a mediation role under African Union leadership, with
the participation of the United Nations, the European
Union, the United States and South Africa, the latter
three having been observers to preceding negotiations.
However for the same reasons concerning Ethiopia’s
intransigence and its rejection of all proposals put
forward, that round was also unsuccessful.
We hope that the Council will assume its
responsibilities in maintaining regional peace and
security in a preventative way by strengthening the
negotiations under the auspices of the African Union
and by calling on the parties concerned to resume
negotiations under the auspices of the African Union,
while allowing international mediators and observers to
assume their role so as to facilitate the negotiations and
reach an agreement in accordance with a set time frame
and to call on Ethiopia to abstain from any unilateral
measure without prior agreement, which could pose
a threat to millions of inhabitants behind the Grand
Ethiopian Renaissance Dam.
Before I conclude, I should like to say unequivocally
that this issue is before the Council today. It is a just
and urgent cause. Members of the Council are called
on to promote a process that continues to be hindered
by obstacles. They can help the process easily and in

S/PV. 8816

a cost-effective way by alleviating the suffering of
the Sudanese people by ensuring that the filling and
operating of the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam
happen pursuant to a comprehensive and legally
binding agreement. No filling should take place without
an agreement, which would have bad and harmful
consequences for the Sudan.
However, silence from the Council would send a
wrong message that a unilateral filling that harms the
interests of the Sudan and the security of its people is
acceptable. That might have serious consequences.
To conclude, having informed the Council of
this issue with all its sovereign, legal, security and
humanitarian implications, and the fact that it poses
a serious threat to international peace and security
and a direct challenge to the Council’s mandate under
the Charter of the United Nations, we have given the
Council an opportunity to shoulder its responsibilities
and take diplomatic and preventive measures to bring
the parties back to negotiations and promote the
African action upon which all parties had agreed, while
conferring a greater role on international facilitators in
the context of strengthening partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union.
Finally, the Sudan reaffirms its sincere commitment
to participating in good faith in all efforts to reach
a binding agreement that fulfils the interests of the
three parties.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
of Water, Irrigation and Energy of Ethiopia.
Mr. Awulachew (Ethiopia): Please accept my
best wishes, Sir, as you steer the work of the Security
Council for the month of July. I wish to extend my
respectful greetings to the members of the Security
Council and my heartfelt greetings to my brother
Minister Selim and my sister Minister Al Mahadi. I
recognize and thank Ms. Inger Andersen and Special
Envoy Onanga-Anyanga for their participation. I also
thank the representative of the African Union (AU)
Chairperson for addressing this meeting.
At this meeting and deliberation of the Security
Council, where a hydroelectric dam is under scrutiny
in an unprecedented manner, I am not sure if I am not
the first water minister to address the Security Council.
Ethiopia believes this is an unfitting use of the time and
resources of the Security Council to discuss the Grand
Ethiopian Renaissance Dam (GERD). Nevertheless, it

21-1830025/28

S/PV.8816

Peace and security in Africa

is an honour for me to speak before this organ to voice
the concerns and just causes of my country, Ethiopia.
A year ago, on 29 June 2020, under your presidency,
Sir, Council members encouraged Ethiopia, Egypt
and the Sudan to continue negotiations to resolve
the outstanding issues and expressed support for the
African Union-led process to facilitate further talks
(see S/2020/636). Ethiopia took part in the negotiation
with renewed commitment and good faith to reach a
mutually acceptable, negotiated outcome under the
auspices of the African Union.
I would like to pause to express special recognition
and thanks to the Republic of South Africa for
effectively facilitating the negotiation until the end
of its African Union chairmanship in February 2021.
Similarly, Ethiopia commends and stands with the
Democratic Republic of Congo, current Chairperson of
the African Union, for its relentless effort under trying
circumstances, including the repeated disruption of
the negotiations.
We are dealing with a hydroelectric dam project,
which is not the first of its kind in Africa or in the
world. We are building a reservoir to store water that
will generate electricity by hitting turbines. For the
Council’s information, the GERD reservoir is two
and half times smaller than that of the Aswan Dam in
Egypt. Perhaps what makes the GERD distinctive as
compared to other projects is the extent of hope and
aspiration it generated for 65 million Ethiopians who
have no access to electricity. It is also unique because
the construction of this $5 billion dam is financed by
the blood, tears and sweat of ordinary Ethiopians. The
GERD is the right dam built at the right place for the
betterment of people in the broader region.
Our unfortunate inability to utilize the Nile River
so far is deeply embedded in the psychology of our
people. Two famous Ethiopian proverbs underscore
that point. Roughly, they translate as “the irony of the
tribulations of a poor man who stood in the middle of a
river and lamented about experiencing extreme thirst”.
To change that generational lament, we have nowhere
else to look but the Abbay or Nile basins, in which two
thirds of Ethiopia’s water resources are found. In this
mighty river, which we share with our neighbours, our
people saw hope to extricate themselves from darkness
and march towards it by building the GERD.
The dam bears the fingerprints of Ethiopia’s farmers,
pastoralists, daily labourers, students, business-women
26/28

08/07/2021

and men and the diaspora throughout the world who
eke out a living in extremely difficult circumstances.
In equal, if not exceeding, terms, Ethiopians have best
wishes and neighbourly concern for their compatriots
in Egypt and the Sudan. We have every intention to
live together in peace and cooperate for our mutual
benefit. The GERD demonstrates that core principle
of collective well-being and prosperity. That is why
the GERD is one of the regional integration projects
under the Programme for Infrastructure Development
in Africa.
Africa, the cradle of humankind, is currently the
youngest continent in the world. Africa is set to reap
its demographic dividend by investing in its youth.
Similarly, 70 percent of Ethiopia’s population is under
the age of 30. More than 100,000 Ethiopians graduate
from higher education every year. Moreover, over
30 million Ethiopians are currently in school at various
levels of education. Catering to the needs of that
growing population is an imperative and existential
matter for my county.
The lives of Ethiopians who languish in the Sahara
Desert attempting to cross into Europe; the migrants
in the Middle East who sacrifice their youth to bring
about a better day for their families; the young boys
and girls in migrant prisons in Africa and beyond;
the bare-footed migrants that one sees returning to
their homeland in mass deportations from the Middle
East — they all deserve a dignified life. The GERD
is a people’s project and our humble attempt to realize
that dream. Against all odds, we chose to act, and act
in spite of the arduous obstacles we faced. Instead of
becoming enmired in those challenges, we struggled to
prevail. Little by little, we are overcoming.
Unfortunately, we are here because Egypt and,
most recently the Sudan, expressed its opposition to
this hydroelectric dam. It is important to note that our
two neighbours have large and small dams and canals
they constructed with absolute disregard for the rights
of other riparian countries and rejecting Ethiopia’s
repeated pleas for consultation. After a series of
initiatives to address the concerns of our neighbours
in good faith, we are compelled to conclude that their
objection is not as such directed at the GERD, but rather
to stop any water use by Ethiopia.
The fact of the matter is that we have no viable
alternative. Unlike Egypt and the Sudan, Ethiopia has
no considerable ground-water reserves. We also do not
21-18300

08/07/2021

Peace and security in Africa

have seawater to desalinate. Nearly 70 per cent of my
country’s water is in the Nile basin. Even if we wanted
to, even if we tried, we cannot avoid utilizing the
Nile River.
In fact, constructing dams is only part of our focus.
Our main objective is to maximize our scarce water
resources by rehabilitating nature and preventing further
depletion through our Green Legacy Initiative — a
prominent initiative of my Prime Minister, Mr. Abiy
Ahmed. With an overall goal of planting 20 billion
trees in five years’ time, we planted 10 billion trees in
past two years. This initiative, which also consists of
seedling-sharing outreach with our neighbours, is part
of the Green Belt Initiative of the African Union. We
call upon Egypt and the Sudan to join this afforestation
programme, which improves resilience and increases
water availability.
Ethiopia believes that an agreement is within reach,
given the necessary political will and the commitment
to negotiate in good faith. We have already reached an
understanding on a considerable number of the issues.
The African Union is seized of the matter and is
ably facilitating our negotiations, which is why it is
regrettable that our sisterly countries opted to bring the
matter to the Security Council.
I will not drag Council members into a discussion of
issues despite my usual disposition to explain technical
details on dams and hydrology. However, I want us to
truly appreciate the subject matter we are compelled to
discuss, and we are speaking of a hydroelectric dam.
For the first time since its establishment, the
Security Council is being asked to pronounce itself
on a water development project. The Security Council
is a political and security organ. It is unhelpful and
misguided to present to this global security body an
issue that requires a hydrotechnical solution.
It must also be clear that the underlying problem for
the differences among the three countries — Ethiopia,
Egypt and the Sudan — is the quest to preserve the
colonial and monopolistic status quo over the Nile. The
approach of trying to solve problems using the mindset
that created them is what blocks our consensus on
the GERD.
The Security Council is faced with the question of
determining whether or not Ethiopians have the right
to utilize the Nile River. On behalf of all Ethiopians, I
implore our friends in the Security Council and in the

S/PV. 8816

wider international community to answer this question:
do Ethiopians have the right to drink from the Nile?
As a point of information, allow me to share with
the Council the most recent status of the African
Union-led negotiations. On 24 June 2021, the AU
Bureau of Assembly convened a meeting to discuss
various issues, including the GERD. The President of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, His Excellency
Mr. Félix Tshisekedi, briefed the Bureau and introduced
his plans for the upcoming negotiations. Unfortunately,
the Republic of the Sudan did not attend that high-level
meeting. With the absence of the Sudan in the 24 June
Bureau meeting, the two countries — Egypt and the
Sudan — have blocked nine meetings between us since
June 2020.
We should have learned by now that Ethiopia
does not respond well to undue political pressure
and interference. Ethiopia will continue to exercise
maximum restraint and showcase cooperation because
we are forever linked by this majestic river. Whether we
like it or not, we will continue to drink from the same
river and must learn to live together as neighbours.
I reiterate Ethiopia’s long-standing commitment
to the AU-led process, which is underpinned by a
belief that Africans have the wisdom, the technical
expertise and, most importantly, the agency to
address their challenges. We believe that the phased
approach proposed by President Félix Tshisekedi, the
Chairperson of the African Union, could help us work
towards resolving the quagmire created by the colonial
heritage in the Nile basin that Egypt and the Sudan are
determined to preserve.
Allow me also to address the much-talked-about
second-year filling of the GERD. The second-year
filling of the GERD is happening in July and August of
this year. We have proactively provided the necessary
data on the modalities for the filling of the dam. Let
me be clear: the filling of the GERD is part of the
construction process. This is clearly stipulated in the
Agreement on Declaration of Principles on the Grand
Ethiopian Renaissance Dam our three heads of State
signed in March 2015.
The filling of the dam is pure physics. Once the
dam concrete reaches a certain height, the water either
flows through the bottom outlets or flows over the
concrete. As designed, the dam will store water until
it reaches the 13.5 billion cubic meters indicated in the
filling schedule agreed to by Egypt and the Sudan. It is

21-1830027/28

S/PV.8816

Peace and security in Africa

only fair that a country that generates 77 billion cubic
meters of water impounds a small fraction of the annual
inflow for its hydroelectric dam.
Egypt and the Sudan do not need any convincing as
to the fortunes they will acquire upon the completion
of the dam. In the wise words of Sudanese officials,
the GERD is an instrument of regional integration. The
GERD is for the Sudan what the High Aswan Dam is
for Egypt.
In this context, I am now going out of my way to
explain to the Council the absence of any threat caused
by the GERD. However, we should not even have to
litigate the benefits Egypt and the Sudan will acquire
from the GERD to argue for our legitimate share from
the Nile. All of us — the Nile riparian countries — are
there to share both the bounty and the scarcity. None
of us ought to stand thirsty watching the others drink.
Through the GERD, Ethiopia is summoning this
common sense to prevail in the Nile basin. Therefore,
the Security Council should not be dragged into
the GERD negotiations, in the expedient pursuit of
domestic political objectives, for example.
If the Council consents to the path proffered by
Egypt and the Sudan, it will certainly be entangled
with resolving disputes on all transboundary rivers.
Interestingly, other than one island sisterly country
of ours, all members of the Security Council have
transboundary watercourses. They have dealt with
and continued to address differences bilaterally and
through basin-wide efforts.
The GERD talks and the process we have undergone
since 2011 has taught us a major lesson. Hopefully,
this process will nudge us to work towards a regional
mechanism on the Nile basin. In this regard, it would
be regrettable for the Council to circumvent this hope
by unhelpful precedent whereby Member States impose
through the Council what they should acquire through
good-faith negotiations. The Council should resist
concerted efforts to turn it into an appellate body on
transboundary-river negotiations.
Colonialism and colonial treaties thwarted Africa’s
ability in utilize its natural resources for the benefit of
its peoples. The Nile basin countries have recognized

28/28

08/07/2021

this problem and worked towards addressing it. In
1999, we established the Nile Basin Initiative, and in
2010, atter 13 years of negotiations, we adopted the
Cooperative Framework Agreement (CFA) on the Nile.
In the Framework Agreement, which many Council
members have financially and technically supported,
the Nile basin countries agreed to share Nile water
in an equitable and reasonable manner. We replaced
the colonial and monopolistic claims with accepted
principles of international law. This instrument is now
awaiting two more ratifications before it can enter
into force.
The insatiable demands of Egypt and, more recently,
the Sudan are not about the moot issue of the GERD but
about future development projects in Ethiopia and the
other riparian countries. Without an effective CFA and
a regional mechanism, similar issues will inevitably be
brought to the Security Council. Today, it is Ethiopia’s
dam; tomorrow, it could come from any one of the Nile
basin countries.
The Nile belongs to all the people of the Nile basin
countries — all the half billion of us in the 11 riparian
countries. There is water enough for all of us. In this
regard, we urge our Egyptian and Sudanese brothers
and sisters to understand that a resolution to the Nile
issue will not come from the Security Council; it can
only come from good-faith negotiations with due care
for each other’s well-being and development. Ethiopia
looks forward to continuing the AU-led trilateral
negotiations on the GERD. We have the solutions at
hand, and we can herald good news to the world by
concluding a mutually acceptable outcome.
Finally, allow me to respectfully request the
Council to return this matter to the able und legitimate
leadership of the African Union and to encourage Egypt
and the Sudan to seriously and faithfully negotiate to
reach a negotiated settlement on the first filling and
annual operations of the GERD. We also request the
Council to make this meeting the last of its deliberations
on the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam. There is no
subject matter as far from the mandate of the Council
as this one.
The meeting rose at 5.50 p.m.

21-18300
