S/2008/708

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
17 November 2008
Original: English

Letter dated 14 November 2008 from the President of the
Security Council to the Secretary-General
I have the honour to inform you that the members of the Security Council have
decided to send a mission to Afghanistan from 21 to 28 November 2008. The
mission will be led by Ambassador Terzi di Sant’Agata of Italy.
The members of the Council have agreed to the terms of reference for the
mission (see annex). The composition of the mission is as follows:
Ambassador Olivier Belle (Belgium)
Ambassador Paul Robert Tiendrébéogo (Burkina Faso)
Ambassador Liu Zhenmin (China)
Ambassador Saúl Weisleder (Costa Rica)
Mr. Toma Galli (Croatia)
Minister Jean-Pierre Lacroix (France)
Ambassador R.M. Marty M. Natalegawa (Indonesia)
Ambassador Giulio Terzi di Sant’Agata (Italy)
Mr. Ahmed Gebreel (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)
Ambassador Alfredo Suescum (Panama)
Minister Konstantin K. Dolgov (Russian Federation)
Ambassador Dumisani Kumalo (South Africa)
Ambassador John Sawers (United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland)
Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad (United States of America)
Ambassador Bui The Giang (Viet Nam)
I should be grateful if you could have the present letter and its annex
circulated as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Jorge Urbina
President of the Security Council

08-60479 (E) 181108

*0860479*

S/2008/708

Annex
Security Council mission to Afghanistan: terms of reference
1.
To reaffirm the Security Council’s continued support for the Government and
people of Afghanistan as they rebuild their country, strengthen the foundations of
sustainable peace and constitutional democracy and assume their rightful place in
the community of nations;
2.
To review the progress made by the Afghan Government, with the assistance
of the international community and in accordance with the Afghanistan Compact, in
addressing the interconnected challenges in the areas of security, governance, rule of
law and human rights, economic and social development, as well as on the crosscutting issue of counter-narcotics;
3.
To assess the status of implementation of relevant Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolutions 1806 (2008) and 1833 (2008), as well as of
mutual pledges and commitments made by the participants to the International
Conference in Support of Afghanistan, held in Paris on 12 June 2008;
4.
To underline, in this context, the central and impartial role that the United
Nations continues to play in promoting peace and stability in Afghanistan by leading
the civilian efforts of the international community and to express strong support for
the ongoing efforts of the Secretary-General, his Special Representative for
Afghanistan and the women and men of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA);
5.
To review the implementation of the enhanced coordinating role assigned to
UNAMA and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General by Security
Council resolution 1806 (2008), taking into account the need for an integrated
approach and the principle of reinforcing Afghan ownership and leadership;
6.
To review efforts by the Afghan authorities, with the assistance of the
international community, to address the threat to the security and stability of
Afghanistan posed by the Taliban, Al-Qaida, illegal armed groups, criminals and
those involved in the narcotics trade and in the diversion of chemical precursors;
7.
To review the humanitarian situation in the country, including the food
security situation, and the implications for security and stability;
8.
To assess the cooperation, coordination and mutual support between UNAMA
and the International Security Assistance Force, including on humanitarian and
human rights issues and in supporting the electoral process, taking due account of
their respective designated responsibilities;
9.
To reaffirm the crucial importance of advancing regional cooperation as an
effective means to promote governance, security and development in Afghanistan.

2

08-60479
