United Nations

S/PV.4487

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-seventh year

4487th meeting
Monday, 11 March 2002, 11.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kolby . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Norway)

Members:

Bulgaria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cameroon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guinea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ireland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mauritius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Syrian Arab Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Tafrov
Mr. Mbayu
Mr. Wang Yingfan
Mr. Valdivieso
Mr. Levitte
Mr. Boubacar Diallo
Mr. Corr
Mr. Bhuckory
Mr. Aguilar Zínser
Mr. Granovsky
Mr. Mahbubani
Mr. Wehbe
Mr. Harrison
Mr. Williamson

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia (S/2002/189)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

02-27936 (E)

*0227936*

S/PV.4487

The meeting was called to order at 11.30 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Somalia (S/2002/189)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Djibouti, Egypt, Ethiopia, Kenya,
Jordan, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Somalia and
Spain, in which they request to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda.
In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provision of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ibrahim
(Somalia) took a seat at the Council table;
Mr. Olhaye (Djibouti), Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt),
Mr. Tessema (Ethiopia), Mr. Jalang’o (Kenya),
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan),
Mr. Dorda (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) and
Mr. Arias (Spain) took the seats reserved for them
at the side of the Council Chamber.
The President: On behalf of the Council, I
extend a warm welcome to Mr. Yusuf Hassan Ibrahim,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Transitional
National Government of Somalia.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members
have
before
them
document
S/2002/189, containing the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in Somalia.
Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): I
welcome Mr. Yusuf Hassan Ibrahim to New York and I
thank him for rescheduling his trip for an earlier date in
order to be with us today.

2

Bulgaria fully endorses the statement to be
delivered shortly by the Permanent Representative of
Spain on behalf of the European Union. I shall
therefore confine myself to a few brief comments.
The delegation of Bulgaria would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting open to
all Members of the United Nations. It gives us an
opportunity to consider the complex and alarming
problems in Somalia.
The Secretary-General’s report sheds light on the
overall situation in the country, which remains very
fragile. Somalia has lacked effective national
institutions for more than a decade. It is still divided by
the various factions, their mutual recriminations and
the violent confrontations among their militias, which
continue to occur. The Arta peace and national
reconciliation process finds itself at a virtual standstill.
Over the last 10 months, there have been new
developments and positive signs from the Somalia
peace process. Bulgaria welcomes the decision taken
on 14 February by the Committee of Foreign Ministers
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) to convene in Kenya, without the imposition of
prior conditions, a national reconciliation conference
with the participation of the Transitional National
Government and all other Somali parties.
We are convinced that the solution to Somalia’s
problems lies in the hands of the Somalis themselves.
The Arta process can succeed only with the
participation of all the factions. It is thus particularly
important for the Security Council to give this
initiative the necessary support so that all parties will
take the path of dialogue and so that the national
transition mechanism will be expanded. We hope that
the Transitional National Government, the leaders of
the political parties, the traditional chiefs and the
Somali factions will put aside their differences and act
together to advance the peace process.
Bulgaria supports IGAD’s efforts for national
reconciliation in Somalia. We would particularly like to
stress the importance of consensus among the countries
of that organization and the need for a unified approach
to the peace process in Somalia. The resolution on
Somalia adopted at the 9th IGAD Summit is therefore
encouraging. It deserves the vigorous support of the
international community, particularly that of the United
Nations. We are therefore pleased that this meeting of
the Security Council is sending to Somali society a

S/PV.4487

signal of strong support for pursuing the Arta peace
process.

that he gave us in the private meeting earlier, which I
found to be very helpful.

Bulgaria encourages discussion of the SecretaryGeneral’s proposal to create committees of friends of
Somali in Nairobi and in New York. This idea is worth
studying with the aim of consolidating the uniformity
of the various initiatives for peace in Somalia.

I also want to congratulate you for putting this
very difficult file on the agenda of the month. You may
recall that, in the final wrap-up meeting of last year, we
discussed the successful files, not-so-successful files
and moderately successful files. Clearly, Somalia is one
of the most difficult files that the Council is faced with
and, to be very candid, we do not think that we have
the answers to the problems faced on this issue. We
hope that, in the course of this discussion, the Council
will try to find some answers.

In the context of the events of 11 September, the
Council must attentively follow the situation in
Somalia to prevent the country from becoming a refuge
for members of terrorist organizations. All countries
must scrupulously respect the relevant Security
Council resolutions. The Transitional National
Government and all other parties concerned must
demonstrate their readiness to cooperate with the
Counter-Terrorism Committee.
Bulgaria is deeply concerned by the spread of
small arms in the region. One of the essential tasks of
the consolidation process is to put an end to the supply
of arms to Somalia.
We particularly want to stress the need for a
constructive contribution from neighbouring countries.
In that regard, the international community must
consider means to enhance the effectiveness of the
sanctions. As Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 751
(1992) concerning Somalia, Bulgaria sees the need to
ensure full compliance with those sanctions.
We are greatly alarmed by the grave humanitarian
situation in Somalia. We encourage donors to respond
generously to the Consolidated Inter-Agency Appeal,
and we congratulate the competent United Nations
agencies and non-governmental organizations that are
working in difficult circumstances to alleviate the
suffering of the Somali people. At the same time, we
urge the Somali parties to make an active contribution
to the work of United Nations personnel by
guaranteeing the safety of humanitarian workers and
the necessary access to strategic sites.
Bulgaria agrees with the report’s conclusions on
security issues and stresses that the safety of personnel,
especially peacekeeping personnel, is a prerequisite for
effective work on the ground by the United Nations.
Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): I, too, would like
to join you, Sir, in warmly welcoming Mr. Yusuf
Hassan Ibrahim, the Foreign Minister of Somalia, and
to thank him for the rather comprehensive statement

You have asked us to be brief, so what I propose
to do is to make just four points.
The first point, of course, is the obvious one,
which is that the problems of Somalia can be solved
only by the people of Somalia. Indeed, the Foreign
Minister very approvingly quoted the SecretaryGeneral’s statement in his report of 21 February, in
which he says:
“Only Somalia’s leaders can decide to end the
suffering of their people and only they can decide
to negotiate an end to the conflict. They need to
rise above their differences and put the interests
of the people of Somalia first and foremost.”
(S/2002/189, para. 65)
I think we are all agreed on that. At the same
time, I think it is very helpful that Somalia has
neighbours that are trying to play a helpful role. Many
have commended Djibouti for the Arta process and we
are now, hopefully, going to see some progress in the
process initiated by the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development. As long as the neighbours work on the
principle of respect for the sovereignty, territorial
integrity, political independence and unity of Somalia,
I hope that they will make a contribution to the
solution of the problem of Somalia.
The second point I wish to make is, of course,
about the role of the international community. Here, it
may be recalled that last week, speaking in the
informal consultations, I asked the question of whether
or not we in the international community have decided
what exactly is our role on the Somali question. Are we
like the medical doctor, analysing and at the same time
providing prescriptions and medicine? Are we just a
pure political scientist, analysing the situation without
providing any assistance? Or are we, perhaps, just a

3

S/PV.4487

bystander, watching what is going on without getting
involved? I am not sure what the answer is to that
question, but at some point it might be helpful for the
international community to work out where, exactly, it
stands on the Somali question.
The third point I wish to make is that, in terms of
analysing or understanding what we can do, perhaps
one point we may want to bear in mind is that, post-11
September, it is actually in the interest of the
international community to encourage all States — and
I would emphasize this point: all States — to have
strong national Governments. Strong national
Governments are an essential requirement in the fight
against international terrorism. We hope that, wherever
there is an exception, the international community will
try to find the answer to it. In that sense, I think that
the international community has a vested interest in
trying to re-establish a strong national Government in
Somalia.
My fourth and final point is, of course, that I
hope, in trying to look at the Somalia question, we will
not look just at various aspects of it. There is a huge
humanitarian problem that, I think, has been touched
upon. We also need to work out a comprehensive
policy on Somalia over the long term that I hope will
provide a solution to the problem. At the same time,
having heard what both the Foreign Minister and the
Permanent Representative of Somalia said this morning
on the question of the Al-Barakaat accounts, I think it
is clear that the freezing of the accounts has aggravated
the humanitarian difficulties of the Somali people. I
hope that we will find some way or another to unfreeze
the accounts to ensure that those who, in a sense, are
the honest recipients of the funds will get their funds
back as quickly as possible.
Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): We would like to thank you, Sir, for
convening this important meeting to consider the
situation in brotherly Somalia.
We join in the welcome extended by preceding
speakers to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Somalia,
Mr. Yusuf Hassan Ibrahim. We support the statement to
be made by the Permanent Representative of Jordan in
his capacity as Chairman of the Arab Group this
month. That statement will demonstrate the support of
Arab Governments for the Transitional National
Government of Somalia, as stressed by the Arab
Foreign Ministers meeting two days ago in Cairo.

4

The ongoing situation in Somalia has certainly
not enjoyed any intervention by the Security Council,
which would impose a major security, political,
economic and humanitarian responsibility on us. We
must discharge our mission as members of the Security
Council, which is to ensure the maintenance of
international peace and security.
During our debate on the Secretary-General’s
report on the situation in Somalia, we can assert that
the report covers the various economic, political and
security dimensions of the crisis there. The picture
painted in the report is indeed a bleak one. From a
security perspective, Somalia remains one of the most
dangerous areas in which the United Nations is
involved and active. Yet, the report does not
recommend the sending of a mission to Somalia.
With respect to peace-building in Somalia, we
support the Secretary-General’s assertion of the
importance of ensuring the security of United Nations
personnel. At the same time, we must find some
explanation of why the situation in Somalia has
deteriorated so that we may remedy it. We feel that the
report does not stress this aspect, but such an approach
would help us to find a way to break the vicious cycle
in that country.
We could use the successful lessons learned by
United Nations missions in other African countries
where civil wars and conflicts had been waged.
However, in extremely dangerous security situations,
the United Nations has in some cases been able to send
peace-building missions that have made positive
contributions to ending warfare and building peace in
those countries.
A question therefore arises: Why not do the same
in Somalia? Why do we not send a peace mission
there? The Secretary-General’s recommendations in his
report are not, we feel, really adequate for addressing
the situation in Somalia. There is an imperative need to
formulate specific recommendations that would enable
our Organization to provide greater assistance,
including in the demobilization of militia members and
the training of police personnel, as proposed by the
Security Council in its presidential statement of 31
October 2001. This is vitally important if we are to
improve the security situation in Somalia. It would also
enable the Transitional National Government to make
use of the humanitarian resources available to it in the
army and police.

S/PV.4487

There is also an imperative need for a
comprehensive approach to dealing with the situation
in Somalia, one that will support peace-building and
security, which are keys to development in the country.
Sending a United Nations mission must not be held
hostage to the wishes of a few warlords who are taking
advantage of the current situation and imposing such
great suffering on the people of Somalia. I assume that
this is now what we in the Security Council wish to see
happen.
The Arta peace process, about which the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Somalia spoke during our private
meeting this morning, is a historic opportunity for the
Transitional National Government. The international
community has agreed that the process provided the
best chance to establish lasting peace in Somalia.
However, the Government inherited a war-torn country
that truly needs material resources in order to rebuild
its infrastructure.
One key to success for the Transitional National
Government is to acquire adequate material resources
to address this situation. In that context, we would
emphasize the following points, which we would like
to see reflected in the presidential statement to be
adopted at the end of our meeting or shortly thereafter.
First, the Council would support the Transitional
National Government’s efforts to complete the process
of national reconciliation, and would strongly condemn
the warlords, who continue to hamper all peace efforts
and are an obstacle on the road to national
reconciliation — a road that would lead Somalia from
the phase of conflict to that of peace-building.
Secondly, the Council would reaffirm the
principles of the unity, independence and territorial
integrity of Somalia and of non-intervention in its
internal affairs, in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations. This point was not mentioned in the
latest report of the Secretary-General.
Thirdly, the Council would consider setting up a
monitoring and verification mechanism that would
facilitate the work of the sanctions Committee
established pursuant to resolution 751 (1992), would
ensure strict compliance with the arms embargo
imposed under Chapter VII of the Charter, and would
study any violations of the embargo. Ambassador
Tafrov, Chairman of the sanctions Committee, and the
other Committee members have stressed that the

Committee must work effectively, and we welcome that
sentiment.
Fourthly, a Committee of Friends of Somalia is
envisaged in the report, and we welcome that idea. We
believe that setting up such a Committee should take
into account the need to include international and
regional organizations and States involved in the
Somalia conflict, so that its work can be positive and
constructive and can lead to national reconciliation.
Conflicts among regional, national and international
initiatives would thus be avoided.
Finally, the international community in general
and the Security Council in particular must participate
in a serious process to build peace in Somalia and to
put an end to the conflict in that country, where chaos
and war have prevailed for so many years. That is the
only way to lift Somalia out of the vicious circle
resulting from the country’s lack of security and the
fact that it has been largely ignored for the last decade.
Such a process would send the right message to the
Somali people, to subregional and regional
organizations and also to donors. It would help
strengthen the ongoing process of national
reconciliation and thereby help support the efforts of
the Transitional National Government. The League of
Arab States also supports those efforts.
We look forward to the national reconciliation
conference to be held at Nairobi in late April. We hope
that it will be a qualitative turning point that will lead
Somalia and the Transitional National Government,
with the cooperation of neighbouring States, back to
peace. Cooperation between Somalia and its
neighbours would then ensure peace in Somalia and in
neighbouring countries, while respecting the unity and
territorial integrity of the country and its people.
This morning, we heard a bitter complaint from
Somalia over the crisis concerning the Al-Barakaat
bank. I think we must try to find a solution to that
problem, because that is the only bank in Somalia —
the lungs of the economy, so to speak — that could
improve the financial situation in the country. Thus we
must find a solution, especially in the light of the
statement by the Somali Minister for Foreign Affairs
that the brotherly Somali people are a peace-loving
people. I think the question of a solution should be
studied carefully and wisely, to ensure life, well-being
and development for the Somali people. We must
provide assistance, particularly taking into account the

5

S/PV.4487

natural disaster of the drought in Somalia and
neighbouring countries.
Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
too should like to extend a warm welcome to the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Somalia, Mr. Yusuf
Hassan Ibrahim, and to thank him for the information
he provided in our previous private meeting. We should
also like to acknowledge your initiative, Mr. President,
to convene this open meeting of the Council.
I shall limit my statement to three elements in the
report of the Secretary-General, the first of which is the
role to be played by the international community.
The participation of the international community
in the reconciliation process in Somalia has been very
important thus far. Indeed, the leadership shown by the
Government of Djibouti in the Arta process was
fundamental to the establishment of the Transitional
National Government.
Moreover, at this moment the initiative of the
heads of State of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), under the leadership of
President Moi of Kenya, to hold a national
reconciliation conference in mid-April, deserves our
full support.
The participation of regional leaders in that
Conference attests to the importance to the region of
achieving a more broad-based reconciliation process, in
order to guarantee greater stability in Somalia. We
therefore support that initiative and hope that it will
bear positive fruit.
The regional authorities already have an
established role in the reconciliation process. We
believe that the same should be true for the United
Nations and the Security Council. The report of the
Secretary-General notes that, for security reasons, it is
impossible to re-establish a political office in Somalia.
We take note of that consideration, but we believe that
we must seek different alternatives that would give the
United Nations a greater political presence on the
ground, which may eventually help improve security
conditions.
One option we could consider is to strengthen the
role of the Security Council. Here I have in mind more
regular briefings to the Council as to the situation on
the ground. The Council could also create monitoring
mechanisms to monitor arms embargo violations.
Another initiative might be to promote an information

6

network, through United Nations agencies and nongovernmental organizations that are carrying out
humanitarian programmes, in order to provide more
and better information and thus to get a better and more
accurate picture of what is happening on the ground.
The second element involves the arms embargo.
We deem alarming the information we have received as
to the number of small arms that are continuing to
circulate throughout the country. That traffic is proof of
the continued violations of the arms embargo imposed
by the Security Council through resolution 733 (1992).
It is also clearly necessary to create a monitoring
mechanism for these sanctions, since violations
continue to occur because of the lack of detailed
follow-up.
The presidential statement on small arms issued
by the Council on 31 August last, under Colombia’s
presidency, notes the need to enhance the effectiveness
of arms embargoes through the establishment of
specific monitoring mechanisms. It also makes the
point that cooperation must be promoted among nongovernmental organizations and regional organizations
in order to achieve a better application of arms
embargoes.
It is our view that the Somalia sanctions
Committee, chaired by the Ambassador of Bulgaria,
must spearhead this process in order to ensure
compliance by all States with the provisions set out by
the Council. I should like to assure Ambassador Tafrov
of the full cooperation of my delegation in this respect.
In that same presidential statement, the SecretaryGeneral is asked to include in his reports analytical
assessments on the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons. The sad reality is that conflicts are fuelled by
trafficking in small arms, the interference of
neighbouring States and the indifference of armsexporting countries as to the destination of their
products. That is why we stress that the next report of
the Secretary-General should address in greater depth
this issue as it affects Somalia.
The third element involves the fight against
terrorism. The combat against terrorism is being waged
at the international level and demands the commitment
of all States. The Transitional National Government
has informed us that it has adopted a series of measures
to implement resolution 1373 (2001). It has asked the
international community for assistance so that it can
create the infrastructure necessary for ensuring full

S/PV.4487

compliance with that resolution. Our view is that this
appeal must be heeded in order to avoid having
Somalia, for lack of cooperation, be used as a refuge
for terrorists.
The effects of the fight against terrorism have
already made themselves felt in Somalia. The closing
of the Al-Barakaat Group of Companies has caused a
drop in family income, which has made the
implementation of certain programmes more difficult.
It would be desirable to establish transparent fundstransfer systems, so that the Somalis could benefit from
lawful systems that have no connection with networks
that finance terrorism. In this context, we support the
initiatives that the United Nations Development
Programme intends to carry out in that country.
In conclusion, I should like to reiterate the
commitment of the international community and of the
Council in particular to work towards national
reconciliation in Somalia and to prevent anarchy,
which has held that country in its grip for so many
years, from triumphing once again.
Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, I wish to welcome the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Somali Transitional National
Government, Mr. Yusuf Hassan Ibrahim, to today’s
meeting. I should like also to congratulate the newly
appointed Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Tubman, head of the United Nations Political
Office for Somalia.
In accordance with the decision taken by the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
Summit and the IGAD Foreign Ministers Committee
on Somalia, the Somali National Reconciliation
Conference will be held in April in Nairobi.
Preparations for the Conference are to be handled
jointly by the three neighbouring countries and by the
IGAD secretariat.
We welcome and support the encouraging
developments that have taken place in the Somali peace
process. Allow me to point out that the responsibility
for national reconciliation and durable peace in
Somalia lies, in the final analysis, in the hands of the
Somali parties themselves. Without the participation
and support of all parties in Somalia, even the best
peace initiative will remain on paper — an exercise in
armchair strategizing.

We endorse the Secretary-General’s view that
only Somalia’s leaders can decide to end the suffering
of their people and that only they can decide to
negotiate an end to the conflict. Therefore we urge the
Somali parties, in the supreme interest of national
reconciliation, to demonstrate the necessary goodwill,
attend the April Nairobi Conference without any
preconditions and endeavour to resolve, through
dialogue and negotiations, problems that are not
amenable to settlement by force.
As pointed out in the report of the SecretaryGeneral’s, the Somali peace process will require not
only political will on the part of the Somali political
leaders and the sustained encouragement and support
of Somalia’s immediate neighbours and of the wider
international community, but also greater unity of
purpose and coordination of the initiatives of the
international community. This is the only way to
contribute to the establishment of a broad-based and
all-inclusive Government, on the basis of the
maintenance of the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Somalia.
We appreciate the tremendous amount of
humanitarian relief work done by the United Nations
system and other organizations in very harsh conditions
on the ground. We call on the Somali factions to ensure
the freedom of movement and safety and security of
humanitarian personnel and provide them with the
necessary facilities.
Effective implementation of the arms embargo on
Somalia can play a positive catalytic role in the peace
process. We hope that the long-standing situation of
ineffective implementation of the sanctions will soon
be reversed. We will continue to support the work of
the sanctions Committee, and we hope that countries
and regional organizations concerned will actively
cooperate with it.
Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
would like to warmly welcome to this Chamber the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Somalia, Mr. Yusuf
Hassan Ibrahim. I would also like to thank him for the
information that he gave us during the closed meeting.
Rest assured, Mr. Minister, that it is very useful to us.
The Transitional National Government, which
emerged from the Arta process, deserves support. As
the Secretary-General has said, it is the only viable
option. It is also the best guarantee of the unity and
territorial integrity of Somalia — a unity and territorial

7

S/PV.4487

integrity to which the Council constantly reaffirms its
commitment. The new Government of Prime Minister
Farah should be given every chance. We should
respond to this Government’s offers to cooperate in the
struggle against terrorism.
A statement will be made later in the meeting by
the Permanent Representative of Spain on behalf of the
European Union. France fully endorses it. I will
therefore limit my statement to a few brief comments.
The Security Council was first seized of the
situation in Somalia in early 1992, 10 years ago. It has
devoted much energy to the Somali crisis and has
adopted close to 20 resolutions on the matter. These
resolutions have allowed for the deployment of two
peacekeeping operations, at the cost of some $2 billion,
and of a multinational force of 37,000 persons.
This is no time to give up. France shares the
cautious optimism of the Secretary-General. The 9th
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
Summit opened up new prospects. The National
Reconciliation Conference, scheduled for the second
half of April in Nairobi, should confirm them,
provided, however, that the Transitional National
Government and all of the Somali parties participate in
it without preconditions and provided also that all
States of the region confirm their good will. This is one
of the messages that the Council should pass on.
In the new post-11 September context, it is
essential to help Somalia in order to prevent it from
becoming a new Afghanistan. It should be done in
cooperation with the Somalis. It should be done by
limiting negative humanitarian consequences. We can
only emphasize from this point of view the very grave
consequences of the freeze on the assets of AlBarakaat. The formula of a controlled lifting of the
freeze of the frozen assets, proposed by the Somali
authorities, should be welcomed.
What can the Council do? Several excellent
courses of action have been put forward in the
Secretary-General’s report. The good-offices missions
of Mohamed Sahnoun have certainly had a very
beneficial impact, particularly on the Khartoum
summit. It is necessary to pursue and intensify them.
They will usefully complement the daily activities of
the
Secretary-General’s
new
Representative,
Mr. Winston Tubman.

8

The creation of two groups of friends, in Nairobi
and New York, is also a step in the right direction.
France would be interested in participating, alongside
other countries that could help with the settlement and
to contribute to the mobilization of the international
community.
What else can be done? It is important, first of
all, that the Council clearly reaffirms its commitment
to certain principles. France unreservedly supports the
preparation of a presidential statement that could be
adopted this week.
Further, the means of making effective the arms
embargo imposed in 1992 are being discussed by the
sanctions Committee under its new Chairman, the
Ambassador of Bulgaria. I will not go into the details,
but the stakes are high for a country that is marked by
arms
proliferation.
Significant
disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes will also
be indispensable.
Finally, the Council should stand ready to take
decisive steps. France is in favour of sending a peacebuilding mission to Somalia as soon as the security
conditions allow for one. Unfortunately, the outcome of
the inter-agency mission that went to several Somali
regions between 15 and 23 January has not yet led to
this. But it is necessary that security in Mogadishu, in
particular, continue to be regularly assessed in the hope
that a green light can soon be given to the return of the
United Nations, particularly to the capital.
Mr. Bhuckory (Mauritius): Let me first thank
you, Sir, for organizing this public meeting to discuss
the report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Somalia. I take this opportunity to welcome Mr. Yusuf
Hassan Ibrahim, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, in
our midst and to thank him for his comprehensive
statement made earlier today.
Since our discussion of the situation in Somalia
in this Chamber last October there have been a number
of important developments in respect to Somalia —
first and foremost, the appointment of a new Prime
Minister, Mr. Hassan Abshir Farah, to whom we would
like to convey our best wishes for success. There has
also been a change at the level of the Representative of
the Secretary-General, with Mr. Winston Tubman
replacing Mr. David Stephen. I take this opportunity to
pay tribute to Mr. Stephen for the very important work
he has done over the past four years in supporting the
national reconciliation process in Somalia. We know

S/PV.4487

that his task was not an easy one. We welcome
Mr. Tubman in his new function as the new
Representative of the Secretary-General and express to
him our full support in his new assignment.
Mauritius has said time and again that the Arta
process remains the only viable framework that could
bring hope to the Somali people and eventually peace
and stability in Somalia. That is why it is so important
to remain focused in our efforts to pursue the Arta
process to its completion.
Last October, when we considered the situation in
Somalia, the Mauritius delegation mentioned that the
two major challenges facing the country and the
Transitional National Government were national
reconciliation on the political front and safeguarding
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity of
Somalia. We welcome in this regard the statement of
the Transitional National Government with regard to
making the reconciliation process a top priority
through talks with the factional leaders and regional
administrations. Since last November, there have been
a number of important regional initiatives to move the
reconciliation process forward. We need to encourage
these initiatives as much as we can.
One important initiative was the reconciliation
meeting convened last December by President Moi of
Kenya, during which a number of agreements were
signed between the Transitional National Government
and the faction leaders who were present at the
meeting. Those efforts culminated in the decision of
the Transitional National Government to form an allinclusive and broader-based Government. This is a
clear demonstration of the seriousness of the intent of
the Transitional National Government to reach out to
the faction leaders who have so far remained outside
the Arta process. This also shows that there is hope for
a reconciliation process in Somalia — especially when
the countries of the region are determined to help in
reconciliation efforts.
We support the proposal of the Secretary-General
to re-establish the Committee of Friends on Somalia.
We believe that such a group could be extremely useful
in furthering the objectives of the Arta conference —
objectives which the Security Council has reiterated
time and again. It is therefore imperative that members
of this group, to be established in both Nairobi and
New York, share this vision of the Council. They
should be genuinely committed to helping the

Transitional National Government advance the national
reconciliation process. Mauritius is ready to be part of
that group.
We also welcome the regional political initiative
recently undertaken by the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) to help the political
process in Somalia. IGAD is, indeed, playing a vital
role in advancing national reconciliation in Somalia.
That was well demonstrated at the 9th IGAD Summit,
which gave due attention to that issue. My delegation
welcomes the Summit’s decision to convene the
Somalia reconciliation conference in Nairobi next
month. At this juncture, it is important for the
international community and the Security Council to
send a strong message of support and to assist, by all
means, the convening of the conference.
The report of the Secretary-General paints a bleak
picture of the humanitarian situation in Somalia. The
food security situation in Gedo is precarious. The
international community should therefore step up its
efforts to prevent a humanitarian tragedy from
unfolding in Somalia. We call upon the donor countries
to contribute to the United Nations Consolidated InterAgency Appeal for Somalia.
With regard to the security situation in Somalia,
we have taken note of the findings of the inter-agency
security assessment mission. The report states that
Somalia remains one of the most dangerous
environments in which the United Nations operates,
and that is preventing the Secretary-General from
launching the much-awaited long-term peace-building
programme in Somalia. It is clear that the insecure
environment is the result of the action of the warlords
and their refusal to cooperate with the Transitional
National Government. It is unacceptable that the
United Nations continues to remain hostage to these
warlords, who are committed only to spreading
violence and undermining all efforts at reconciliation.
The intransigence of the warlords is exacerbated
by the proliferation and easy availability of small arms
and light weapons within Somalia. It is therefore
important that those who are engaged in arming the
various militia groups in Somalia be identified, and
that action be taken against them. The arms embargo
imposed on Somalia under Security Council resolution
733 (1992) is obviously being violated. It is
unacceptable that, when the Security Council is
striving to bring peace and stability to Somalia, there

9

S/PV.4487

are still some unscrupulous elements that are doing just
the opposite by arming the warlords.
We are grateful to Ambassador Tafrov of Bulgaria
for reactivating the work of the Somalia sanctions
Committee. We believe that there is an urgent need to
reinforce the arms embargo on that country.
As we discuss the situation in Somalia again
today in the Council, we should ask ourselves what
more the United Nations can do to assist that country,
which has suffered from more than a decade of anarchy
and chaos. We now have a process that appears to be
on track, and we have a Transitional National
Government that is showing that it is committed to
bringing peace and order back to the country. In his
statement to the Council last October, former Prime
Minister Galaydh stated,
“in all of our discussions with donors and with
the United Nations we have always said that the
best way to help us is to help establish the police
and security forces”. (S/PV.4392 (Resumption 1),
p. 18)
That is precisely what the United Nations should
do to help the Transitional National Government
maintain security in Mogadishu and elsewhere. We
urge the various United Nations development agencies
to increase their efforts to train and equip the security
forces of the Transitional National Government. The
so-called police forces in Mogadishu are living in
camps and are not earning any salary. Assisting them
would send a strong message to the people of Somalia
that the international community cares about their
plight and to the warlords that it would be in their
interests to put down their weapons and join the peace
process.
Finally, we also fully support projects currently
considered by the United Nations Development
Programme for the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) of the militias. We hope that the
next report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Somalia will indicate the number of police personnel
who have so far been trained and the number of
militias considered under the DDR programme.
Mr. Mbayu (Cameroon) (spoke in French): I
should like to thank you, Mr. President, for taking the
initiative to organize a public debate in the Security
Council on the situation in Somalia. Like earlier
speakers, I would like to welcome His Excellency

10

Mr. Yusuf Hassan Ibrahim, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Transitional National Government of Somalia.
We would also like to thank him for the detailed
information he gave us at the private meeting this
morning on the situation in his country and the efforts
being made by the Government to foster peace and
national reconciliation in Somalia.
The situation in Somalia has been a major cause
of concern to the international community for many
years. It is a country that has been divided, torn apart,
devastated and ravaged by war. Given that background,
we warmly welcome the most recent report of the
Secretary-General; the information that it contains is
cause for renewed hope. We must take advantage of
these positive signals.
Cameroon believes that by the end of this debate
the Council will have stressed the importance of five
points. The first is the need to maintain and strengthen
national dialogue among all the Somali factions. The
second is the need to step up the process of national
reconciliation so as to foster a fully representative,
broad-based Government, while at the same time
preserving the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
unity of Somalia. Thirdly, specific steps must be taken
for social and economic recovery and the restoration of
peace, security and stability in that country. That will
require increased mobilization of financial resources so
as to attain the $83.7 million requested in the most
recent Inter-Agency Consolidated Appeal to meet
humanitarian needs. There will also have to be material
and financial support for the very promising activities
in the field by the World Health Organization and
Doctors Without Borders. Fourthly, additional
assistance will be required for the United Nations
consolidated inter-agency disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration plan. Fifthly, activities aimed at
economic recovery for the consolidation of peace need
to be strengthened, with particular emphasis on
combating illiteracy, ensuring respect for the rule of
law, demining, demobilizing militia groups and
reintegrating former militia members, and ensuring
respect for human rights.
In order for the recovery and reconstruction
process in Somalia to succeed, our Somali brothers
must demonstrate a spirit of tolerance, patriotism and
dialogue, and accept negotiations with a view to
national reconciliation. To that end, my country
supports the initiative by the member countries of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development to bring

S/PV.4487

all factions together at a national reconciliation
conference during the second half of April 2002. It is
our hope that all factions will participate effectively at
the conference.
Cameroon also supports the initiative of the
Secretary-General to set up a Committee of Friends on
Somalia, at both Nairobi and New York. The
membership of the two groups must nevertheless take
into account the complexity of the matter and the stated
sensitivities of those in the subregion.
Lastly, I would like to congratulate Mr. Tubman,
the new Representative of the Secretary-General. I
wish him good luck in his new and noble task of
bringing about peace and heartfelt reconciliation in
Somalia.
Mr. Corr (Ireland): I would like, first, to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this public meeting
on Somalia today.
My delegation joins others in warmly welcoming
Minister Yusuf Hassan Ibrahim, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Somalia, with whom the Council
had a very constructive meeting in private session
earlier this morning.
Placing Council attention on the situation in
Somalia has been a priority for Ireland since coming
into the Security Council. We are therefore very
pleased to see the Council and the wider United
Nations membership focus on the issue today in this
open meeting.
The Permanent Representative of Spain will
speak shortly on behalf of the European Union, and
Ireland of course fully associates itself with his
statement.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report, which we have before us today. I want to
pay warm tribute to the former Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. David Stephen, for his
commitment to the people of Somalia and his untiring
efforts in what must be one of the most challenging
posts in the United Nations system. I would also like to
wish Mr. Winston Tubman, the new Representative of
the Secretary-General, every success as he takes on the
mantle.
We heard in October from the former
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Stephen,
that the people of Somalia were ready for peace. We

see today in the report of the Secretary-General that the
heads of State of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) have concluded that Somalis are
tired of conflict and division. It has always been the
case that the momentum for peace must come from the
Somali people themselves. It is now clear that the
people of Somalia have begun what will not be an easy
process to move towards peaceful reconciliation. It is
equally clear that the wider international community
must support their efforts, building on the first,
tentative steps taken at Arta. My delegation welcomes,
for that reason, the proposal by the Secretary-General
to establish the Committee of Friends on Somalia in
New York and in Nairobi.
We are particularly encouraged that there is now
agreement on a unified regional approach, which offers
strong beginnings of new hope for Somalia. Ireland
strongly supports the IGAD initiatives agreed at the
level of heads of State and Government and foreign
ministers since the beginning of the year. While it is
true that only Somalia’s leaders can end the suffering
of their people, it is also fair to say that it will not be
possible without a coordinated, constructive approach
on the part of its neighbours. We encourage all States,
in particular those in the region, to continue to
contribute in this positive spirit to national
reconciliation in Somalia. The gain will be not only for
the people of Somalia but for wider regional stability
and development.
The National Reconciliation Conference on
Somalia, to be held in Nairobi in a few weeks’ time,
will be an historic opportunity for the Somali parties —
all Somali parties — to begin at last to put the interests
of the Somali people — innocent victims of years of
mindless power feuding and divisions — ahead of all
power struggles and partisan motives. We strongly
encourage all Somali parties to participate in the
conference, and to participate without preconditions, in
a spirit of compromise and cooperation, so as to
complete the process begun at Arta.
At the same time, we encourage all parties to
continue to focus on achieving reconciliation at the
local level as well. My delegation especially welcomes
the commitment of the Secretary-General and his
Special Adviser Mohamed Sahnoun to assist IGAD
countries in implementing the decision taken at the 9th
IGAD Summit. Ireland will strongly support an active
United Nations role in this area.

11

S/PV.4487

As the report of the Secretary-General clearly
illustrates, various United Nations agencies, including
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP),
are actively engaged in promoting peace and
reconciliation through various programmes in Somalia,
which, as the Secretary-General says, contribute to
overall United Nations peace-building objectives. We
are encouraged by the briefing that the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) gave in
Geneva in February when introducing the Consolidated
Appeal, reporting that there are approximately 150
United Nations staff working on the ground in Somalia
on any given day.
The results of the recent inter-agency security
assessment mission in Somalia are clear, and we of
course accept that, for the moment, the United Nations
should not repatriate United Nations Political Office
for Somalia. We also hope, and we are confident, that
this question will be kept under review. In the
meantime, we must see what the international
community can do within these constraints to assist the
people of Somalia, who for over a decade now have
struggled, to a large extent isolated from the support
available to the populations of other countries
struggling with crisis.
The international community has a clear and
unambiguous responsibility to the people of Somalia,
which obliges us to look beyond the limitations that the
current security situation imposes and to reflect and
come up with ideas as to what is possible within the
constraints to help create the circumstances in which
the United Nations can become more fully engaged in
Somalia. We in the Council, in short, also have that
responsibility. Silence and lack of action is not an
option.
We have the presidential statement that we
adopted in October, which calls for proposals on how
the United Nations may further assist in the
demobilization of militia members and the training of
police personnel from the Transitional National
Government. We believe it would be appropriate to
look at such proposals and at any other means by which
we could help create more favourable circumstances on
the ground.
We should also now consider how to give greater
effect to the arms embargo on Somalia. The reports of
preparations for a major offensive, as contained in
paragraph 33 of the Secretary-General’s report, are

12

extremely worrying, as such reported developments
would clearly be in breach of Security Council
resolution 733 (1992). In the presidential statement of
October last year, the Council insisted
“that all States, in particular those of the region,
should not interfere in the internal affairs of
Somalia. Such interference could jeopardize the
sovereignty,
territorial
integrity,
political
independence
and
unity
of
Somalia.”
(S/PRST/2001/30, p. 2)
The Council furthermore insisted that “the territory of
Somalia should not be used to undermine stability in
the subregion” (ibid.). We believe that if these
principles were respected, the security situation in
Somalia would be enhanced.
We strongly support strengthening enforcement of
the sanctions regime. One option might be the
establishment of an appropriate mechanism to do so, as
it is clear that the regime that has been in place now for
10 years has not been enforced.
Ireland welcomes the establishment of an antiterrorism task force by the Transitional National
Government, and we urge that it be seen to be effective
and urgent in its work.
The report of the Secretary-General points to a
perilous humanitarian situation in the country. The
United Nations humanitarian and development
agencies continue to carry out important, life-saving
work in the face of often serious obstacles. Such
obstacles include a certain ennui on the part of the
international donor community, and we strongly urge
donors to respond generously to the Inter-Agency
Appeal.
My delegation notes the comments of the
Minister this morning on the impact of the freezing of
the Al-Barakaat accounts. We are also hopeful that a
satisfactory solution will be found quickly, which
would help ease unnecessary suffering.
There is no such thing as a failed society. There
may be failed State institutions, there may be weakness
of governance, but society and the needs of people
transcend more narrow, legalistic definitions. The
people of Somalia need the help of the international
community. The IGAD partners need our support. The
peoples of the region need our engagement. We on the
Council have a duty to offer this support.

S/PV.4487

Mr. Diallo (Guinea) (spoke in French): My
delegation first wishes to thank you, Sir, for taking the
initiative of convening this open meeting on Somalia,
which comes just a few days after the meeting on the
Ethiopian-Eritrean conflict. That initiative was a most
eloquent demonstration of the interest that the Council,
through your presidency, attaches to the peaceful
resolution of conflicts in Africa. My delegation also
wishes to express its appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for the wealth of detail and highly useful
contents of his latest report on the situation in Somalia.
We welcome the appointment of Mr. Winston
Tubman as the Secretary-General’s Representative for
Somalia, and we assure him of our cooperation. We
would also like to welcome the presence of Mr. Yusuf
Hassan Ibrahim, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Somalia, and to thank him for his informative report
during our closed meeting.
The grave crisis affecting Somalia for over a
decade remains a matter of great concern. The way has
been prepared for national reconciliation. The Arta
peace process of 2000, which fostered reconciliation
among part of the Somali society and gave rise to the
establishment of transitional institutions, gives reason
for hope in this regard. My delegation believes that the
process, recognized by the international community as
the only viable foundation for a lasting and global
solution to the crisis, must be fully carried out.
In this regard, we consider it urgent and
imperative that all parties to the conflict, political
groups and factions be part of the current process. That
is one of the sine qua non conditions for a lasting
restoration of peace. National reconciliation and the
restoration of confidence cannot be achieved without
the effective participation of all socio-political
sensibilities in the country.
One welcomes the decision of the 9th Summit of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) to hold a reconciliation conference to include
the participation of all Somali political actors, in
Nairobi in April. It is to be hoped that all those who
have influence over the various actors use it to ensure
their effective participation.
There is no doubt that the results achieved are
derisory compared to the suffering endured by the
Somali population since 1991. Indeed, numerous
challenges are yet to be addressed, among them the
humanitarian and security problems. That is why it is

essential to reinforce the arms embargo in order put an
end to their proliferation. A demobilization,
disarmament and reintegration programme must be
implemented as well.
With regard to humanitarian concerns, my
delegation is concerned at the grave situation of food
shortages and appeals to the international community
to mobilize resources to alleviate the suffering of the
population.
It is understood that it is first and foremost up to
the Somalis themselves to demonstrate their wisdom by
finally putting an end to the fratricidal conflict, which
has gone on too long. However, it is also true that the
international community can provide the impetus and
continue the efforts made in this country since 1992.
For this reason, my delegation continues to believe that
the United Nations has a role in the recovery of
Somalia, taking into account, needless to say, the
security of its personnel. My delegation believes that in
the current international context, the implementation of
a peace-building mission in Somalia is indispensable.
Finally, my delegation is favourable to the idea of
creating a committee of friends of the SecretaryGeneral for Somalia.
Mr. Williamson (United States of America): We
would like to welcome our Somali friends, Foreign
Minister Yusuf Hassan Ibrahim and other members of
the Transitional National Government, back to the
Security Council. We thank them for their statements to
the Council this morning. We note their efforts to
comply with the provisions of Council resolution 1373
(2001) and appreciate their contributions to date in the
war against terrorism.
The United States remains committed to working
with all Somalis dedicated to the tasks of combating
terrorism, ensuring a secure environment for the
delivery of humanitarian assistance, promoting
economic development and overcoming long-term
governance challenges.
We thank the Secretary-General for the recent
report on Somalia and share his concern over the lack
of progress on political reconciliation. We, too, remain
concerned over continued violence throughout
Somalia. In particular, we condemn those responsible
for the recent death of a worker for the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and the kidnapping of the
UNICEF programme director based in Mogadishu.

13

S/PV.4487

Those incidents point out once again the very dangers
that United Nations personnel face each day in
Somalia.
We commend the United Nations for its continued
efforts to assist civilians in need through the provision
of humanitarian assistance and promoting economic
development where feasible. We share the Security
Council’s concern over the worsening humanitarian
situation, which is compounded by the level of
violence, which threatens to reduce humanitarian
assistance operations.
The United States supports the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation for the establishment of a
friends of Somalia group constituted both in Nairobi
and here in New York. We would also like to express
our appreciation to Mr. David Stephan, the former
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia,
for his dedicated and tireless work. We welcome
Mr. Winston Tubman, the Secretary-General’s new
Representative for Somalia, and pledge to work with
him as we move forward.
We fully concur with the assessment of the
security situation in Somalia, based upon the
recommendations of the United Nations headquarters
inter-agency mission and their recommendation not to
re-establish the peace-building office in Mogadishu at
this time.
As members recall, the inter-agency composition
of the United Nations mission was intended to ensure
that those United Nations departments responsible for
conducting operations in Somalia would have an
opportunity to evaluate the security situation on the
ground from the perspective of their humanitarian and
political operational requirements. Those officials
contributed to the final assessment contained in the
report. We believe that those United Nations
departments, in conjunction with United Nations
security officials, are best suited to make a judgement
concerning the United Nations presence in Somalia.
We remain committed to removing the terrorist
threat in Somalia and ensuring against the use of
Somalia as a terrorist base. To that end, we call upon
all parties in Somalia to observe the provisions of
Council resolution 1373 (2001).
We also seek to prevent developments in Somalia
from threatening regional peace and stability. Security
Council resolution 733 (1992), which calls for a

14

general and complete embargo on all deliveries of
weapons and military equipment to Somalia, remains in
force and is relevant to the fight against terrorism as
well as to the quest for peace and reconciliation. All
States have a continued obligation to implement
resolution 733 (1992) fully and completely. We
appreciate the leadership demonstrated by Bulgaria in
convening the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 733 (1992) and stand ready to assist the
Committee in developing strategies that will result in
an effective arms embargo for Somalia.
We support Somali and regional efforts intended
to promote national reconciliation and to overcome the
long-term governance challenges that terrorists have
exploited to make Somalia a base. Specifically, we call
upon all Somali parties to attend the April national
reconciliation conference in Kenya — sponsored by
President Moi, endorsed by both Ethiopia and Djibouti
and carried out under the auspices of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development —
without reservation or preconditions. We also call upon
neighbouring States to play a constructive role in
efforts aimed at Somali political reconciliation and
request that they encourage all Somali parties to attend
the conference and approach it with the goal of
fostering political stability in Somalia.
We believe that, ultimately, the Somali people
control their own political destiny and must choose to
lay down their arms and end the interminable cycle of
violence that has engulfed Somalia since 1991.
Nonetheless, we also recognize that the international
community and we must do our part. The international
community has once again turned its attention to
Somalia and is ready to demonstrate its commitment to
assist in political reconciliation and economic
development. It is now up to the Somali people to turn
away from “warlordism” for their “States” which seek
to play a constructive role, to demonstrate their
willingness to put the failures of the past behind them
and to work together for a new Somalia.
Mr. Granovsky (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We join other speakers in thanking the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Somalia, Mr. Yusuf
Hassan Ibrahim, for his important statement containing
a very thorough and detailed analysis of the situation in
his country. In our opinion, that statement was
extremely useful. We also thank you, Mr. President, for
having organized this meeting.

S/PV.4487

The Russian delegation agrees with the
assessments and observations contained in the
Secretary-General’s report. We wish to comment on
three key issues reflected in the report.
We share the Secretary-General’s “cautious
optimism” with regard to the outcome of the ninth
Summit of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD). The general understanding
achieved on how to resolve the urgent problems of
Somalia on the basis of consensus among the countries
of the subregion is an important prerequisite for
harmonizing the various peace initiatives under way.
Coordinated efforts in the framework of IGAD among
the Somali factions will deprive the destructive forces
of any opportunity to exploit the conflicts between the
countries of the subregion and other interested players.
The task of the Security Council and the entire
international community is to strengthen the positive
approach of IGAD and to encourage Somalis in their
turn to interact constructively with that organization.
Russia is prepared to continue to assist the efforts of
the countries of the subregion on a bilateral basis and
within the context of the Joint IGAD Partners Forum.
We note the Secretary-General’s intention to
establish committees of friends of Somalia in Nairobi
and in New York. We believe that such structures
should primarily provide moral, political and, where
possible, material support for the collective efforts of
the IGAD countries and the positive forces in Somalia
to emerge from crisis. Naturally, membership in the
committees of friends should be open to all interested
participants, including members of the Security
Council, that can provide genuine assistance in that
work.
We agree with the Secretary-General’s conclusion
that the security situation in Somalia, including in
Mogadishu, is not yet conducive to the establishment
of a United Nations political office there. The Council,
together with other members of the United Nations
family, must map out a clear path for providing
effective assistance to the Somali people once the
conditions have been met.
We have also focused our attention on that
section of the report addressing the fight against
international terrorism. We note that the leaders of the
Transitional National Government have asserted that
they will not tolerate any manifestation of such a threat
in the territory of Somalia. At the same time, we

understand that the capacities of the Transitional
National Government and other Somali groupings
prepared to combat extremism are limited. It is the task
of the international community and the Security
Council, at the heart of the struggle against
international terrorism, to provide the Somalis with the
essential help they need to neutralize any possible
manifestation of terrorism. It is important for the
Somalis themselves energetically to cooperate in that
task with the Counter-Terrorism Committee established
pursuant to a Security Council resolution. Such
cooperation, including possible measures against
persons linked to international terrorism, should have a
solid foundation in international law. The ultimate
neutralization of the various threats emanating from the
territory of Somalia will be impossible without the
restoration of peace and order throughout the country.
Mr. Harrison (United Kingdom): May I, through
you, Sir, thank the Foreign Minister of the Transitional
National Government of Somalia for his statement this
morning.
The representative of Spain will be speaking
shortly on behalf of the European Union and my
delegation naturally endorses everything that he will
say. I just want to make a few points in my national
capacity.
The Nairobi peace and reconciliation conference
will be crucial, but we should all be realistic about
what it can achieve. Even if the parties are able to
resolve only some of their differences, we would
reckon that the Nairobi peace conference will have
been a success. We must, however, regard it as the first
stage in a process and not the endgame and be realistic
in assuming that agreement at Nairobi is unlikely on a
broad-based Government. Instead, the focus of Nairobi
should be on resolving differences among the parties in
the South and on finding a political settlement that may
result in the formation of a broad-based Government in
due course. The United Kingdom is contributing
₤25,000 to the expenses of the Nairobi conference.
It is important that the United Nations and,
indeed, other international bodies do not make any
statements before Nairobi that might prejudice the
outcome — for example, statements that push a
particular constitutional model for Somalia. As many
delegations have already said, the only stable outcome
will be one that is generated and agreed by the Somali
people and parties themselves.

15

S/PV.4487

A number of delegations have commented on the
question of a peace-building mission in Somalia. We
believe that a United Nations office there would be
useful, but we also believe that it is important that we
all respect the Secretary-General’s judgement on the
safety of personnel, which is clearly the most important
priority.
We are also concerned by the proliferation of
arms supplies to Somalia. Countries that are engaged in
the arms trade to Somalia are not only in breach of
Council resolution 733 (1992) but are also further
destabilizing the country, fuelling the gun culture and
undermining regional efforts to reduce the flow of
arms. Like others, we are in favour of reactivating the
arms embargo.
We also encourage the United Nations, in
conjunction with the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) and other regional bodies, to do
more to solve problems that would bring practical
benefits for the people of Somalia. In this context, it
may be worth encouraging the Government of Saudi
Arabia more energetically to lift the livestock ban, to
make a serious attempt to stop the flow of illegal arms
and to take tough action against the dumping of toxic
waste into legal fishing areas in Somali waters.
Finally, if the Nairobi Conference fails and
hostilities increase, the international community will
need to consider appropriate action against those who
are responsible.
Mr. Aguilar Zínser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
I join the expressions of congratulations to you,
Mr. President, on your convening of this meeting on
Somalia. On behalf of my country, I should also like to
thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Somalia,
Mr. Yusuf Hassan Ibrahim, for presenting his statement
to the Council in a frank and precise manner.
At this meeting, we return once again to the issue
of Somalia, which has been a source of concern to the
United Nations and the Security Council for more than
10 years. During this period, the initiatives presented
have not taken hold or achieved their fundamental
purpose:
peace,
development,
harmony
and
understanding in the country. However, this must not
be a reason for the Security Council and the United
Nations
to
excuse
themselves
from
their
responsibilities and commitments in Somalia.

16

The evaluation undertaken by the inter-agency
security assessment mission that went to Somalia is not
promising. Quite simply, the analysis of the conflict
situation that the country is living through underlines
the necessity that this issue remain a matter for the
Council’s attention.
Last week, in the private consultations held by
the Council, Assistant Secretary-General Ibrahim Fall
reiterated the feeling of the Secretary-General,
expressed in his letter of November 2001, that so long
as security conditions do not permit the return of the
United Nations Political Office for Somalia, it will
have to continue performing its functions from Nairobi.
Thus, Mr. Winston Tubman, recently appointed by the
Secretary-General as his Representative to direct that
Office, will have to begin its work from another
country. I should like to add here that we wish
Mr. Tubman every success in the difficult task for
which the Secretary-General has singled him out. We
also give him our vote of confidence.
Upon arriving in the region, Mr. Tubman will
confront a very complicated situation in which, in
Mexico’s view, what is most urgent is to concentrate
efforts on humanitarian assistance, supplying ample aid
to the Somali population, who need it for distinct
reasons. This population faces, in addition to interethnic problems and the armed conflict between
opposing groups, grave conditions of malnutrition and
endemic diseases that require medical attention. Above
all, an economic recovery that would enable
improvement in the welfare of the Somali population is
needed.
Our attention must be immediate and, of course,
include the assessment of how various United Nations
programmes in Somalia can be reinforced, how we can
establish a fund to support the process of peace that
may be achieved in that country, and how to coordinate
peacemaking and humanitarian efforts. There is a close
link between security conditions in the country and
food security for the Somalis, and this is a priority that
the United Nations must address.
The context in which humanitarian and
development activities must be undertaken is precisely
that of improving security. We must confront the
prevailing conditions of insecurity that caused the
withdrawal of United Nations personnel and that today
put at risk the safety and security of locally hired

S/PV.4487

personnel in the areas where the United Nations carries
out its sorely needed and urgent tasks.
Closely connected to the problem of security is
that of worsening humanitarian and food security
conditions and, in its turn, the trafficking in and
proliferation of small arms and light weapons. We
recall that there is a United Nations sanctions regime
imposed by the Security Council that includes an
embargo on small arms and light weapons.
Nevertheless, the conflict continues and the sanctions
regime has been unable to operate effectively.
Therefore, we welcome and firmly support the
Bulgarian delegation in its efforts to restructure that
regime.

accept the need to share power. We will therefore pay
close attention to developments related to, and the
results that will emanate from, the upcoming National
Reconciliation Conference set for April, which is to be
convened under the auspices of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD). We also invite all
Somali groups to participate in that meeting in a
constructive spirit.
We trust that at that Conference solutions will be
found that are based on the principle of respect for the
national sovereignty and territorial integrity of Somalia
and that will create conditions conducive to governance
and to the sharing of authority and power in the
country.

We also note once again the Secretariat’s
affirmation that this is one of the most dangerous
environments in which the United Nations operates,
and thus we welcome all the efforts that the
Organization can undertake to control arms and the
financing of arms trafficking and to deal with the
possible links between these and terrorist groups as one
of the central tasks of the Organization.

We support the decision taken at the IGAD
Summit recognizing that consensus among Somalia’s
neighbours is essential for progress to be made in the
quest for a peaceful settlement and an orderly
transition. This is an opportunity for the countries
involved to demonstrate their commitment to peace and
stability in the region while respecting the will of the
Somali people themselves.

We support the Transitional National Government
and believe, as said earlier today, that it is the starting
point for achieving peace and reconciliation in
Somalia. We wish the Government every success in its
efforts to bring about peace in the country and to
establish the basis for reconciliation and conditions of
governance that would include the participation of all
groups and factions in the country.

In this sense, we endorse the support voiced here
for the initiative to create two groups of friends of
Somalia — within the region itself and here in New
York, at United Nations Headquarters.

We are aware that, as pointed out by the
Secretary-General in his report, the security situation in
Somalia is highly fragile and that the Transitional
National Government does not enjoy full recognition
throughout the territory. Therefore, we hope that the
reconciliation efforts carried out by the Government
and promoted by the international community will be
successful and that they benefit all domestic groups.
We believe that the Security Council, the
international community and international agencies as
a whole must coordinate their efforts to see to it that
the parties give up violence and achieve a national
reconciliation in which the various actors and groups

In conclusion, I should like to place on record the
fact that Mexico has all along maintained that the
United Nations must play an active and direct role in
efforts to keep the peace in Somalia. Though we agree
with the Secretary-General’s assertion that peace
cannot be imposed on the parties to a given conflict if
they do not seek it actively and do not in fact want it,
we maintain that, wherever a process is required for
achieving peace, it is the duty of the United Nations to
guarantee that this is done and that, wherever obstacles
are encountered to progress in this respect, it is our
duty, as members of the Security Council, to work
tirelessly to help ensure that such obstacles are
overcome.
The President: In view of the late hour, and with
the concurrence of the members of the Council, I shall
now suspend the meeting until 3.30 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.15 p.m.

17
