S/PV.9434

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9434th meeting

Wednesday, 11 October 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. França Danese. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Brazil)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mrs. Paolini
Mr. Nanga
Mr. Osei-Mensah
Mrs. Shino
Ms. Gatt
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Hauri
Ms. Tantawy
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. Wood

Agenda
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the Permanent Representative of
Colombia to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the President
of the Security Council (S/2016/53)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia (S/2023/701)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-29854 (E)
*2329854*

Accessible document

Please recycle

Colombia

S/PV.9434

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the
Permanent Representative of Colombia tso the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
and the President of the Security Council
(S/2016/53)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia (S/2023/701)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of Colombia to participate in
this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Álvaro Leyva Durán, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Colombia.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Carlos Ruiz
Massieu, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia; His Excellency Mr. Hrvoje
Ćurić Hrvatinić, Deputy Permanent Representative of
Croatia to the United Nations, in his capacity as Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission; and Mr. Rodrigo
Botero García, General Director of the Foundation for
Conservation and Sustainable Development.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2023/701, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ruiz Massieu.
Mr. Ruiz Massieu: I am grateful for this opportunity
to brief the Security Council as it takes up the most
recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2023/701) on
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia.
As always, I am honoured to be joined by Minister
for Foreign Affairs Álvaro Leyva Durán. I once
again thank him and the Government of Colombia
for their continued trust in the work of the Mission
2/22

11/10/2023

in support of peace. I also welcome Mr. Rodrigo
Botero’s participation in today’s meeting. He is a
leading Colombian environmentalist and participant
in the ongoing peace efforts whose work illustrates the
important connections between conflict, peacebuilding
and the environment.
We meet as milestones in the peace process are
approaching, with the seventh anniversary of the signing
of the 2016 Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict
and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace coming up and
nearing the halfway point in the 15-year timetable for
its implementation. Those who have studied Colombia’s
armed conflict deeply have pointed to skewed land
distribution and the failure to enact essential rural
reforms as one of its underlying causes. It was for
that reason that the parties to the agreement placed
comprehensive rural reform at its heart, making it the
first chapter of the agreement and the area requiring the
most substantial long-term investment. It is therefore
not surprising that the lagging progress in that area
in the initial years of implementation has limited the
extent to which the agreement has been able to bring
the hoped-for transformations to rural and conflictaffected areas that have long been marginalized.
Nevertheless, while we are still a long way from
attaining the ambitious goals of the agreement in that
respect, I wanted to begin my briefing today with an
acknowledgement of the increasing Government efforts
under way to bring about these reforms. I would say
that a commitment to that section of the agreement and
the new peace dialogue initiatives were the outstanding
features of the Petro Urrego Administration’s recently
concluded first year as it sought to further consolidate
peace in the country. The Secretary-General’s latest
report highlights important policy actions in that
regard, pointing to a year marked by substantial budget
allocations for rural reform and its prioritization in
the national development plan; increased dialogue
with peasant and landholder organizations and recent
steps taken such as the establishment of the National
Agrarian Reform System and the designation of four
priority regions for comprehensive rural development
interventions.
That commitment has been brought to life in human
terms in scenes such as that witnessed this past weekend
in the town of San Juan de Arama, in the southern
department of Meta, where land purchased by the
Government was delivered to some 500 beneficiaries,
among them former Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
23-29854

11/10/2023

Colombia

de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP)
combatants, peasants and Indigenous members of
the communities where they have resettled. Hopeful
moments such as those are now increasingly common
as Colombia’s Government takes up that crucial aspect
of the Peace Agreement, for which action is overdue,
with greater dynamism.
The Secretary-General’s report also contains
multiple examples that illustrate the interdependence
between the implementation of the 2016 Final Agreement
and other efforts by President Petro’s Government
to consolidate peace. A few weeks ago I visited the
former territorial area for training and reintegration of
Carrizal, in Antioquia department, where more than 50
former FARC-EP members and their families are living
alongside members of the local community. There, as
in similar locations around the countryside, one can
see an admirable persistence among former combatants
and communities as they join efforts to improve their
lives and realize the transformations outlined in the
Final Peace Agreement. In a project supported by
the Mission, women former combatants who work in
artisanal mines have augmented their incomes and
those of the community by crafting and selling jewelry.
Former combatants and community members have also
joined forces in planting trees to combat deforestation.
However, as I heard in my conversations with excombatants and leaders of social organizations, those
initiatives have been imperilled by threats from illegal
armed groups. In fact, that reintegration area, like
several others before it, is likely to be relocated in the
near future, owing to insecurity. As the relocation is
planned, I reiterate my call on the authorities to ensure
dignified living conditions in the new location and to
continue to look after the safety and welfare of the
communities that remain behind.
I should also condemn once more and in the
strongest terms possible the killings of former FARCEP combatants. Two such killings have occurred
since the report was issued, and nearly 400 former
combatants have been killed since the signing of the
Final Agreement. That is simply unacceptable, and it
demands that the authorities take urgent and concrete
measures for their protection and that of social leaders
and human rights defenders. An important step in
that direction was the recent adoption by the National
Commission on Security Guarantees of the longdelayed implementation of a public policy dismantling
illegal armed groups and criminal organizations.
That policy — a product of consultations between

S/PV.9434

the Government and civil society — seeks to address
the multiple causes favouring the emergence and
strengthening of criminal actors. Its implementation
should help the authorities respond effectively to the
ever-evolving threats in the territories.
(spoke in Spanish)
The multiple expressions of violence that persist
in various regions of Colombia must not continue to
hinder implementation. Government initiatives to
pursue dialogue with armed actors are unquestionably
a necessary additional way to defuse those threats and
reverse their impact on communities by allowing the
unfulfilled commitments undertaken under the peace
agreement to materialize. That is particularly true for
Indigenous and Afro-Colombian territories in regions
such as the Pacific, where the actions of armed groups
and the limited implementation of the ethnic chapter of
the agreement force communities to endure intolerable
levels of violence and lack of opportunity.
I would once again like to welcome the progress
made at the negotiating table between the Government
of Colombia and the Ejército de Liberación Nacional
(ELN). In particular, I want to highlight the development
of the bilateral ceasefire, which has resulted in a decline
in the conflict between the parties. I also emphasize
the importance of the Council’s support in enabling
the Mission to contribute to that process through
its participation in the Monitoring and Verification
Mechanism, which is contributing to the prevention
and resolution of incidents between the parties.
I am also pleased to report that thanks to the
contributing countries, 31 of the 68 international
observers authorized by the Council and deployed
specifically to monitor and verify the ceasefire arrived
recently. The work of the National Participation
Committee installed in August to promote the
participation of all sectors of Colombian society in the
peace process with the ELN is also progressing. The
fact that the peace talks panel met in Bogotá yesterday
for the first time is indicative of how the process is
becoming increasingly established in Colombia.
We welcome the dialogues between the
Government and the self-styled Estado Mayor Central
FARC-EP group. Last weekend, the parties announced
a suspension of offensive actions against each another
and declared that they intended to establish a peace
talks panel and that a bilateral ceasefire would take
effect starting on 16 October. I have been informed that

23-298543/22

S/PV.9434

Colombia

the parties will soon ask the Council to authorize the
Mission to participate in the monitoring and verification
of the ceasefire. I will ensure that the Council receives
all the information it needs to consider the request.
The expectations generated by progress towards the
construction of a peace process must be matched by the
fulfilment of the commitments made, the de-escalation
of confrontations and, especially, respect for the rights
of communities, social leaders and signatories of the
2016 Final Agreement.

11/10/2023

(spoke in English)
From conducting a participatory process to develop
the national action plan for resolution 1325 (2000),
alongside women platforms, to consultations with
peasants and landowners over rural reform, dialogue
with grassroots organizations has been a prevalent
practice of the current Administration. I salute that
inclusive approach, which provides opportunities for
building consensus on public policy.

The consistent demonstration of the will of the
parties necessarily involves preventing the recurrence
of events such as last month’s attacks in the department
of Cauca, which resulted in the tragic death of civilians
from communities that have been seeking peace
for decades.

In that spirit, I encourage the Government, former
FARC-EP combatants and all actors invested in the
comprehensive implementation of the Final Peace
Agreement to prioritize constructive dialogue. That
will be essential for sustained progress in areas such as
the ethnic chapter, rural reform, reintegration and illicit
crop substitution.

As we meet in October, which marks the anniversary
of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, I salute the Government of Colombia and
civil society organizations for their progress towards
the finalization of the first national action plan for
its implementation.

Also critical to moving forward is the definition,
without further delay, of a clear institutional architecture
to oversee implementation, including the appointment
of a high-level official within the presidency tasked
to lead those efforts. The period ahead will be key for
translating new plans and initiatives into actions.

In the same context, the recent decision of the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace (SJP) to open Case 11, which
will address gender-based, sexual and reproductive
violence by parties to the conflict, is another key
milestone. I acknowledge the leadership and tireless
work of hundreds of civil society organizations across
Colombia who advocated for the opening of the case.

In over two weeks, Colombia will hold its
second local elections since the Final Agreement.
Unfortunately, violence has already impacted the
electoral campaign in various regions and has affected
parties across the political spectrum, including former
combatants and members of the Comunes party. I
trust that authorities will do their utmost to guarantee
that both candidates and voters can participate in the
elections in the most inclusive and secure way possible
throughout the national territory. That would deepen a
tangible outcome of the Final Agreement.

That important development comes alongside other
recent advances by the SJP on its way to issuing its
first sanctions, including recent acknowledgements of
responsibility made by all parties. In addition to being
an obligation of all parties to the conflict, contributing
to the truth and acknowledging responsibility for the
crimes committed are fundamental pillars for the
success of this process.
As the Secretary-General stated in his report, it is
important for the peace process, as a whole, to reach the
stage where the SJP issues its first sanctions as soon as
possible. Likewise, it will be crucial for the Government
to ensure the necessary conditions for the prompt and
effective implementation of those sanctions so that they
can fulfil their objective and thus honour the principle
of the centrality of the victims. To that end, the Mission
continues to work closely with the SJP, participants and
Government and State entities.
4/22

Colombia’s conflict was once considered
intractable. The peacebuilding efforts under way today,
with the crucial support of the Council, came about
following frustrated attempts in previous decades.
But Colombians never gave up on peace and neither
did the international community. In times of tension
around the world, Colombia’s case is a reminder that
even the most entrenched of conflicts can be resolved
through dialogue and a call to never desist in the search
for peace.
The President: I thank Mr. Ruiz Massieu for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ćurić Hrvatinić.
23-29854

11/10/2023

Colombia

Mr. Ćurić Hrvatinić: On behalf of the
Peacebuilding Commission, I thank you, Mr. President,
for inviting me to brief the Security Council.
Building on the Peacebuilding Commission’s
engagement with Colombia since 2020 and, in particular,
on transitional justice and on Indigenous peoples, peace
and reconciliation this year, the Commission encourages
the Security Council to consider several points.
The Commission acknowledges the concrete steps
taken by the Government of Colombia during its first
year in office to consolidate peace and encourages all
concerned parties to redouble their efforts in order to
accelerate the full implementation of the 2016 Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a
Stable and Lasting Peace.
The Commission welcomes the progress achieved
to date while acknowledging that challenges remain
as Colombia nears the seventh anniversary of the
Final Agreement.
The Commission encourages the Council to support
the Government in ensuring that peace dividends reach
all Colombians, including through comprehensive rural
reform, which is key to reinforcing State presence
and providing development opportunities and public
services in conflict-affected areas and historically
marginalized regions, thus addressing the underlying
causes of conflict in a sustainable way by recognizing
that development, peace and security and human rights
are interlinked and mutually reinforcing.
The Commission calls for continued international
support for the comprehensive implementation of the
Final Peace Agreement and other peace initiatives
taken forward by the Government. In that regard, the
Commission welcomes the support of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia and the United
Nations country team, the close coordination among
the two and the Secretary-General’s recent decision
to extend Colombia’s eligibility for the Peacebuilding
Fund for a further five-year period. It also encourages
the Government to progress on its plans to re-establish
the presidential office for the implementation of the
Final Peace Agreement.
The Commission welcomes advances in the
Government’s efforts to seek broader peace through
dialogue in the framework of the “total peace” policy,
in particular the peace negotiations with the Ejército
de Liberación Nacional (ELN) and, in that regard,
expresses appreciation for the Security Council’s

S/PV.9434

decision to mandate the Mission to verify the ceasefire
between the Government and the ELN.
The Commission also underscored the need for all
armed groups to cease violence against civilians, engage
in good faith in peace initiatives and seek to de-escalate
violence against one another as demonstrations of their
will to work for peace. In that context, the Commission
welcomes the announcement by the Government and
group self-identified as Central High Command-Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del
Pueblo to include respect for civilian populations in
their bilateral, national ceasefire.
The Commission encourages further progress in
reintegration to ensure the security and livelihoods of
former combatants who have laid down their arms and
seek to rebuild their lives in peace.
The Commission expresses its strong concern
about continued violence faced by former combatants
and social leaders, as well as Indigenous and
Afro-Colombian populations and other vulnerable
populations in Colombia, and encourages the further
implementation of the action plan of the Comprehensive
Programme for Safeguards for Women Leaders and
Human Rights Defenders. The Commission encourages
the Government to undertake concerted efforts to
provide security and protection.
The Commission also underscores the importance
of holding upcoming regional and local elections on
29 October in conditions of safety and security, and
underscores the need to ensure the safe participation
of former combatants in those elections, in accordance
with national legislation.
The Commission recalls with appreciation
Colombia’s commitments to the inclusion of
Indigenous peoples in peace efforts and encourages
further international support, as demonstrated in the
Commission’s meeting on Indigenous Peoples, Peace
and Reconciliation of 19 June 2023.
The Commission encourages the Council to closely
follow the measures taken to provide protection for
young community members and leaders to ensure
their full and effective participation in peacebuilding
efforts. The Commission appreciates the strong focus
on gender provisions in the Final Agreement and the
total peace policy, including in the dialogues with other
armed actors. It welcomes the ongoing work towards
the development of Colombia’s first action plan for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), which could

23-298545/22

S/PV.9434

Colombia

contribute to the full and timely implementation of the
gender provisions of the Final Agreement and of the
ceasefire agreements, including the one between the
Government and the ELN.
The Commission commends continued progress in
the pioneering work of the transitional justice system
in contributing to truth, justice, reparations and the
non-repetition of crimes committed during the armed
conflict. It acknowledges the efforts of the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace and looks forward to the issuance
of its first restorative sentences.
The Peacebuilding Commission notes that
Colombia continues to be a model for comprehensive
peace consolidation and reiterates its commitment to
supporting the Government of Colombia and its people
in their efforts to build and sustain peace and share their
experiences on peacebuilding before the Commission.
The President: I thank Mr. Ćurić Hrvatinić for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Botero García.
Mr. Botero García (spoke in Spanish): Following
a deplorable weekend that saw conflicts escalating
around the world, I wish to draw the Security Council’s
attention to three issues: first, the nature of the
armed conflict in Colombia and its environmental
repercussions; secondly, the opportunity for a peace
policy that includes the environment at its heart; and
finally, the international reciprocity necessary to
prevent the conflict’s expansion.
As Council members know, the lack of
implementation of the 2016 Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace
and, in particular, the failure of the State to reach the
territories previously controlled by the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo have
led to those territories being occupied recently by
various armed groups. The proliferation of such groups
is also related to the presence of resources — generally
in local community areas or conservation zones — that
are fuelling their armies.
In that context, since the signing of the Final
Agreement, almost 1 million hectares have been
deforested in one of the most biodiverse areas on the
planet — an area approximately a quarter the size
of the Kingdom of the Netherlands. Environmental
degradation is also related to allegedly legal activities,
which in some areas are conducted in tandem with those
6/22

11/10/2023

forms of territorial co-opting, offering evidence of new
alliances between armed groups, regional politicians,
private investors and international markets. The overlap
between activities related to agriculture, livestock
farming, infrastructure, oil and large-scale mining and
illegal economies is not by chance, allowing us to see
the complexity of the conflict.
Deforestation has been concentrated in public
lands, Indigenous territories and protected areas. The
introduction of 1.2 million new cows to appropriated
and deforested lands in the Amazon has had an impact
on the rights of landless peasant communities, as well
as forests and biodiversity. The data collected in Brazil
and Bolivia by the Science Panel for the Amazon shows
regional trends. We believe that the regulations of the
European Union, the United States and the United
Kingdom are not enough when it comes to due diligence
and traceability. Other large international markets are
still not helping with that task.
Threats against and the displacement of national
park officials, in an area of 10 million hectares and
over the course of several years now, as well as the
concentration of anti-personnel mines, which are
causing inhumane confinement and leaving land
uninhabitable for the future, are concrete examples
of the major interests that are posing a danger to
our territories.
All of that paints a bleak picture for civil and
public environmental defenders and non-governmental
organizations. Colombia has one of the highest rates in
the world of threats to and deaths among those defending
its environment and territory, despite the Government’s
efforts to advance the ratification and implementation
of the Escazú Agreement.
It is worth highlighting here the opportunity
presented by the Colombian Government’s peace
policy to place the environment at the heart of the peace
dialogues’ agenda. For the first time in the history of
peace dialogues in our country, the environmental axis
has been defined as a structural element to achieve a
peace that includes the environment as a victim, but
also as an element of transformation for the country’s
sustainable future.
As for the peace agenda with the Ejército de
Liberación Nacional (ELN), it has been agreed that
civil society’s participation in the discussion of
environmental issues should be promoted, and the
transformations required to ensure that the environment
23-29854

11/10/2023

Colombia

can recover and thrive for the benefit of the entire
population should be considered. The inclusion on
the agenda of an item dedicated to the environment
as a victim underscores the fact that Colombia has
recognized the importance of the environment as a
collective good that must therefore be repaired, restored
and privileged in governmental and civil efforts. It also
recognizes that the State, the private sector and armed
groups have all had environmental impacts that must
be acknowledged and rectified. That is unprecedented
at the global level and therefore attests to the challenges
faced in advancing the dialogue process.
It is important to highlight the opportunities — and
challenges — that have arisen with other illegal groups,
such as the Estado Mayor Central, which is directly
associated with deforestation in the Amazon and
has demonstrated its intention to discuss that issue
in addition to the agricultural frontier, Indigenous
territories and protected areas. The transition towards
a comprehensive State presence, with support for local
populations — and hopefully supported by the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia — will be a
crucial point in the political dialogue with the Estado
Mayor Central, which could constitute the best path
towards their political transition.
The price of gold has increased by 118 per cent
since 2008, and the consequences of that can be seen
in the lands forgotten by humankind. The income from
those businesses passes through money laundering
systems and could be traceable between purchasing
and producing countries. The role of private enterprises
must be reviewed, as they could be playing a key role
in that operation.
Another issue that fuels war and destroys the
environment and local communities is that of minerals
such as coltan. Its uses in communications technologies,
inter alia, augurs long-term demand. Various countries
with powerful economies are interested. How can we
achieve an agreement that does no harm to those stilluntouched areas of our planet? The same goes for coal
and other minerals with regard to the energy transition.
The peace dialogues have also included segments
of communities that are affected by the hydrocarbon
industry and oil and mining companies associations, in
the search for agreements and consensus that will allow
us to achieve a plausible future.
On the issue of borders, alarm bells are ringing.
Today, unfortunately, we are witnessing drug trafficking
taking hold, with unprecedented violence, along our

S/PV.9434

border with Ecuador. On our border with Peru, illegal
mining activities are making inroads, Indigenous youth
are being recruited and industrial-scale coca crops are
being established, in the search for routes to Europe.
On the border with Brazil, fleets of dredging boats are
paying taxes to illegal armed groups. On the border
with Venezuela, a number of illegal groups are having
an impact on Indigenous and protected territories along
the Orinoco River, in search of gold and of coca routes
in Catatumbo and through Lake Maracaibo. The story
comes full circle on the border with Panama, where the
highest levels of migration in America are taking place,
controlled by armed groups.
In other words, peace in Colombia affects the
continent and the world. Reciprocity is more urgent
than ever, as the Presidents of the States members
of the Amazon Cooperation Treaty Organization
drew attention to in Belém, Brazil, earlier this year.
Democracies and the environment are increasingly
at risk.
I must point out that Colombia is at a turning
point. The peace policy has opened up an essential path
forward: namely, achieving a national agreement that
goes beyond what was agreed with a specific armed
group and includes all social, political and financial
segments of society in building a path towards the
resolution of conflicts in the country. Likewise, if
the reality of international demand for products from
illegal economies remains unchanged, other groups
could emerge and seek to control over such revenue,
despite the political transition of the groups currently
involved in negotiation processes.
Lastly, we call on the Security Council to continue
its support in the hope of reversing climate change
and biodiversity loss, concurrently with the long-term
peacebuilding process, which will have ramifications
for Colombia and the planet as a whole.
The President: I thank Mr. Botero García for his
briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
Let me start by thanking Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Ruiz Massieu and Ambassador
Hrvatinić for their briefings and Mr. Botero García
for highlighting the wider environmental challenges. I
welcome the participation of Foreign Minister Leyva
Durán as well.

23-298547/22

S/PV.9434

Colombia

As we approach the seventh anniversary of the 2016
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a Stable and Lasting Peace, the United Kingdom
commends the efforts made by successive Colombian
Governments to work towards sustainable peace in
the country.
I would like to highlight three particular priorities.
First, we welcome the recent progress on rural reform
and the restitution of land to Indigenous communities.
The full implementation of the 2016 agreement remains
central to peace and reform in Colombia. We support
the Secretary-General’s call for the rapid delivery of a
dedicated office within the presidency to accelerate the
implementation of the agreement.
Secondly, we strongly condemn violence against
signatories from the former Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo
(FARC-EP), human rights defenders, women leaders
and members of Indigenous and Afro-Colombian
communities. The United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia has verified 393 killings of former FARCEP combatants since the Final Agreement was signed,
which includes 18 killings since the Security Council last
met on this issue (see S/PV.9374). We welcome progress
towards rapid-response plans to protect signatories of
the agreement and human rights defenders, with the
adoption of a public policy to dismantle organized
crime groups. We welcome the recent opening of
macro-case 11 on sexual and gender-based violence by
the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, and we look forward
to the launch of Colombia’s first resolution 1325 (2000)
national action plan. We commend the participatory
approach taken by the Government of Colombia, as it is
vital to consider the experience of all women, as well as
ethnic and LGBTQ+ groups, in its development.
Thirdly, the continued dialogue and ceasefire
between the Colombian Government and the Ejército
de Liberación (ELN) is an important step towards
peace in Colombia. We expect the ELN to approach its
undertakings in good faith and to respect international
law. We continue to follow closely efforts to reach a
ceasefire with the dissident group of the former FARCEP that identifies itself as the Estado Mayor Central,
and we welcome the announcement on the 8 October of
a bilateral ceasefire.
The United Kingdom remains committed to
supporting broad and lasting peace in Colombia and
welcomes the prospect of a visit by the Council in 2024.
8/22

11/10/2023

Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the African members
of the Security Council (A3). We would like to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia, Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, for his enlightening
briefing on the latest developments in Colombia. We
extend our appreciation to His Excellency the Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission for his valuable advice
to the Security Council. We also thank Mr. Rodrigo
Botero García, General Director of the Foundation
for Conservation and Sustainable Development, for
the important perspective that he shared. We welcome
the participation in this meeting of His Excellency
Mr. Álvaro Leyva Durán, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Republic of Colombia.
We would like to warmly congratulate President
Gustavo Petro Urrego on the successful completion
of his first year in office. The year was marked by his
tireless search for the restoration of peace in a country
that has faced decades of conflict. His inclusive and
consultative approach has united diverse stakeholders
and set the stage for a transformative journey towards a
more harmonious and peaceful nation.
The journey is, however, far from over. The road to
peace is arduous. There are still many challenges ahead
to overcome. In that regard, we welcome the continued
progress being made in negotiations between the
Government and the Ejército de Liberación Nacional
(ELN), with the holding of the fourth round of peace
negotiations in Venezuela. Similarly, we note with
great satisfaction the ongoing dialogue with the Estado
Mayor Central Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP). Their
continuous engagement serves as a testament to the
commitment of both parties to working towards a
peaceful settlement of the conflict. Such dialogue
is essential to fostering understanding, trust and,
ultimately, lasting peace in the country.
The A3 considers the issue of land to be a crucial
element in the country’s peace process. We therefore
commend the Government’s continued effort to
promote the institutional reforms and the allocation
of necessary funds for comprehensive rural reform.
We encourage the Government to intensify its efforts
in land allocation and to pair that action with both
technical and financial support in order to promote the
beneficiaries’ self-reliance.
23-29854

11/10/2023

Colombia

We welcome the work carried out by the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace (SJP) during the reporting
period. We note with satisfaction the public recognition
of responsibility for war crimes and crimes against
humanity by former members of the public security
forces. We encourage the continued collaboration of
the Minister of Defence with the SJP in ensuring that
all those indicted provide truthful accounts. Such a
collaborative effort holds great significance in attaining
justice and accountability for the atrocities committed.
Regarding the ethnic chapter, the A3 regrets the
lack of substantive progress in its implementation.
It is worrisome to note that most efforts to advance
the ethnic provisions are still in the planning stage,
including consultations with Afro-Colombians and
Afro-Indigenous people. We are also concerned about
the lack of clear and up-to-date information on the
current state of the implementation of the ethnic chapter
by the entities responsible, as well as the lack of projects
specifically designed by the territorial development
programme to benefit ethnic communities.
In the light of those considerations, we strongly
urge the Government to redouble its efforts to accelerate
the implementation of a vital component of the peace
agreement. It is imperative to ensure that the rights of
Indigenous peoples who have endured the consequences
of the conflict are reaffirmed and respected, and that
the reparations and justice for the damage caused are
provided as soon as possible. Addressing those issues
is crucial to the effective realization of the intended
benefits for marginalized communities, particularly
those who have suffered the most. We were pleased to
note that the Colombian army recently issued a public
apology to the families of victims of the civil war. We
commend that noble gesture, which showcases the
army’s commitment to justice, reconciliation and the
pursuit of lasting peace in the country. It holds promise
for fostering understanding and contributing to the
ongoing reconciliation process.
In our opinion, the security situation in Colombia
continues to be of great concern and a potential
threat to the successful implementation of the peace
agreement. In the context, we encourage continued
dialogue with all groups to address the situation. We
welcomed the approval in September by the National
Commission on Security Guarantees of public policy
aimed at dismantling illegal armed groups and criminal
organizations. The A3 reiterates its appeal to the
Government to intensify the State’s presence in regions

S/PV.9434

with criminal incidents while ensuring the safety and
protection of the civilian population, especially the
Indigenous and Afro-Colombian communities, which
are the worst affected.
The continuing attacks on and murders of social
leaders, human rights activists, political party members
and former FARC-EP fighters, as well as the recruitment
of children and other atrocities among the Colombian
population, should not be tolerated. This wave of
violence undermines trust and therefore the ability
to build peace. We welcome the interest of former
FARC-EP members in participating in the upcoming
elections on 29 October, as evidenced by the approval
of 299 candidates, including 128 women. We condemn
all acts of intimidation and violence towards election
candidates, regardless of their party affiliation. Such
actions undermine the democratic process and must be
unequivocally rejected.
The A3 encourage the continued use of the earlywarning and early-response system to address political
tensions and prevent electoral violence. We would
like to take this opportunity to express our deep
appreciation for the invaluable work being done by
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia,
whose diligent efforts in monitoring and verifying the
implementation of the peace agreement have played a
vital role in ensuring its successful progress. We urge
and encourage the continuation of those efforts.
To conclude, the A3 would like to extend its sincere
wishes to the good people of Colombia for the holding
of free, fair and transparent elections. We stand in
solidarity with Colombia and reaffirm our unwavering
support for the nation’s ongoing efforts to consolidate
peace, foster reconciliation and build a brighter and
more prosperous future for all Colombians.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would first like to welcome Mr. Álvaro Leyva Durán,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, to today’s
meeting and to thank Special Representative Ruiz
Massieu and Ambassador Ćurić Hrvatinić, Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), for their briefings.
I also listened attentively to the statement by the
representative of civil society.
China commends the Government of Colombia, led
by President Petro Urrego, for fully implementing the
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a Stable and Lasting Peace and actively advancing the
vision of “total peace”. China expects and supports

23-298549/22

S/PV.9434

Colombia

efforts by the parties in Colombia to consolidate and
build on the commendable progress that has already
been made, strive resolutely to achieve the goal of
realizing total, lasting and sustainable peace and work
hard to usher in a dynamic and fruitful new era.
Colombia’s peace process has highlighted the
potential of sustainable development to promote
lasting peace. China commends the Government for
integrating nation-building into the implementation
of the peace agreement and for continuing to increase
inputs in areas such as rural reform, land distribution,
the substitution of illegal crops and the reintegration
of former combatants into society, with a view to
addressing the root causes of conflicts and realizing
lasting peace and security in Colombia. To that end,
China hopes to see continued assistance from the
United Nations country team and the PBC, among other
entities, along with international regional partners.
Colombia’s peace process sets an example for
resolving differences, disputes and conflicts through
dialogue and negotiation. China welcomes the fact
that the Government of Colombia and the Ejército
de Liberación Nacional have continued to implement
the ceasefire agreement and have advanced the peace
talks, and hopes that the two sides can achieve further
positive results at the fifth round of the peace talks,
to be held in Mexico in November. The Government
and the Estado Mayor Central Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo have
announced a suspension of hostilities and confrontation
and their intention to start formal ceasefire talks in the
near future. China hopes that the two sides can agree on
a ceasefire arrangement as soon as possible.
Colombia’s peace process has underscored the
need to increase people’s confidence through security
governance. As highlighted in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2023/701), strengthening the State’s presence
across the country and protecting vulnerable groups
are vital to the implementation of the peace agreement
and to advancing dialogue and negotiation with armed
groups. China supports the Government of Colombia
in continuing to increase the deployment of security
forces in former conflict areas where effective control
is lacking and in strengthening the protection of former
combatants, women, children and ethnic minorities.
China hopes that the local elections will proceed
smoothly and safely in October.
This month the Security Council will make a
decision on the mandate renewal of the United Nations
10/22

11/10/2023

Verification Mission in Colombia. We appreciate the
important contribution made by the Mission, under the
leadership of Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Ruiz Massieu, in support of the implementation
of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and
Building a Stable and Lasting Peace and the Colombian
Government’s efforts to advance the vision of total
peace. We hope that the Mission will coordinate closely
with the Colombian Government and participate in
the monitoring and verification of the ceasefire, in
accordance with resolution 2694 (2023). We also
support the Security Council in positively considering
further expansion of the Mission’s mandate when the
conditions are in place.
Along with the international community, China
stands ready to continue its support for a Colombianled and -owned peace process and to help Colombian
people to achieve greater gains towards the goal of total
peace, stability and development.
Mrs. Shino (Japan): I thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Mr. Ruiz Massieu and
Mr. Botero García for their briefings. I welcome
Foreign Minister Leyva Durán who joined this meeting.
I also thank Mr. Ćurić Hrvatinić for the advice of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). We appreciate it
very much.
Japan welcomes the efforts of the Colombian
Government in advancing the peace process and
commends the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia for its support in that endeavour. The
upcoming departmental and municipal elections will
be a significant opportunity for Colombia to validate
the achievements stemming from its long-standing
commitment to peace. The Security Council and the
international community will be following closely and
with keen interest.
Japan continues to emphasize the importance
of conducting elections in an atmosphere free of
violence. That requires leadership by the Colombian
Government and active cooperation by the Colombian
people. Creating and maintaining an atmosphere
free of violence should extend beyond the elections.
The immediate cessation by all actors of any form
of violence, including against civilians and former
combatants, is vital.
In that regard, Japan commends the Colombian
Government’s efforts to implement the Final Agreement
for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and
23-29854

11/10/2023

Colombia

Lasting Peace and looks forward to further efforts to
implement the national plans for rural reform, as well
as the first issuance of restorative sentences by the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace.
We also welcome the continued dialogue between
the Government and several armed groups under
the “total peace” policy, including the group selfidentified as Central High Command-Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo, and
the fourth round of talks with the Ejército de Liberación
Nacional. Any ceasefire talks or agreements need to be
sustained by concrete action. Unfortunately, several
previous ceasefire agreements have been broken in
the past. An institution-based approach is one way
to ensure that ceasefire agreements are sustainable.
The National Participation Committee, which the
Peacebuilding Fund is supporting, could be a part of
such a mechanism.
A necessary thread for all phases of a ceasefire to
succeed is full and meaningful participation. As the
PBC Chair noted, measures and frameworks that protect
and promote the active engagement on the ground of
people, including women and youth, in peacebuilding
efforts, are crucial.
In conclusion, Japan reaffirms its continuous
support for Colombia’s peace efforts.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to begin by thanking Special Representative Ruiz
Massieu for his informative briefing on the Colombian
peace process. I also welcome the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Colombia, Mr. Álvaro Leyva Durán, to
this important meeting, and I thank the Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission for his briefing.
(spoke in English)
Colombia has undertaken a long and challenging
journey towards peace — lasting peace. It has been time
consuming, arduous and painful, but resolute efforts to
close this dramatic chapter and the strive for peace are
paying much-awaited dividends. Albania commends
the Colombian Government for its remarkable progress.
And we welcome the positive developments in the
implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace,
as identified in the report of the Secretary General
(S/2023/701). We encourage it to stay the course
and call on all stakeholders to redouble efforts to
accelerate progress.

S/PV.9434

Making peace after decades of war was never
going to be an easy process, and we are aware of the
difficulties and impediments being faced in the process,
particularly regarding the rule of law. Peace — “total
peace” — can be the result of efforts made only by all
and for all.
I would like to make the following points.
First, we applaud the progress made in negotiations
with the Ejército de Liberación Nacional. That reflects
the determination of both parties to put an end to decades
conflict. However, we remain worried by the persistent
violence against former members of the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del
Pueblo (FARC-EP), human rights defenders and social
leaders. It has been mentioned by other colleagues that
close to 400 former FARC-EP combatants have been
killed, and women leaders and female ex-combatants
are constantly under the threat of sexual violence. We
strongly condemn such crimes and remain concerned
about the slow progress of investigations. We join the
call of Secretary-General on the Government to take
all necessary measures to guarantee their security and
protection, as well as to bring perpetrators to justice.
Secondly, Albania welcomes the approval by the
National Commission on Security Guarantees of the
public policy and its action plan aimed at dismantling
illegal armed groups and criminal organizations. We
are convinced that full State presence and authority in
all conflict affected regions is instrumental to address
the root causes of the conflict and bring an end to
violence. In that respect, we also welcome the efforts
aimed at reaching and pursuing ceasefires through
dialogue with all other illegal armed groups currently
under way.
Thirdly, with the upcoming regional elections on the
horizon, political violence, especially against women
involved in the electoral process, is not only an issue
of particular concern but also unacceptable. We call on
the Government to bolster security for all, fostering an
environment of peace, respect and broad participation.
Fourthly, transitional justice remains vital in
achieving and consolidating peace. It provides for
truth, justice and reparations to victims on all sides.
We believe that all actors involved must do their part
in their process in order to ensure accountability for
crimes and justice for the victims. It is the only secure
path towards reconciliation. In that respect, we welcome
the inclusion, for the first time, of gender prosecution

23-2985411/22

S/PV.9434

Colombia

in indictments by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace and
the announcement to initiate a macro case on sexual
violence, reproductive violence and other crimes
committed out of prejudice, hate or discrimination
against individuals of a particular gender, sexual
identity or diverse sexual orientation in armed conflicts.
In conclusion, allow me to underline that “total
peace”, though complex and challenging, remains
a unique opportunity to bring to an end decades
of conflict. Albania fully supports the efforts of
President Petro Urrego towards building consensus
and establishing an inclusive dialogue. Last but in
no way least, we express our full support to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ruiz Massieu
and to the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia and commend them for their tireless efforts
in favour of peace, stability and process in Colombia.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Ruiz
Massieu for his informative briefing and Mr. Rodrigo
Botero García for all he does to advance environmental
justice in Colombia. I would also like to thank the Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission for his important
perspective. Let me also welcome Foreign Minister
Leyva Durán once again to the Security Council.
The United States remains one of Colombia’s
strongest partners. And we remain committed to
the successful implementation of the 2016 Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a
Stable and Lasting Peace. Its implementation will
help to bring about stability and security. It will drive
progress forward on counter-narcotics goals. And it
will strengthen the protection of human rights, help to
bring truth and justice to victims of Colombia’s decades
of conflict, and enhance economic development and
equality in Colombia in rural and urban areas.
There are three messages I want to convey today.
First, the United States is committed to working
with Colombia as it implements the 2016 peace accord.
The United States is deeply committed, as the first
international accompanier of the ethnic chapter, to
partnering with Colombia to consolidate a lasting
peace that centres on justice and equality for AfroColombian and Indigenous people. The United States
is also committed to the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia. The Mission plays a critical role
in strengthening peace and security in Colombia, and
we are grateful to the Special Representative of the
12/22

11/10/2023

Secretary-General and his team for their tireless efforts.
We echo the Secretary-General’s call on all groups
behind violence in areas affected by armed conflict to
halt their actions against civilians.
Secondly, the United States supported the
Security Council’s expansion of the Verification
Mission’s mandate last August to include monitoring
and verification of the ceasefire with the Ejército de
Liberación Nacional (ELN). We continue to engage
with the Special Representative to stay up to date
with the Verification Mission’s efforts to monitor the
implementation of the Government’s ceasefire with
the ELN. But we are concerned about the ELN central
command’s ability to maintain the ceasefire, at a time
when various fronts under its command continue
to express discontent. Although the ceasefire with
the ELN seems largely intact, a recent media report
indicated that 40 per cent of ELN members would reject
a peace deal with the Government. Why? Because they
continue to see lucrative earnings from drug trafficking
and illegal mining.
I want to conclude with a third point, on the potential
further expansion of the Verification Mission’s mandate
to include the ceasefire with the Estado Mayor Central
Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de ColombiaEjército del Pueblo (EMC FARC-EP). The EMC’s
recent announcement that it would cease offensive
operations against the Colombian military and police
forces and begin a 10-month ceasefire is a positive
development. But we need to see more progress in that
effort before the Council considers further expanding
the mandate. And let me be clear: the ELN, the EMC
and the Segunda Marquetalia remain designated foreign
terrorist organizations under United States law.
As we support peace efforts, we must learn from
past mistakes. We know from other peace processes that
a security strategy is essential and that it can pressure
illegal armed groups to negotiate in good faith and to
avoid impunity for abuses. Before the Security Council
agreed to expand the mandate of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia to monitor the
ceasefire with the ELN, there were multiple rounds of
talks between the ELN and the Government negotiating
team. In addition, several international accompaniers
and guarantors had already committed to support the
process. And the Security Council regularly heard
inputs from the Colombian Government’s negotiating
team, which gave us a clearer sense of their expectations.
The talks between the Government and the EMC still
23-29854

11/10/2023

Colombia

lack that maturity. We look forward to continuing to
hear from the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and the Colombian Government as those
talks progress and the parties develop mechanisms to
maintain the ceasefire going forward. We look forward
to continuing our engagement on those efforts and will
closely follow the talks with the EMC.
The 2016 peace accord is Colombia’s blueprint
for peace and justice. Now the parties must make
those promises real. The Colombian people, who have
endured decades of conflict, deserve nothing less.
Ms. Tantawy (United Arab Emirates): I thank
Special Representative Ruiz Massieu for his valuable
briefing. His work and that of his team has been
critical in providing the Security Council with the
necessary and much-needed insights into developments
in Colombia. We also thank Mr. Botero García for his
briefing and for shedding light on the dire impact of
conflict, not only on people, but on the environment
too. We thank Mr. Ćurić Hrvatinić for his briefing
as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, and we
welcome the participation of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Colombia here today.
We have reached a critical juncture on the path to
peace and security in Colombia. The hard-won gains
should not be taken for granted; on the contrary,
they demonstrate that nothing short of a holistic and
whole-of-society approach is necessary for securing
a just and lasting peace throughout the country. As
such, the United Arab Emirates wishes to make three
points today.
First, we must maintain momentum to ensure the
full and comprehensive implementation of the Final
Peace Agreement. Now almost at the midway point,
seeing that through to its successful conclusion is
crucial. We welcome the Government’s progress in
the implementation of the agreement, including on
rural reform and the gender provisions, as well as the
progress made in the country’s first national action
plan on women and peace and security. However, the
continued violence against civilians, and in particular
against former combatants, remains a challenge that
must be addressed. Those men and women honoured
their commitment by pursuing the path to peace. We
stress the critical need to take all necessary measures
in ensuring their security and protection. At stake is
the preservation of an environment of reconciliation.
Similarly, all efforts should be made to allow for safe
and inclusive elections to take place. To see an electoral

S/PV.9434

process that is truly representative — including women,
Indigenous people and former combatants — enhanced
security measures are needed, and we welcome efforts
in that regard.
Secondly, the work of the Comprehensive System
of Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition has
been crucial for building trust and reconciliation in
Colombia. We focus today on the work of the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace (SJP). The cases of the SJP,
where victims are at the heart of the process, are
well under way to reaching the stage where the first
restorative sentences are issued. That will be key for
the transitional justice process and reparation and
to the overall implementation of the agreement. We
particularly welcome the added focus on addressing
conflict-related sexual violence, which is a critical part
of the reconciliation process.
Thirdly, upholding the ceasefire is at the core
of the first steps towards a broader, lasting peace
across the country. The ongoing ceasefire between
the Government and the Ejército de Liberación
Nacional (ELN) reflects the new era of trust-building
in Colombia. As such, the United Arab Emirates
reaffirms its support for all efforts to monitor and
verify the ceasefire agreement, including through the
recent expansion of the mandate of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia. And as we heard
from Special Representative Ruiz Massieu during the
meeting of the Informal Expert Group on Women and
Peace and Security in August, women are playing a
prominent role in that process. Representation in that
form sets the scene for peacebuilding that is truly
inclusive and has a greater chance of being sustainable.
Colombia has worked with the Council and
the international community to show what can be
achieved when there is an unwavering commitment to
reconciliation. As our last mandated Security Council
briefing on Colombia, the United Arab Emirates wishes
to acknowledge and commend all those who have
worked towards that goal. The building blocks of peace
are firmly in place. As it continues taking the necessary
steps in the reconciliation process, we have faith that
the country will continue to move beyond its past and
towards a secure, more prosperous future for the people
of Colombia.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
welcome the participation of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Colombia, Mr. Álvaro
Leyva Durán. I thank the Special Representative

23-2985413/22

S/PV.9434

Colombia

of the Secretary-General and Mr. Rodrigo Botero
García for their briefings. I also thank the Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission for his intervention.
The Commission’s recommendations should always be
taken into account by the Council.
The progress reflected in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2023/701) is encouraging, especially that
derived from the attention paid to gender provisions
in the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and
Building a Stable and Lasting Peace. The recently
adopted national action plan for the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) is an essential instrument
to promote the active participation of women in
peacebuilding processes.
Ecuador recognizes the work of the Comprehensive
System of Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition
as an international reference point for the application
of transitional justice. The opening of Case 11 by
the Special Jurisdiction for Peace (SJP), which will
investigate sexual and gender-based violence committed
in the context of the conflict in Colombia, is another
element that contributes in that regard. On the other
hand, at a time when the SJP is approaching the phase
of issuing the first restorative sentences, it is important
for the Colombian State to undertake efforts to ensure
favourable conditions for carrying out those sentences
and for them to be accepted by Colombian society.
It is important to acknowledge the reports of a
decrease in violence as a result of the ceasefire reached
with the Ejército de Liberación, and those concerning
the ongoing talks with the Estado Mayor Central
Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de ColombiaEjército del Pueblo, which could result in a ceasefire
agreement with specific provisions on the protection of
civil society. Ecuador echoes the Secretary-General’s
call for all armed groups to put an end to violence
against civilians, participate in good faith in peace
initiatives and demonstrate their willingness to work
for peace.
We welcome the approval by the National
Commission on Security Guarantees of the public
policy aimed at dismantling illegal armed groups and
criminal organizations, which we hope will help to stop
violence in the conflict-affected areas. The Security
Council looks forward to hearing the results of the pilot
plans that have been implemented in the Magdalena
Medio, Caguán and northern Cauca areas. We also
hope that the department and municipal elections to
be held on 29 October will be held in a safe, peaceful
14/22

11/10/2023

and respectful manner, with the broad participation of
the public.
As we approach the halfway point of the 15year deadline for the implementation of the Final
Peace Agreement, I would like to reiterate Ecuador’s
support for the peace process in Colombia and the
implementation of the agreement within the framework
of the “total peace” policy, including initiatives aimed
at ensuring better security conditions and sustainable
development for marginalized populations, particularly
those in border areas.
Mrs. Paolini (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Ruiz Massieu, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General; Mr. Ćurić Hrvatinić, in his capacity
as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission; and
Mr. Botero García for their briefings. I also welcome
the presence of Minister for Foreign Affairs Durán in
today’s meeting.
France commends the efforts made by the Colombian
authorities to achieve peace in Colombia. In that
respect, we welcome the announcement of a ceasefire
and peace talks between the Colombian Government
and the Estado Mayor Central Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo
(EMC FARC-EP), which will begin on 16 October.
We sincerely hope that that announcement will lead
to a lasting ceasefire and a peace agreement. We also
welcome the continuation of negotiations between the
Government and the Ejército de Liberación Nacional
(ELN) since the ceasefire announced on 3 August, with
the support of the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia.
France fully supports the Colombian authorities in
their efforts to secure ceasefires with several other armed
groups. Those developments are encouraging. They
must allow affected communities to finally live in peace,
with better prospects for socioeconomic development.
The Colombian Government’s efforts to reach new
ceasefires go hand-in-hand with the full implementation
of the 2016 Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and
Building a Stable and Lasting Peace. The negotiations
under way with the ELN and EMC FARC-EP armed
groups seek to strengthen the Final Agreement in order
to secure peace throughout Colombia. In that regard,
France welcomes the Government’s continued efforts
to implement the peace agreement, as well as the
Human Rights Council’s establishment in July of an
international expert mandate to make recommendations
23-29854

11/10/2023

Colombia

on the agreement’s implementation. We welcome in
particular the efforts to ensure development, rural
reform and access to land and encourage the Colombian
authorities to increase those efforts.
We also support the prioritization of the
implementation the ethnic chapters of the peace
agreement. We also call on the Government to continue
to guarantee favourable conditions for the work of the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace.
Despite the progress made, we deplore the fact that
the security guarantees remain insufficient for former
combatants, human rights defenders and representatives
of civil society, given the violence targeting them,
and for children and adolescents, who continue to be
recruited by illegal armed groups.
We are closely monitoring the preparations for
the local elections scheduled for the end of this month
and call for them to be held under the best possible
conditions. It is essential to prevent any risk of violence
and to guarantee the safety of candidates and voters
throughout the territory of Colombia.
Colombia continues to set an example through its
determination to build peace through dialogue. In that
regard, the 2016 peace agreement is an essential and
historic achievement that must be fully implemented,
alongside the pursuit of new peace agreements with
armed groups. France encourages the Government to
pursue and strengthen its efforts. We stand together
with the Government in its efforts to achieve a lasting
and “total peace” for the country.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the participation in today’s
discussion of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Colombia, Mr. Álvaro Leyva Durán. We thank the
briefers for their briefings.
The 2016 Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict
and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace is approaching
its seventh anniversary, nearly halfway through the
time allotted for its implementation. Over that period,
the implementation of the agreement approved by
the Security Council has faced numerous challenges.
The previous Colombian Administration effectively
sabotaged the peace process. It is encouraging that
both parties to the peace agreement are now committed
to its implementation and are working together for
reconciliation in the country.

S/PV.9434

We note the consistent work of the Colombian
leadership in that regard, in particular in the
implementation of land reform. Nevertheless, additional
efforts are required to ensure the physical security and
respect for the human rights of former combatants,
social activists and the most vulnerable segments of
the population, as well as to implement the illicit crop
substitution programme, strengthen State authority on
the ground and provide housing for former participants
in the conflict.
On a separate note, we underscore the need to
stop the violence against former Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo
members. More than 30 signatories of the peace
agreement have been killed in this year alone, which is
an average of one murder a week. Without clear security
guarantees for former combatants, it is impossible
to speak of a durable implementation of the peace
agreement. That is particularly important in the context
of the upcoming department and municipal elections, in
which former rebels must be able to participate without
fear for their lives.
We view Bogotá’s recent peacebuilding initiatives
as a logical next step in implementing the provisions of
the peace agreement. We see the “total peace” policy
of the Government of Gustavo Petro Urrego as an
opportunity to resolve the pressing problems impeding
Colombia’s exit from this protracted armed conflict. At
the same time, we are convinced that the total peace can
and must be built on nothing other than the previously
laid foundations of the peace agreement. It is important
that all the decisions taken on the new peacebuilding
tracks do not contradict that fundamental document.
Furthermore, the institutions and agreements that
were established for the implementation of the peace
agreement can and should be updated in accordance with
changing realities. In particular, there is the question of
the future role of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace in
the context of the numerous peace processes under way.
We welcome the start of the work of the Monitoring
and Verification Mechanism, with the assistance of
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia,
to verify the ceasefire agreement with the Ejército de
Liberación Nacional. We hope, as progress is made in
the peace talks with other groups, that those agreements
will lead to a decrease in violence on the ground and
an improvement of the humanitarian situation in the
affected areas.

23-2985415/22

S/PV.9434

Colombia

We are following the negotiation process
with the Estado Mayor Central Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo
(EMC FARC-EP) illegal armed group. We welcome
the start of a nationwide reconciliation programme and
the formal launching of a dialogue with the group. At
the same time, we are concerned about the continuing
incidents of armed violence by the EMC FARC-EP. We
hope that both sides will nonetheless be able to find a
path to reconciliation.
Within the framework of the Security Council,
Russia will continue to actively participate in
international efforts to provide assistance to the
peacebuilding processes in Colombia. We reaffirm
our full support for the work of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia under the leadership
of Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, and we are prepared to
give positive consideration to extending the Mission’s
comprehensive mandate this month.
Ms. Gatt (Malta): I thank Special Representative
Ruiz Massieu, Deputy Permanent Representative
Hrvatinić of Croatia, in his capacity as Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission, and Mr. Botero García
for their briefings. I also welcome the participation of
Foreign Minister Leyva Durán of Colombia.
Malta commends the Government’s efforts in
holding peace talks with armed groups and welcomed
the commencement at the beginning of August of a
six-month ceasefire with the Ejército de Liberación
Nacional. The Council’s unanimous adoption of
resolution 2694 (2023), aimed at verifying the
implementation of the ceasefire, demonstrates its
commitment to Colombia on its path to peace and
highlights the advances being made on the ground. We
welcome the progress being made towards a ceasefire
with the Estado Mayor Central Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo and
hope it will prove to be a promising step forward.
Regrettably, persistent violence continues to
hinder the realization of the full potential of the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a
Stable and Lasting Peace. The continuing targeted
killings, threats and violence against people standing
for office in the upcoming elections are cause for
great concern. We urge the Government to ensure
comprehensive safeguards that can enable meaningful
political participation and representation. The violent
attacks and targeted killings of former combatants,
human rights defenders, Indigenous leaders and Afro16/22

11/10/2023

Colombian leaders, as well as environmentalists, as
Mr. Botero García highlighted, pose an existential threat
to the peace agreement. We condemn that violence in
the strongest possible terms and call on the authorities
to bring those responsible to justice as soon as possible.
The State must honour its obligations to those who have
chosen peace and ensure robust security guarantees for
former combatants and social leaders.
We are deeply concerned about the high numbers
of both forcibly displaced people and those who have
been forcibly confined. More must be done to prevent
and address such human rights violations. We urge
the Government to redouble its efforts to establish an
effective State presence in the areas most affected by
conflict and to create suitable conditions for returns and
reintegration. We also call for sustained attention and
resources to be provided to the search for the missing
and disappeared.
Malta welcomes the Government’s efforts on
comprehensive rural reform. We call for continuing
the work of providing vulnerable groups with access
to land and transforming conflict-affected areas. The
implementation of the ethnic chapter in the Final
Agreement is vital. It is deeply worrisome that ethnic
communities continue to suffer disproportionate
violence and child recruitment at the hands of illegal
armed actors. We call on the Government to redouble
its efforts to ensure the full and timely implementation
of those crucial provisions in order to address historic
inequalities. Priority must also be given to the gender
provisions in the peace agreement. Ensuring the full,
equal, meaningful and safe participation of women in
its implementation remains key.
Malta is pleased to see progress across cases of
the Special Jurisdiction for Peace as it approaches
the pivotal phase of issuing its first restorative
sentences. That next step is crucial to the transitional
justice process and to peacebuilding efforts and the
overall implementation of the peace agreement. We
also commend the announcement on the opening of
Case 11, on sexual and gender-based violence, and the
inclusion of sexual violence and slavery among the
first regional indictments for war crimes and crimes
against humanity.
In conclusion, we are pleased to see clear progress
being made on Colombia’s path towards lasting and
sustainable peace. It is essential to build on what
has been achieved and to take decisive action to stop
23-29854

11/10/2023

Colombia

S/PV.9434

the ongoing violence and ensure the comprehensive
implementation of the peace agreement.

violence. We also reiterate that all parties must respect
international humanitarian law.

Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
welcome the participation of the Foreign Minister of
Colombia, His Excellency Mr. Álvaro Leyva Durán, in
this meeting. I also thank the Special Representative,
Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, and the Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Mr. Ćurić Hrvatinić, for
their briefings. My thanks also go to Mr. Rodrigo
Botero García for his statement.

Thirdly, the role of women in peacebuilding,
through their knowledge, experience and leadership,
offers a potential that must be strengthened. The
women and peace and security agenda is a cross-cutting
theme in our support to the Colombian peace process,
particularly with regard to ceasefires, the participation
of civil society and the work of dealing with the past.
We therefore commend the Government of Colombia
for developing its first national action plan on women
and peace and security. The broad participatory process
organized at national, regional and thematic levels, with
the support of the international community, will set
an exemplary standard for its future implementation.
We were honoured to co-host with the Government of
Colombia an event on women’s participation and its
national action plan, which took place just before this
meeting. The remarks by Mr. Leyva Durán, Special
Representative Ruiz Massieu and the two civil-society
representatives who shared their practical experiences
and recommendations once again highlighted the
indisputable fact that

Just two months ago, the Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2694 (2023), expanding the
mandate of the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia, and the peace negotiations have made
significant progress since then. We welcome the
dialogue among all the parties and underscore the
efforts of the Colombian Government through its “total
peace” policy. With regard to dealing with the past, the
progress made by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace
is noteworthy, although it will be essential to ensure
the implementation of the upcoming first reparation
sentences. Given that the protection and participation
of the entire population are key elements of the peace
process, I would like to highlight the following points.
First, the announcement of the suspension of
all offensive operations between the Colombian
Government and the self-proclaimed Estado Mayor
Central Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo is a first step towards the
opening of formal peace negotiations and the signing
of a bilateral ceasefire agreement. Switzerland supports
that development as part of its ongoing commitment to
the Colombian peace process.
Secondly, the Colombian Government must ensure
the safety and protection of ex-combatants from acts
of violence. The judicial authorities must also combat
impunity. We would like to point in that regard to
the recent report of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (A/HRC/49/19),
which highlights the need for greater attention to the
implementation of non-repetition guarantees. Conflictrelated violence continues to affect civilians in many
parts of the country, despite the Government’s efforts
to dismantle illegal armed groups and criminal
organizations. In view of the upcoming elections,
Switzerland reiterates its call on the Colombian
authorities to strengthen its prevention and security
measures in order to mitigate the effects of that

(spoke in Spanish)
without women, there is no peace.
(spoke in French)
The support of the Council and the international
community remains essential to achieving a lasting
peace. We welcome the close cooperation with the
Government of Colombia in this regard. We also thank
the Peacebuilding Commission for its recommendations
and look forward to Colombia’s continued cooperation
and sharing of experiences in that context.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Brazil.
(spoke in Spanish)
I thank the speakers for the report presented, and
I extend a very warm welcome to Foreign Minister
Álvaro Leyva Durán.
Colombia continues to demonstrate its commitment
to the full implementation of the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace and the expansion and consolidation of peace in
its territory. Dialogue with the other armed groups is
also continuing through the “total peace” strategy of
President Petro Urrego’s Government. In other words,

23-2985417/22

S/PV.9434

Colombia

the country remains committed to a comprehensive and
integrated solution to politically motivated violence.
With regard to the Final Agreement, we must
always bear in mind that its implementation is a longterm process, established over a 15-year timetable. We
will soon commemorate the seventh anniversary of its
signing, on 24 November, which puts as the midpoint of
the timetable for its formal implementation.
We know that the agreement involves deep
reforms, which are always difficult. It is not an easy
task to bolster State presence in rural areas where there
are still vestiges of the conflict. The agreement has the
great merit of tackling Colombia’s various structural
challenges, which are at the root of the manifestations
of political violence in recent decades.
The full implementation of the 2016 agreement is
a necessary condition for the expansion of the peace
processes in the country. Concrete Government actions
are the best way to clearly show its earnestness in its
commitment to redefine its relationship with the most
vulnerable segments of the population, including women
and Afro-Colombian and Indigenous populations.
It is just and necessary to recognize the significant
progress already made, especially the budget allocation
and the legal and institutional changes aimed at
expediting the implementation of the comprehensive
rural reform, which is essential for the State to expand
its presence in all corners of the country, especially in
conflict-affected areas. We also welcome the creation of
the agrarian and rural jurisdiction and the recognition
of the rights of peasants to special constitutional
protection in Colombia.
Brazil supports the strategy of Petro Urrego’s
Government to achieve total peace. We recognize the
importance and necessity of the additional dialogues
under way to expand the benefits of peace throughout
the country. As a guarantor country, Brazil also
reiterates its firm commitment to the dialogue between
the Colombian Government and the Ejército de
Liberación Nacional (ELN).
We welcome the remarkable progress achieved
in the negotiations. As guarantors, we can attest
to the determination of both parties to put an end to
decades of conflict. As the Secretary-General notes
in his latest report (S/2023/701), initial progress
demonstrates the possibility of a sustained reduction in
violence, which would bring significant benefits to the
affected communities.
18/22

11/10/2023

As we approach almost a year of negotiations, after
four cycles of dialogue, we welcome the functioning
of the National Commission on Participation and
the development of its timeline of meetings with
various regions and social sectors, as well as the
maintenance of the bilateral, national and temporary
ceasefire, accompanied by the Monitoring and
Verification Mechanism.
We also welcome the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia to
establish the national, regional and local bodies for the
Mechanism in order to fulfil the task of participating in
the monitoring and verification of the ceasefire and its
protocols, pursuant to resolution 2694 (2023).
As of 3 October, the ceasefire has held for two
months. We urge the parties to continue to maintain
it, so as to help improve the humanitarian situation in
the conflict-affected areas, especially with regard to
strengthening the protection of civilians. Brazil also
stresses the importance of defining a political and
conceptual framework on humanitarian actions and
dynamics, as achieved in the most recent cycle, held
between August and September in Caracas.
We follow with optimism the Government’s dialogue
with the self-proclaimed Estado Mayor Central Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del
Pueblo. The establishment of formal negotiations and
the continuing bilateral ceasefire that ensures respect
for the civilian population, are very encouraging signs.
As in the case of the ELN, we hope that the Council can
authorize the Mission to verify the implementation of
the ceasefire agreement with the Estado Mayor Central
as soon as it is requested by the Colombian Government.
It is important to promote simultaneous progress
in the various negotiations. In that regard, we must
optimize the Council’s contribution to the joint
progress of those processes, especially with the aim
of encouraging ceasefires with the Government and
among the groups still competing for territory.
We know that challenges remain. Violence by illegal
armed groups and criminal organizations continues
to significantly impact the lives of civilians and excombatants, which represents a central challenge for
the peacebuilding and reintegration process.
Brazil strongly supports the Colombian society
and Government in their political determination
to overcome the various challenges to total peace,
23-29854

11/10/2023

Colombia

including through our work in the Council. We
reiterate that the actions of this organ in Colombia
must be guided by the expectations and requests of
the Colombian Government. As always, that will be
our guiding principle during the negotiations for the
renewal of the mandate of the Verification Mission.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Colombia.
Mr. Leyva Durán (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I welcome my fellow countryman, Mr. Rodrigo
Botero García.
Peace in Colombia is a daily project. It is a daily
effort to eradicate violence and armed confrontation as
a means to further the interests of the people a divided
and intolerant society. The history of humankind has
taught us that peace requires ongoing efforts. It requires
artisans to patiently work to build peace —to design it,
weave it, agree upon it and maintain it.
Allow me to elaborate on this idea with a visionary
anecdote regarding our great Colombian sculptor and
painter, Fernando Botero, who recently passed. Botero
was a man who banked upon peace in Colombia and in
the then besieged and suffering Medellín, his birthplace,
to which he donated a sculpture called El Pájaro — The
Bird — as a symbol of peace, which would help it leave
behind the violence perpetrated by the drug cartels in
the 1980s and the beginning of the 1990s.
On 10 June 1995, in the San Antonio park, in
his city, at the foot of this sculpture, 10 kilograms of
dynamite were detonated, leaving 23 dead and hundreds
injured. Despite the horror of this event, Botero never
lost his faith in peace. Upon the request of the artist,
the sculpture was not removed. On the contrary, the
bird statue remained there as an eloquent testimony of
unpardonable brutality. Five years later, in 2000, Botero
donated another sculpture, a new bird, which now stands
triumphantly alongside the “Pájaro Herido”, or “Injured
Bird”, as it was dubbed to refer to the violent incident.
Botero taught us an important lesson — despite the
violence inflicted upon us, we must never waver; we
must vanquish; we must overcome.
In Colombia, we know that lesson very well.
Although various forms of violence persist, as
mentioned with concern in the quarterly report
presented today (S/2023/701), our efforts and renewed

S/PV.9434

commitment to peace must be maintained and must be
our highest task. It certainly has not been easy and has
required perseverance. Fortunately, we have an active
society that demands constant responsibility from the
Colombian State and its institutions.
It is my duty, at this point, to highlight that
Colombia’s decision to bring the peace agreements of
2016 to the Security Council was a sign of the will at
that time to achieve irreversible reconciliation — the
task being to ensure that what was agreed upon would
be binding regardless of the political will of the
Government in power.
I wish to take this occasion to refer to two
fundamental issues of peace in Colombia: first, the need
to ensure the inviolability of what was agreed upon in
2016; and secondly, to reiterate that the dialogues that
continue to be held with various armed groups and
actors are fundamental tools, today and every day, to
achieve “total peace” throughout our national territory.
With regard to the desire to maintain and fulfil
what was agreed upon, we are concerned that the
institution serving as a model for the entire world,
designed to provide justice after decades of horrible
internal conflict — more specifically, the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace — is derailing from what was
agreed upon with great effort, casting aside norms that
should be rigorously applied in favour of the victims,
with truth, reparations and non-repetition as its heart.
I love and admire the Special Jurisdiction for Peace as
if it were a person, not an institution. Alongside five
others, I had a hand in designing it. I therefore applaud
what was intended and what has been achieved. It has
been a difficult task, but the time has come to review
its actions in order to correct and perfect them. Let us
consider that now.
On 13 March 2017, the Head of State of the
Republic of Colombia, in a communication addressed
to Secretary-General António Guterres, politely
requested that he transmit to the Security Council
his official declaration of good faith in the form of a
unilateral State declaration. By doing so, within the
framework of resolutions 2261 (2016) and 2307 (2016) of
25 January and 13 September of that year, respectively,
adopted unanimously by the Council, its own official
document would be generated, containing the 2016
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a Stable and Lasting Peace, signed on 24 November
between the Government of Colombia and the Fuerzas

23-2985419/22

Colombia

S/PV.9434

Armadas Revolucionarias
del Pueblo.

de

Colombia-Ejército

Consequently, the Security Council incorporated
the Final Agreement, along with the unilateral State
declaration, in an official document: S/2017/272. Its
incorporation implies that the text to be implemented
by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, without any
modification of its content whatsoever, is the one
officially adopted by the Security Council, thereby
enshrining Colombia’s commitment to the world to
enforce it, at the risk of incurring international liability
that would entail serious consequences should it fail to
do so.
We must bear in mind that Security Council
resolutions such as those I cited cannot be contested
through any legal recourse — much less through a
unilateral State declaration. It is those resolutions that,
by their nature, prevail in our internal order. Therefore,
in the case at hand, the official document I mentioned
was automatically added to the constitutional body of
law of the Colombian nation. That is something that
many are unaware of, yet that cannot be ignored.
In the case of a jurisdiction such as the one
indicated, its binding regulatory text establishes the
corresponding powers, which are not being respected.
With regard to the personal competence of the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace, the text of the official Security
Council document S/2017/272 states the following:
“The judicial component of the comprehensive
system for truth, justice, reparation and
non-repetition will apply to all those who
participated directly or indirectly in the armed
conflict. It will apply to those investigated or
convicted of the crime of rebellion or other crimes
related to the conflict, whether they belong to the
armed organizations in rebellion or not.”
Unfortunately, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace
has officially limited the appearance of those who are
entitled to such special justice, as is the case for socalled paramilitaries, among others. Their connection
has been prevented or made difficult by the application
of a non-existent mechanism in the Final Agreement
that refers to so-called prior contributions to truth
within the framework of the conditionality regime,
when the fact is that the conditionality regime refers
exclusively to the laying down of arms.
That has restricted the revealing of peace, closing
the path to truth and impeding it from fully reaching
20/22

11/10/2023

the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, as well as the victims
and the general public. Now is the time to underscore
that Law 975 of 2005 — known as the Justice and Peace
Law of Colombia, which dates back to well before
the peace agreement — contains provisions for the
reintegration of members of armed groups organized
outside the law who contribute effectively to the
achievement of national peace. Its article 63 states that:
“More favourable future law. If, subsequent to
the promulgation of this law, laws are issued that
grant members of illegal armed groups benefits more
favourable than those established here, the persons who
have been subject to the alternative mechanism may
avail themselves of the conditions established in such
subsequent laws.”
That goes to show that combatants subject to the
jurisdiction of the Justice and Peace Law can resort
to the universal principle of penal favourability — a
right that has constantly been denied by the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace. I add here a citation from item
5.1.2 of the Final Agreement, entitled “Justice”, in its
section II, paragraph 32:
“With regard to combatants in illegal armed
groups, the judicial component of the system will
only apply to those signing a final peace agreement
with the Government.”
It is worth noting that, in the case of the socalled paramilitaries, there is the Santa Fe de Ralito
Agreement, of 15 July 2003, signed between the
national Government of the time and the so-called
United Self-Defence Groups of Colombia. That text
has been disregarded, but I am providing a copy of it
alongside my statement today. The persons concerned
are therefore covered by the personal jurisdiction of the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace, which we are analysing.
Likewise, in accordance with paragraph 32, to which I
have already referred to twice:
“The judicial component will also apply to State
agents who may have committed crimes related to or
during the armed conflict; this application will be
in a differentiated manner, providing fair, balanced,
simultaneous and symmetrical treatment.”
It continues:
”In the case of State agents, the application of
the Special Jurisdiction for Peace is based on the
recognition that the State’s primary purpose is to
protect and guarantee the rights of all citizens”.
23-29854

11/10/2023

Colombia

Furthermore, it states that
“[f]or the purposes of the Special Jurisdiction
for Peace, a State agent is understood to be any
person who at the time of the commission of the
alleged crimes was acting as a member of public
bodies, or as an employee or worker of the State
or its decentralized entities, territorially or through
provided services, and who participated in the
planning or commission of criminal acts related
directly or indirectly to the armed conflict. In
order for such acts to be considered by the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace, they must have been
committed as actions or omissions within the time
frame of the internal armed conflict”.
Despite the cases of hundreds of Colombians, the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace has set aside previous mandates
all of which are related to its specific jurisdiction.
It bears pointing out that the Special Jurisdiction as
a special jurisdictional system is based on the Charter of
the United Nations, whereby free States may establish
such systems, based on the principles of international
law, international humanitarian law, international
human rights law and international criminal law, all of
which points to the fact that in the case of State agents,
article 27 of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court, “Irrelevance of official capacity”, is
applicable without being subject to discrimination. The
scope of paragraphs 1 and 2 of Article 27 must therefore
be borne in mind. With regard to the right to the truth
and victims’ right to the truth, they are inescapable,
particularly in the context of a peace process. Such
rights rise to the level of ius cogens.
In that regard, I would like to refer members of the
Council to the most authoritative sources on the subject,
as reflected in their credentials. On the subject at hand,
I have based my arguments on renowned experts, in
particular Rafael Casado Raigón, Professor of Public
International Law at the University of Córdoba; Araceli
Mangas Martin, Professor of Public International Law
and European Law at the Universities of Salamanca and
Complutense; and Zlata Drnas de Clément, Professor
Emerita of the National University and Professor of
the Catholic University in Córdoba, Argentina, whose
expertise lies in public international law, among other
subjects. Perhaps the Council can best be guided by
Ms. Zlata Drnas’s work on the peremptory norms of
general international law — ius cogens — and its
concrete application. With regard to ius cogens, the
author points out that these are peremptory norms of

S/PV.9434

general international law, which are the linchpin of
the normative system and can invalidate any norm
contradicting the principle, customary or conventional.
As Ms. Drnas writes, all of that implies that the nature
of the norm ius cogens is characterized as
“a coercive, compulsory, imperative, absolute,
peremptory, final, non-derogable, fundamentally
immutable, full right, which protects fundamental
social goods of a given community”.
Furthermore, the German jurist Hermann Mosler
reaffirmed that
“jus cogens rules are characterized by the fact
that their violation affects the international legal
community as such, since even when it turns out
that only one State is directly affected by a violation
of such rules, the consequences are likely to extend
to the community as a whole”.
We must therefore ask ourselves what, given their
status as peremptory norms of general international
law, are the norms and rights within the scope of jus
cogens over which the jurisdiction of the SJP falls in
order to protect them without any restrictions? The
answer is nothing more or less — and whether it is put
in writing or not — than the recognition of the victims
and the fact that their rights in armed conflict include
the right to the truth. Those legal rights, which are
broadly protected by international law, are based on the
principles I just mentioned. The mission of the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace is therefore to promote and
uphold them, while acknowledging their intrinsic value,
to provide them with the corresponding safeguards
and acknowledge their place in the legal hierarchy, as
they are at the top of the normative system, given the
fact I mentioned previously that they have the power
to invalidate any norm contrary to them, whether
customary or conventional.
The SJP cannot impose conditions or restrictions
on those who want to tell the truth if they have the
right to appear before the Special Jurisdiction, owing
to the specific jurisdiction derived from its constitutive
norms, such the mandate conferred on it by the peace
agreement, which we have often referred to by its
full title, Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict
and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace, officially
acknowledged in the letter dated 29 March 2017 from
the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council that I cited previously.

23-2985421/22

S/PV.9434

Colombia

The principle of nulla poena sine lege, or that
there is no penalty without law, is held sacred in
constitutional States. It is upheld even more strongly
in a socially conscious State based on the rule of law
such as Colombia. The principle is part of the human
right to due process. Where crimes are concerned, the
Special Jurisdiction is obliged to implement previously
established punishments, excluding all others, in
accordance with the peace agreement, as stipulated
within the Security Council letter that I just mentioned.
Under Chapter 5 of the agreement, part
III — entitled “Procedure, bodies and sanctions of the
judicial component of the comprehensive system for
truth, justice, reparation and non-repetition” — the last
paragraph of section 46, clearly states that:
“The Tribunal for Peace will be the final body
of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace created within
the Comprehensive System for Truth, Justice,
Reparation and Non-Repetition”.
In relation to the Special Jurisdiction for Peace and
the Security Council’s own document, mediated by the
unilateral declaration of the State, as well as subject to
resolutions 2261 (2016) of 25 January 2016 and 2307
(2016) of 13 September 2016, our Special Jurisdiction for
Peace has become an exemplary form of international
jurisdiction. Its decisions reach far beyond our borders,
with universal erga omnes effects. It therefore cannot
be restricted by local jurisdictions, nor can it ignore
the official text of the agreement. Its obligation is to
promote international legal certainty. Restricting rights
that it must place above all other considerations does
harm, in addition to the dangerous liability that its
prestigious magistrates may incur. Its status as a final
body was reiterated in the agreement of 9 November
2016 signed between the national Government and the
FARC-EP. Part III, paragraph 2 (a), of the agreement
clearly states,
“The Special Jurisdiction for Peace, being
a special jurisdiction that autonomously and
preferentially exercises judicial functions for
matters within its jurisdiction, particularly with
respect to conduct deemed to constitute a serious
breach of international humanitarian law or a
serious violation of human rights. It shall only

22/22

11/10/2023

apply to acts committed prior to its coming into
effect.”
For the Government of Colombia, on whose behalf I
am speaking before the Council today, it is clear that the
entire content of the 2016 peace agreement constitutes
an imperative mandate for the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace and for all State institutions. We cannot fail.
To avoid any shadow of doubt, the President of the
Republic, Gustavo Petro Urrego, will in the next few
days reiterate the official declaration of good faith in
the form of a unilateral State declaration, as previously
delivered by one of his predecessors, so as to assume
direct responsibility for protecting and fulfilling the
commitments enshrined in the official document of the
Council contained in document S/2017/272. The word
and commitment of the Republic of Colombia to the
Council and the world cannot be called into question.
Secondly, a brief yet important point: I wish to
emphasize that the dialogues that we are currently
having with the various groups and armed actors serve
as a fundamental tool to achieve peace in all territories
of the country and to alleviate the humanitarian impact
of armed and criminal violence. As a Government, we
know that this must go hand in hand with the intervention
of all State institutions, which is what we intend to do in
conjunction with the national development plan, which
has already been mentioned here in the past.
We understand the concerns sometimes caused
within the international community and the Council
by the ambitious and challenging commitment to total
peace shown in Colombia, which goes alongside the
challenge of a complex institutional design. However, I
stand here today with the certainty that this commitment
is appropriate and proportional to the responsibility that
as a State and as a Government, under the leadership
of President of the Republic, Gustavo Petro Urrego,
we have towards society and the victims. It is also
something that becomes an obligation, towards which
we must move fearlessly, with optimism, faith and total
peace. We must aim towards guaranteeing the life and
happiness of every member of our society. We want to
set an example. We truly want to say loud and clear that
Colombia is a global life force.
The meeting rose at 5.15 p.m.

23-29854
