United Nations

General Assembly

A/RES/61/37
Distr.: General
18 December 2006

Sixty-first session
Agenda item 79

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 4 December 2006
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/61/455)]

61/37. Commemoration of the sixtieth anniversary of the
International Court of Justice
The General Assembly,
Mindful that, in accordance with Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the
United Nations, all Members shall settle their international disputes by peaceful means
in such a manner that international peace and security, and justice, are not endangered,
Bearing in mind the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning
Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations 1 and the Manila Declaration on the Peaceful Settlement of International
Disputes, 2
Recognizing the need for universal adherence to and implementation of the rule of
law at both the national and international levels,
Recalling that the International Court of Justice is the principal judicial organ of
the United Nations, and reaffirming its authority and independence,
Noting that 2006 marks the sixtieth anniversary of the inaugural sitting of the
International Court of Justice,
Noting with appreciation the special commemorative event held at The Hague in
April 2006 to celebrate the anniversary,
Solemnly commends the International Court of Justice for the important role
1.
that it has played as the principal judicial organ of the United Nations over the past sixty
years in adjudicating disputes among States, and recognizes the value of its work;
Expresses its appreciation to the Court for the measures adopted to operate
2.
an increased workload with maximum efficiency;
Stresses the desirability of finding practical ways and means to strengthen
3.
the Court, taking into consideration, in particular, the needs resulting from its workload;
_______________
1
2

06-49665

Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.
Resolution 37/10, annex.

4.
Encourages States to continue considering recourse to the Court by means
available under its Statute, and calls upon States that have not yet done so to consider
accepting the jurisdiction of the Court in accordance with its Statute;
Calls upon States to consider means of strengthening the Court’s work,
5.
including by supporting the Secretary-General’s Trust Fund to Assist States in the
Settlement of Disputes through the International Court of Justice on a voluntary basis, in
order to enable the Fund to carry on and to strengthen its support to the countries which
submit their disputes to the Court;
Stresses the importance of promoting the work of the International Court of
6.
Justice, and urges that efforts be continued through available means to encourage public
awareness in the teaching, study and wider dissemination of the activities of the Court in
the peaceful settlement of disputes, in view of both its judiciary and advisory functions.
64th plenary meeting
4 December 2006

2
