A /73/PV.106

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-third session

106th plenary meeting

Thursday, 12 September 2019, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Espinosa Garcés . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ecuador)

The meeting was called to order at 10.35 a.m.
Agenda item 13 (continued)
2001-2010: Decade to Roll Back Malaria in
Developing Countries, Particularly in Africa
Draft resolution (A/73/L.109)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Eswatini to introduce
draft resolution A/73/L.109.
Mr. Masuku (Eswatini): On behalf of the Group
of African States, I would like to introduce draft
resolution A/73/L.109, entitled “Consolidating gains
and accelerating efforts to control and eliminate
malaria in developing countries, particularly in Africa,
by 2030”.
Malaria remains a huge health challenge to the
global community. According to the recent World
Malaria Report 2018 of the World Health Organization,
in 2017 malaria accounted for approximately
200 million cases worldwide, more than 90 per cent
of which occurred in Africa. Eleven of the countries
that account for most of the global malaria burden are
found on our continent. The report also shows that
the levels of access to life-saving malaria tools and
interventions and their uptake are insufficient. It paints
a gloomy picture for Africa and calls for escalating the
fight against the disease. It is for that reason that we
look to our partners to support our efforts to achieve
the total elimination of malaria. In that regard, we look
forward with great anticipation to the Global Fund

Replenishment Conference to be held in October in
Lyon, France. Africa remains committed to eliminating
malaria. Our Heads of State and Government meet
annually on the margins of the African Union Summit to
discuss action and accountability in the region’s efforts
to combat malaria and to reaffirm their commitment to
eliminating malaria by 2030.
This year’s draft resolution retains last year’s
language with the exception of a few technical updates
and new paragraphs highlighting current developments.
The draft resolution acknowledges the high burden to
high impact targeted malaria response as a country-led
approach to reignite the pace of progress and get back
on track to achieve the targets of the Global Technical
Strategy for Malaria 2016–2030 in high-burden
countries. In addition, the draft resolution calls on the
international community to assist malaria-endemic
countries to strengthen their health systems in order to
achieve universal health coverage.
In conclusion, allow me to express our sincere
gratitude to all Member States. We value their
constructive engagement and the spirit of compromise
shown throughout the negotiation process. We urge
all delegations to join us in our quest to keep the draft
resolution an annual initiative.
I also invite delegations that have not done so to join
in sponsoring the draft resolution. The African Group
looks forward to the adoption of the draft resolution by
consensus, as in previous years.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
will now take a decision on draft resolution A/73/L.109,

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-27740 (E)

*1927740*

A/73/PV.106

12/09/2019

entitled “Consolidating gains and accelerating efforts to
control and eliminate malaria in developing countries,
particularly in Africa, by 2030”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have also
become sponsors of A/73/L.109: Antigua and Barbuda,
Brazil, Canada, India, Indonesia, Maldives, Myanmar,
Namibia, Papua New Guinea, Sri Lanka, Thailand,
Turkey and Turkmenistan.
The President (spoke in Spanish): May I take it
that it is the wish of the General Assembly to adopt
draft resolution A/73/L.109?
Draft resolution A/73/L.109
(resolution 73/337).

was

adopted

The President (spoke in Spanish): I call on the
representative of the United States of America, who
wishes to speak in explanation of position on the
resolution just adopted.
Mr. Mack (United States of America): The
United States joins consensus on resolution 73/337 in
recognizing the need to strengthen malaria surveillance
and data quality and urges the global anti-malaria
community to use data to make evidence-based
decisions. Given the influx of data and advancements
in the development of new malaria control products, the
United States Government stands ready to work with
the World Health Organization and other institutions to
ensure that global technical recommendations evolve in
pace with incoming data and advancements in research
and development.
With reference to the Addis Ababa Action Agenda,
the United States refers to our global explanation of
position of 8 November 2018.
In reference to the Sustainable Development Goals
malaria targets, the document incorrectly refers to
those targets as agreed to throughout the document.
We underscore that the 2030 Agenda is non-binding
and does not create or affect rights or obligations
under international law nor does it any create any
financial commitments.
2/29

In reference to calls for United Nations Member
States to take action in accordance with the requirements
of the Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic
Pollutants, we note that the Convention’s provisions
apply only to Member States that are party to the
Convention. As we have stated for several consecutive
years, it is not appropriate for a United Nations
document to speak to ongoing or future work of the
World Trade Organization (WTO) or to undermine
the independent mandate and processes of the WTO.
Discussion of the WTO rule issues, including the
amendment to article 31 of the WTO Agreement on
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
in paragraph 33, is imbalanced and biased, and it is
inappropriate for the United Nations to call on WTO
members to take action on such issues. As was the case
last year, the United States must therefore disassociate
from paragraph 33, and we insist that the inclusion of
such language in the resolution does not serve as a basis
for future negotiations.
Finally, we find it unfortunate that so many
negotiations are stalled by the same issues around
intellectual property, which unnecessarily inflames
the discussion of serious health challenges. This year’s
resolution on malaria highlights the way in which
some countries have chosen to pursue those other
agendas even when they have little or no relevance
to the topic at hand. In the case of malaria, we note
that for the anti-malarial medicines on the current
WHO Model List of Essential Medicines there is not
a single patent in a single country that is still in force.
Intellectual property is therefore not a barrier to access
to those anti-malarial medicines. Importantly, however,
intellectual property is essential to the development
of new medicine, including those that we need to treat
malaria when resistance develops to current regiments.
The United States is therefore concerned that the threat
or use of compulsory licences for such medicines in the
future will disincentivize the research and development
that will be needed to save lives in the future.
We request that this statement be made part of the
official record of the proceedings of this meeting.
The President (spoke in Spanish): May I take it
that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude
its consideration of agenda item 13?
It was so decided.
19-27740

12/09/2019

Agenda item 15 (continued)
Culture of peace
Draft resolution (A/73/L.110)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkmenistan to introduce
draft resolution A/73/L.110.
Mrs. Ataeva (Turkmenistan) (spoke in Russian):
On behalf of the delegation of Turkmenistan, allow
me to thank all delegations for their constructive and
fruitful negotiations, which resulted in the substantive
text of the draft resolution entitled the International
Year of Peace and Trust, 2021, contained in document
A/73/L.110.
At present, our world suffers from an acute form
of trust deficit syndrome. The world as a whole is
experiencing a crisis of trust in national institutions
and in other States that have established a world
order. Cooperation among countries is less defined
and more complex. Trust in global governance is also
fragile, as the problems of the second century outpace
the institutions and thinking of the twentieth century.
We therefore believe that it is necessary and timely to
submit the draft resolution.
The draft resolution before us today contains 12
preambular paragraphs and six operative paragraphs,
the first of which declares 2021 the International
Year of Peace and Trust. The purpose of the draft
resolution is to mobilize the efforts of the international
community to promote peace and trust among States,
in particular through political dialogue, understanding
and cooperation, with a view to achieving sustainable
peace, solidarity and harmony. The draft resolution
also calls on the international community to continue
to help strengthen peace and trust in relations between
States as values that promote sustainable development,
peace and security and respect for human rights.
Peace and trust represent acceptance and respect and
embody mutual understanding and the recognition of
diversity in all its myriad forms. Diversity enriches
and strengthens the foundations of life itself, and the
recognition of diversity ensures peaceful coexistence
to a greater degree even than tolerance. History has
repeatedly shown that decisions to shun peace and
embrace extremes in any form can trigger conflict
and discontent and ultimately lead to war and untold
suffering. Peace and trust, on the contrary, can mitigate
or prevent such consequences. That is why it is crucial

A/73/PV.106

to view peace and trust as fundamental to international
relations around the world, in some parts of which the
task of establishing peace continues to be very difficult
to accomplish.
We welcome the fact that the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development has been a powerful impulse
in this area, containing as it does many references to
peace, specifically in Sustainable Development Goal
16, and thereby helping to promote the efforts of the
United Nations system to create a culture of peace.
We believe that major meaningful results in building
peaceful and inclusive societies to attain the Sustainable
Development Goals are fully attainable in the light of
what our work has already achieved. In acknowledging
that an approach founded on trust can help to achieve
peaceful coexistence, we see that peace and trust in
all of their forms can also help to facilitate the future
development of friendly relations among States on the
basis of the principle of mutual trust and complement
the work of the United Nations at various levels in
advancing a culture of peace.
In conclusion, we should point out that while there
are many obstacles to establishing a culture of peace
and trust, they can all be overcome. We believe that in
our changing world the task of building and maintaining
good relations among States and strengthening a spirit
of partnership and mutually beneficial cooperation is
especially urgent. We believe that this initiative will
make a significant contribution to the development of
mutually respectful, trusting dialogue among States
and peoples on an equal footing. We are grateful to the
delegations that have sponsored the draft resolution and
hope it will be adopted by consensus.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
will now take a decision on draft resolution A/73/L.110,
entitled “International Year of Peace and Trust, 2021”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to those delegations listed
in document A/73/L.110, the following countries have
also become sponsors: Algeria, Armenia, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Benin, the Plurinational State of Bolivia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Chad,
China, Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Djibouti, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Georgia,

19-277403/29

A/73/PV.106

12/09/2019

Greece, Guyana, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Ireland,
Jordan, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lesotho,
Libya, Malawi, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Myanmar, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Peru, Poland, the
Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova, Samoa,
Serbia, Somalia, the Sudan, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Tonga, Tunisia, Uganda, the United Arab Emirates,
Uzbekistan and Zimbabwe.
The President (spoke in Spanish): May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to adopt draft resolution
A/73/L.110?
Draft resolution
(resolution 73/338).

A/73/L.110

was

adopted

The President (spoke in Spanish): The General
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 15.
Agenda item 128 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(r) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries
Draft resolution (A/73/L.111)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cabo Verde to introduce
draft resolution A/73/L.111.
Mr. Fialho Rocha (Cabo Verde): I have the honour
to introduce, under agenda item 128, draft resolution
A/73/L.111, entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries”, on behalf of the member States of the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP):
Angola, Brazil, Guinea-Bissau, Equatorial Guinea,
Mozambique, Portugal, Sao Tome and Principe, TimorLeste and my own country, Cabo Verde.
This year the CPLP is celebrating the twentieth
anniversary of its relationship with the United Nations.
In 1999, through resolution 54/10 of 18 November,
the General Assembly granted it observer status. The
CPLP is a space united by its common use of the
Portuguese language and by the primacy of peace,
democracy and the rule of law, human rights, social
justice and cultural bonds. Today it is a community
composed of about 300 million people across four
4/29

continents. Portuguese is the fifth most widely spoken
language in the world and a major contributor to the
strengthening of multilingualism on a global scale,
a theme cherished by the United Nations. On the
one hand, the Community’s goals are strengthening
diplomatic and political dialogue among its member
States, enhancing cooperation between them in all
areas and promoting the Portuguese language. More
broadly, it is committed to reinforcing cooperation with
other States, the United Nations and other regional and
multilateral organizations.
On 17 and 18 July 2018, in Santa Maria, Cabo
Verde, the CPLP held its twelfth summit, at which our
Heads of State and Government, among other things,
reaffirmed the full validity of the commitments in
the CPLP’s Constitutive Declaration; welcomed the
choice of “People, culture and oceans” as the theme of
the conference and committed to promoting political
dialogue, sharing experiences, and cooperating with a
view to enhancing CPLP achievements in those areas;
and discussed the advancement of the process of mobility
and circulation within the CPLP space, a privileged
instrument for enhancing mutual understanding
between the countries of the Community and continuing
to build CPLP citizenship. They also granted associate
observer status to eight new countries, increasing the
number of observers to 18.
Draft resolution A/73/L.111, which we bring to
the Assembly’s attention today for adoption, aims at
deepening the CPLP’s partnership with the United
Nations through regional cooperation and in the
pursuit of our shared objectives, particularly in the
areas of human rights, poverty eradication, sustainable
development and sustaining peace. The draft resolution
recalls the importance of the civil society’s engagement
and the private sector’s participation in implementing
the Sustainable Development Goals within the
Community. It notes with appreciation the CPLP’s
commitment to the promotion of human rights, gender
equality and the empowerment of all women and girls.
It acknowledges the impact of extreme weather events
and the importance of the humanitarian assistance that
has been provided recently to CPLP countries such as
Mozambique, which was affected by Cyclone Idai, and
Cabo Verde, which has seen extreme drought.
The draft resolution stresses the importance of
partnerships between the United Nations and other
relevant organizations, including the CPLP, to improve
coordination and cooperation in peacebuilding and
19-27740

12/09/2019

A/73/PV.106

sustaining peace. In that context it reiterates the
need to ensure that Guinea-Bissau continues to take
concrete steps towards peace, security and stability
and welcomes the international community’s continued
support in monitoring the political situation in GuineaBissau. That includes the role played by the P5 group
of five international partners — the United Nations,
the African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States, the European Union and the CPLP — as
well as the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the United
Nations Peacebuilding Commission and the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in GuineaBissau.

The President (spoke in Spanish): May I take it
that the Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/73/L.111?

In conclusion, on behalf of the CPLP member
States, I want to express our deep appreciation to the
countries that helped to enrich the text of the draft
resolution and to those that sponsored it. We would like
to request that it be adopted without a vote.

Advancement of women

The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
will now take a decision on draft resolution A/73/L.111,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I would like
to announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to those delegations listed
in document A/73/L.111, the following countries have
also become sponsors: Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belgium,
Benin, the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Bulgaria,
Canada, the Central African Republic, Chile, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Eswatini, Finland, France, the Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Jordan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Mauritius, the Federated States of
Micronesia, Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco, Namibia,
Nauru, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, the Philippines,
Poland, the Republic of Moldova, the Russian
Federation, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Sri Lanka, Tajikistan, Thailand,
Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Viet Nam
and Zimbabwe.

Draft resolution
(resolution 73/339).

A/73/L.111

was

adopted

The President (spoke in Spanish): May I take it
that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude
its consideration of sub-item (r) of agenda item 128?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 29 (continued)
Draft resolution (A/73/L.115)
The President (spoke in Spanish): We shall now
proceed to consider draft resolution A/73/L.115. Before
giving the floor for explanations of vote or position
before the vote, I would like to remind delegations that
explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Mack (United States of America): The United
States welcomes resolution A/73/L.115, on the twentyfifth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action (Beijing+25), and will join the
consensus on its adoption. Civil-society organizations
and human rights defenders play a critical role in
implementing the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action. Civil society and human rights defenders
are our eyes and ears on the ground and are critical
to implementing international efforts to promote and
protect human rights, including those of women and
girls. To that end, we welcome the text’s references
to civil-society participation in the process and urge
their inclusion throughout the process as vital to its
success. The United States is pleased that at least three
representatives of civil society will address the highlevel event to be held next September. Civil society’s
voice must be heard throughout the process, including
at events such as the interactive multi-stakeholder
hearing and the generation equality forum.
We remain concerned about the increasing trend
among some Member States of restricting civil society
and human rights defenders at the United Nations,
a trend we have seen across various bodies and in
resolutions on modalities, particularly during this
session of the General Assembly. Furthermore, the
United States would like to express its disappointment

19-277405/29

A/73/PV.106

with the way the negotiation process for this draft
resolution was handled regarding the inclusion of
human rights defenders in the text. We negotiated
constructively yet firmly throughout the process,
particularly regarding the retention of the reference to
human rights defenders. While the reference remained
in the text through two rounds of silence procedure, it
was removed from the final text in a non-transparent
process. Its removal was the preference of a small
number of delegations, and we are deeply disappointed
that their opinions were considered over the majority
view on retaining the reference.
If we cannot include human rights defenders in
a modalities resolution in which we should ensure
their participation in discussing their work, we should
re-evaluate our work here at the United Nations.
Leaving out critical partners from key events such as
the Beijing+25 commemoration goes against the spirit
and purpose of the Organization. The United States
continues to be puzzled at some Member States’ lack
of clarity about the term, especially given that the
Declaration on Human Rights Defenders is more than
10 years old. We urge all Member States to push back
against this alarming trend in all future negotiations
and to fight harder for the voices of our civil-society
and human rights defender partners.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We have heard
the only speaker in explanation of vote or position
before the voting on the draft resolution before us.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/73/L.115, entitled “Scope, modalities,
format and organization of the high-level meeting
on the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Fourth World
Conference on Women”. May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/73/L.115 without
a vote?

12/09/2019

Representatives of Qatar and New Zealand, for their
excellent work and leadership of a highly complex
process. I also thank Member States for their constructive
spirit and cooperative engagement throughout the
negotiations. The modalities we have agreed to provide
us with a solid base to jointly assess in an open and
transparent manner the progress made in implementing
the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, as well
as the gaps and challenges that remain. I am aware that
Member States grappled extensively with the issue of the
participation of civil society and the non-governmental
organizations, institutions and individuals whose
efforts have supported the implementation of the
Beijing Declaration and the Platform for Action and the
human rights involved. I am pleased that by agreeing to
the resolution’s operative paragraph 6, Member States
have affirmed the relevance to Beijing+25 of all actors,
including on the human rights agenda that is integral to
it. I thank all Member States for that spirit of consensus.
(spoke in Spanish)
The Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action
were historical milestones in the empowerment
and equality of all women and girls. Beijing+25 is a
unique opportunity for us to make further progress in
fulfilling our commitments on equality, development
and peace contained in the Beijing Declaration and
Platform of Action and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. This occasion should serve to strengthen
urgently needed policies and actions to ensure that all
women and girls can develop their full potential and
build lives that meet their aspirations.

The President: I would like to share a few thoughts
on resolution 73/340, which the General Assembly has
just adopted, and which is the result of arduous and
extensive negotiations and proof of the importance that
Member States attach to the effective fulfilment of the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, adopted in
1995 by the Fourth World Conference on Women.

In marking Beijing’s twenty-fifth anniversary, we
can also reaffirm our commitments to multilateralism
and international cooperation and solidarity to enable us
to resolve the global challenges we face. This is crucial,
given that 2020 will coincide with the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the founding of the United Nations. As
the fourth woman to preside over the General Assembly,
I would like to express my pleasure at the adoption of
this resolution. I firmly believe that gender equality,
the rights of women and the empowerment of women
are prerequisites for building fair and sustainable
societies and meeting the Sustainable Development
Goals, which promise a better future for all people,
women and men alike.

I would like to thank Ambassadors Alya Ahmed
Saif Al-Thani and Craig John Hawke, the Permanent

Before giving the floor for explanations of position
on the resolution just adopted, I would like to remind

Draft resolution A/73/L.115 was adopted (resolution
73/340).

6/29

19-27740

12/09/2019

delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
I now give the floor to the observer of the
European Union.
Mr. Gonzato (European Union): I am reading this
statement on behalf of Albania, Australia, Argentina,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Georgia, Iceland,
Liechtenstein, Mexico, Montenegro, North Macedonia,
Norway, Panama, Peru, Serbia, Switzerland, the
Republic of Moldova, Ukraine and Uruguay, and on
behalf of the European Union and its 28 member States.
We welcome the adoption of resolution 73/340,
on the “Scope, modalities, format and organization of
the high-level meeting on the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the Fourth World Conference on Women”. That
important event will close out a year of renewed
initiatives and actions for the implementation of the
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action. The
twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration
and Platform for Action provides momentum for all of
us — States, civil society and private actors — to join
forces and renew our commitments to gender equality
and women’s empowerment for all. We are ready to
play our part and call on all partners to do the same.
Civil-society organizations and human rights
defenders play a major role in implementing Beijing.
They are our eyes and ears on the ground and are
critical to implementing international efforts to
promote and protect human rights, including those of
women and girls. To that end, we welcome the text’s
references to civil-society participation in this process.
No fewer than three civil-society representatives will
address the high-level event next September. They will
play an important role in all other events, including the
multi-stakeholder interactive hearing and the generation
equality forum. This is a clear recognition of the major
contributions made by civil society, including women’s
and community-based organizations, feminist groups,
women human rights defenders, girl- and youth-led
organizations and trade unions, to the achievement of
gender equality and the empowerment of all women
and girls.
We remain concerned about the increasing trend
whereby some Member States restrict civil society
and human rights defenders at the United Nations,
which we have seen across bodies and in modalities
resolutions, particularly during the current session of

A/73/PV.106

the General Assembly. This group will never accept
such intimidating practices and will stand by all
organizations and individuals that are being attacked
simply for what they stand for or who they are. We also
urge others to do the same in future resolutions so that
we are not faced with this issue again.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We have heard
the only speaker in explanation of position after
adoption. May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 29?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 123 (continued)
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
Report of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the
Revitalization of the Work of the General
Assembly (A/73/956)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The General
Assembly has before it the report of the Ad Hoc Working
Group on the Revitalization of the Work of the General
Assembly (A/73/956) and a draft resolution, contained
in paragraph 91 of the report.
I would like to make some opening remarks before
we proceed to consider the draft resolution.
(spoke in English)
At the start of the General Assembly’s seventythird session, after extensive consultations with
Member States, I included the revitalization of the
United Nations, and specifically the General Assembly,
as one of my main priorities. Throughout the session,
deliberations on this topic have been held in formal,
informal and innovative forums, from meetings of the
Ad Hoc Working Group and the General Committee
to Morning Mingas to the discussions with former
Presidents of the General Assembly that my Office
organized in February and July to capture lessons
learned and support the transition to my successor.
I addressed the Ad Hoc Working Group during
its general debate on 28 February, the thematic debate
on 27 March on the working methods of the Assembly
and the thematic debate on 30 April dedicated to
strengthening transparency, accountability and the
institutional memory of the Office of the President of
the General Assembly.

19-277407/29

A/73/PV.106

I am pleased that this year we have made further
progress and achieved tangible results on a number of
issues, including on streamlining the text of the Working
Group’s draft resolution itself. We have reduced the
number of operative paragraphs to 62 as opposed to
101 last year; this deserves applause. We now have a
decision that the Secretary-General-designate will
take an oath of office before the Assembly during a
swearing-in ceremony using the text including in the
annex to the draft resolution.
We have also made progress on the alignment
process through the updated mapping assessment of
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) coverage, as
well as the initial efforts made during the session to
develop possible criteria for identifying overlap and
duplication where they are found to exist. I would
like to take this opportunity to thank Her Excellency
Mrs. Marie Chatardová, Permanent Representative of
the Czech Republic, and Her Excellency Mrs. Maria
Helena Lopes De Jesus Pires, Permanent Representative
of Timor-Leste, for their hard work and leadership in
executing this mandate, and to thank all delegations for
their constructive engagement.
Progress is also reflected in other elements of the
draft resolution. This includes language on the needs
to limit the number of high-level events as well as side
events in the margins of the general debate. It is crucial
that we preserve the primacy of the general debate and
leverage to the fullest the unique annual gathering of
world leaders. It includes the decision to ensure that all
meetings of the General Assembly and its subsidiary
organs have accessible seating for representatives
with disabilities — one of the recommendations of
the steering committee I established on accessibility,
so ably chaired by His Excellency Mr. Walton Alfonso
Webson, Permanent Representative of Antigua and
Barbuda, and His Excellency Mr. Park Chull-Joo,
Deputy Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Korea — and a request for the Secretary-General to
submit a comprehensive report during the seventy-fourth
session on further ways to improve the accessibility of
United Nations Headquarters. In includes a reference
to the resolution on the seventy-fifth anniversary of
the United Nations (resolution 73/299), adopted earlier
this year under the guidance of His Excellency Burhan
Gafoor, Permanent Representative of Singapore and the
former Ambassador of Iceland, Bergdís Ellertsdóttir.
This anniversary is a golden opportunity to
strengthen our resolve to achieve the future we want and
8/29

12/09/2019

the United Nations we need. I was grateful that efforts
to phase out single-use plastic from United Nations
Headquarters and to bring the work of the General
Assembly to a wider audience were recognized in the
text. The process we have elaborated was the result of
highly collaborative efforts involving Member States,
the United Nations system, external partners and my
tireless and creative team.
Finally, I am delighted that the Working Group
was able to conclude its work earlier than last year
after a series of formal and informal meetings as well
as several rounds of consultations. This is a step in
the right direction. I express my sincere gratitude to
Her Excellency Ms. Sima Sami Bahous, Permanent
Representative of Jordan, and His Excellency Michal
Mlynár, Permanent Representative of Slovakia, as
co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the
revitalization of the work of the General Assembly. I
congratulate and thank them for their able leadership
and their tireless work.
I believe that there is more that we can and should do
to enhance the effectiveness of the General Assembly,
the first body mentioned in the Charter of the United
Nations, our parliament for humanity, and to ensure
that its work is supported actively by we the peoples.
I hope that everyone entering the General Assembly
Hall will be reminded of our duty to them through the
poster we created to commemorate the signing of the
Charter, on 26 June 1945. The poster and the symbolic
signatures of recommitment will be displayed outside
the Hall this week and remain in situ throughout the
seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations. Let
us remember this commitment when leaders come to
speak in this Hall in a few days’ time and work together
for a stronger United Nations that better serves we
the peoples.
(spoke in Spanish)
The Assembly will now proceed to take a decision
on the draft resolution entitled “Revitalization of the
work of the General Assembly”, contained in paragraph
91 of the report of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the
revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
(A/73/956).
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
adopt the draft resolution?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 73/341).
19-27740

12/09/2019

The President (spoke in Spanish): Before giving
delegations the floor for explanations of vote after the
voting, may I remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegation from their seats.
I now give the floor to the observer of the Observer
State of Palestine.
Mrs. Abushawesh (Palestine): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the Group of 77 and
China in relation to the alignment process, as reflected
in operative paragraphs 11, 12, 13, 27 and 28.
At the outset, the Group would like to express its
deep appreciation to the co-facilitators, the Permanent
Representatives of the Czech Republic and Timor-Leste,
and their teams for their tireless efforts in facilitating the
consultation process aimed at enhancing synergies and
coherence between the work of the General Assembly
and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development in
an open and transparent manner.
In that connection, the Group would like to
stress the importance of maintaining and ensuring
the transparency, openness and intergovernmental
character of this process in future work. The Group
fully recognizes the relevance of the alignment process
to the revitalization of the General Assembly as well as
to making our work more effective and more relevant
for all, particularly as it regards the full and effective
implementation of the 2030 Agenda in its entirety, with
the developing countries at the centre.
We also recognize that overcoming gaps, reducing
duplication and creating necessary and productive
synergies, which are core objectives of the alignment
process, would contribute to both revitalization and
the full and effective implementation that we all seek.
The Group has engaged constructively and actively
throughout all stages of the alignment process. We have
conveyed our inputs in this regard to the co-facilitators
for the proposed mapping assessment. We have thus
agreed to take note of this year’s updated mapping
assessment as an evolving reference for discussion by
the General Assembly at its seventy-fourth session.
However, we continue to stress the need for
further elaboration and analysis of the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) in relation to the agenda
items and sub-items to ensure their alignment with
the 2030 Agenda. Such analysis must go deeper than
verification of the fact that the title of an item or

A/73/PV.106

resolutions corresponds to certain SDGs; it must be a
substantive and content-based analysis.
The Group would also like to stress that the
alignment process cannot be understood in relation
only to the Sustainable Development Goals, but, first
and foremost, to the 2030 Agenda as a whole, of which
the SDGs are a part. Otherwise, the relevant issues
covered by the Agenda that are not necessarily reflected
in any of the SDGs or targets would be left out of the
alignment process.
As to the co-facilitators’ proposed possible criteria
for identifying overlaps and duplication where they
are found to exist, the Group continues to believe that
it is premature to discuss such criteria at this stage.
Before doing so, we need to have a detailed, thorough
and comprehensive analysis of the SDGs and the
agenda item.
At the appropriate time, the set of criteria must be
further developed until consensus on the basis on which
to take any decision in that regard is reached among
Member States. Moreover, we believe that the process
has been developed in an unbalanced manner, since so
far all efforts have been made to develop criteria for
identifying possible duplication and/or overlap but no
criteria have been pursued to identify possible gaps in
relation to the 2030 Agenda. Nevertheless, in the spirit
of flexibility and cooperation, the Group has agreed to
take note of the initial efforts this session to develop
possible criteria to identify all overlaps and duplication
where they are found to exist.
The Group would like to underscore the ownership
and leadership of Member States in that exercise. The
Group stresses that the process cannot prejudge the
sovereign right of countries and groups to present
issues and/or draft resolutions on the agenda of the
General Assembly, its Commissions and other relevant
organs of the United Nations, especially if they are
in line with the purposes and principles set out in the
Charter of the United Nations and in connection with
the implementation of the 2030 Agenda.
While we recognize and support the need to
advance United Nations mandates regarding alignment
with the 2030 Agenda, we understand that the process
must advance on solid foundations, based on evidence,
after a broad, in-depth and comprehensive analysis.
Finally, the Group reiterates its support and
commitment to engaging constructively in the

19-277409/29

A/73/PV.106

consultation process during the upcoming session with
a view to building on the discussions that took place
during this session and to continuing to work together
in order to reach consensus among all States.
Mr. Carazo (Costa Rica) I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency Group (ACT), a cross-regional group
comprised of the following 25 small and medium-sized
countries, which seeks to improve the working methods
of the Security Council: Austria, Chile, Costa Rica,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Gabon, Ghana, Hungary,
Ireland, Jordan, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Maldives,
New Zealand, Norway, Papua New Guinea, Peru,
Portugal, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Slovenia, Sweden,
Switzerland and Uruguay.
We welcome today’s adoption of resolution 73/341
and would like to thank the co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc
Working Group on the Revitalization of the Work of the
General Assembly, the Permanent Representatives of
Jordan and Slovakia, for their excellent work, creativity
and dedication. The ACT Group would like to offer two
main comments on the cluster dealing with the selection
and appointment of the next Secretary-General and
other executive heads addressed in the resolution.
The Group believes that it is crucial to consolidate
the achievements of the most recent process of selection
and appointment of the Secretary-General towards the
next selection hence and to define a clear timeline,
which would include the submission of candidatures,
the holding of interactive dialogues with Member
States, the recommendation of the Security Council
and the General Assembly’s appointment resolution.
We also believe that improved interaction between
the Security Council and the General Assembly is
needed to ensure that the relationship between those
two principal organs of the United Nations is mutually
reinforcing and complementary. We believe that the
relationship needs to be further improved in order to live
up to the expectations of the membership and the new
standards of openness and transparency. We therefore
encourage the Security Council to review its working
methods, building on the discussions held among
Council members during the most recent selection
process. For example, the collective discussions
within the Council on the merit, skills and experience
of individual candidates would enhance Security
Council decision-making. The ACT Group would like
to reiterate its call for regular public briefings by the
10/29

12/09/2019

Security Council on developments in the nomination
process and open communication of straw-poll results.
Mr. Mlynár (Slovakia): First of all, I would like
to express on our collective behalf — on behalf of
my co-Chair, Ambassador Bahous, and myself — our
appreciation for your personal leadership, Madam
President, for your dedication to the process of the
revitalization of the General Assembly and for its
prioritization in your work and throughout the session. I
also wish to thank all delegations for their engagement,
support, cooperation and flexibility throughout the
process, which has enabled us to present to the General
Assembly the streamlined and more concise resolution
73/341 just adopted by consensus.
My co-Chair, Ambassador Bahous, will address
some important elements that we would like to
highlight today. I myself would like to mention that
we have been truly honoured to guide the negotiations
and the whole process together. I would like to use
this opportunity to once again thank you, Madam, for
your trust in appointing us as co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc
Working Group on the Revitalization of the Work of
the General Assembly. Having an excellent co-Chair in
Ambassador Bahous, it was more comforting to assume
that responsibility, which goes to the very core of the
United Nations, empowering the General Assembly in
order for it to fulfil its central role, as reflected in the
Charter of the United Nations, and to be better able to
face and address current global challenges.
I will not provide a detailed analysis of the
resolution just adopted at this meeting. We should all
collectively continue to reflect on what has already
been achieved and where we need to further step up
our efforts. Member States engaged on many critical
issues on the agenda of the Ad Hoc Working Group.
Important discussions were held on the alignment of the
work of the General Assembly with the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, possible alternative dates
for the beginning of the regular session of the Assembly
and some issues relating to the process of selection and
appointment of the Secretary-General, as has also just
been mentioned by the Permanent Representative of
Costa Rica on behalf of the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency Group. Member States have
acknowledged the existing challenges posed by the
so-called proliferation of side events and high-level
meetings on the margins of the General Assembly
session. It is extremely important to stress that now,
less than two weeks before the general debate. Last but
19-27740

12/09/2019

not least, substantive exchanges were held on various
aspects pertaining to the status and work of the Office
of the President of the General Assembly.
Even if the discussions do not always immediately
lead to revolutionary changes, I believe they have
prepared the ground for their productive continuation
in future sessions. I usually refer to them as hooks that
are there for us to use, build on and move forward. In
the end, that is what multilateralism is about — calm
discussions in good faith and in a friendly atmosphere
of mutual respect, so that a mutually acceptable
compromise is found in the end, even when views seem
almost irreconcilable.
We believe that the current resolution, which has
been streamlined and is now much more concise,
provides a solid foundation for continued discussion
and the identification of action-oriented solutions
during the coming sessions. We strongly believe that
this truly overarching process does and should lead
by example. By that I do not mean only by making
the resolution more concise and streamlined. In fact,
we owe it to ourselves as members of the General
Assembly, and even more so as we now approach the
seventy-fifth anniversary of our Organization. In many
ways, revitalization provides a golden opportunity in
that regard, not least by helping us to take a good look
in the mirror in order to reflect on where we are and
what remains to be done.
In conclusion, I want to once again thank all
delegations, as well as the capable Secretariat team, led
by Under-Secretary-General Catherine Pollard, for all
their support and engagement.
Ms. Bahous (Jordan): On behalf both of my
co-Chair, Ambassador Michal Mlynár, and myself, I
would like to congratulate you, Madam President, and
all Member States, on our adoption by consensus of
resolution 73/341, on the revitalization of the General
Assembly. I want to express our appreciation for your
personal leadership and dedication to the revitalization
process. Ambassador Mlynár and I were very honoured
to be chosen to lead that process and we thank you
and all Member States for the trust and support that
helped bring this process to fruition in a true spirit
of multilateralism.
We believe that the revitalization process is
important in that it helps to make global governance
more responsive and the General Assembly — the
chief deliberative policymaking and representative

A/73/PV.106

organ of the United Nations — a more effective and
efficient instrument for pursuing and aligning our
shared priorities and aspirations. The revitalization of
the way we work in the Assembly and its subsidiary
organs directly affects the Assembly’s ability to ensure
that it can deliver on its mandate. Revitalizing its
work is also critical and an essential component of the
reform of the United Nations generally. I would like to
acknowledge our appreciation for the very pragmatic
and constructive approach that Member States and
their representatives took this year in ensuring that the
negotiations, tough as they were, moved along well and
that we worked steadily to achieve what we set out to
do. Keeping in mind the importance of revitalizing the
work of the General Assembly in order to strengthen
the wider United Nations system, it will be necessary,
indeed crucial, that we continue to negotiate in the
same spirit in the future.
The resolution we have adopted today is evidence
of the commitment of Member States to a stronger,
more efficient and effective General Assembly. We
have managed to take forward a number of important
issues, which were highlighted by my co-Chair, in
support of a revitalized world body. We were also able
to adopt some practical measures that should improve
the way we work and interact in the Assembly in the
four major thematic areas — the role and authority
of the General Assembly, its working methods, the
selection and appointment of the Secretary-General
and other executive heads, and the strengthening of
the accountability, transparency and institutional
memory of the Office of the President of the General
Assembly. In particular, we have managed to adopt a
streamlined resolution that was duly updated and is
more action-oriented and coherent and less repetitive.
Allow me to say, Madam President, that we were able
to match your and the Secretary-General’s boldness and
determination to reform the United Nations by making
the General Assembly more efficient and effective and
thereby contributing together to a stronger Organization
and a stronger multilateral system.
Last but not least, we would like to sincerely
thank the Secretariat, particularly the Department for
General Assembly and Conference Management, for its
continued and highly professional support throughout
the session.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We have heard
the last speaker in explanation of position.

19-2774011/29

A/73/PV.106

On a personal note, I would like to reiterate my deep
gratitude to the Ambassadors of the Czech Republic
and Timor-Leste for their exceptional leadership and
coordination in ensuring that the adopted resolution
contained an alignment component. After three years
of hard work, we finally reached a consensus agreement
on the process of aligning the work of the Assembly
with the Sustainable Development Goals and the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. Of course, there
is still much to be done.
I also want to especially thank the Ambassadors of
Slovakia and Jordan for their tireless work as co-Chairs
of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of
the Work of the General Assembly. Their work has not
only been arduous, it has demanded tremendous tenacity
and commitment above and beyond their duties. The
process has not been simple, but it is vital and central
to improving the way we respond to and honour our
commitments, and it will continue to be central and
vital as we commemorate the seventy-fifth anniversary
of the creation of our Organization. I would like to
once again thank and recognize the four facilitators,
particularly those from Slovakia and Jordan, for their
exceptional work. I also want to express our gratitude
and recognition to the Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management and the Secretariat team,
whose work supported this arduous process.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to
conclude its consideration of agenda item 123?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 31 (continued)
Report of the Security Council
Report of the Security Council (A/73/2)
The President (spoke in Spanish): We will continue
with the list of speakers from our meeting the day
before yesterday (see A/73/PV.105).
Ms. Rodríguez Abascal (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Our delegation appreciates the convening of this
meeting to consider the 2018 annual report of the
Security Council to the General Assembly, contained
in document A/73/2. We also thank the Ambassador
of the Russian Federation, in his capacity as President
of the Council for September, for his presentation of
the report.
12/29

12/09/2019

It is regrettable that for a third consecutive time
the Security Council was late in discussing and
approving the annual report for consideration by the
General Assembly within the established time frame.
The delays in the report’s publication, and the failure
to issue or make it public in an appropriate and timely
manner, have significantly affected the Assembly’s
ability to address the work of the Council and consider
it in depth, in accordance with the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations and Member States’
desire to participate fully in the process. Moreover,
the content of the report has not resulted in a genuine
exercise in accountability on the part of the Security
Council to the General Assembly. It is once again
merely a descriptive account of the Council’s meetings,
activities and decisions, despite the fact that a majority
of Member States have questioned the exercise as pro
forma and lacking in critical analysis.
Cuba demands a Security Council report that is
exhaustive, explanatory and analytical and that makes
it possible to assess the causes and implications of the
Council’s actions. For example, it is unacceptable that
the 2018 report omits any discussion of violations of
the Council’s own resolutions, particularly resolution
2231 (2015), on the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA), and resolution 478 (1980), on the status
of East Jerusalem, violations that are implicit in the
United States’ withdrawal from the JCPOA and transfer
of its Israeli embassy from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem. It is
extremely regrettable that the report does not reflect
the stagnation of the question of Palestine and its
people’s protracted suffering. Nor does it condemn
the escalation of violence and the tragic events in the
Gaza Strip since 30 March 2018 caused by obstruction
on the part of the United States. It is also unacceptable
that it does not mention the violation of resolution 2334
(20l6) or demand accountability for Israel’s ongoing
illegal occupation of Palestinian territory and its illegal
settlements in the occupied Palestinian territory.
We want to remind the Assembly that in
performing the functions inherent in its primary
responsibility to maintain international peace and
security, as conferred on it by the Charter, the Security
Council acts on behalf of all Member States and must
therefore comply with the obligation, established in
Articles 15 and 24 of the Charter, to submit special
reports on its actions for consideration by the General
Assembly. Although the figures for meetings held
by the Council in 2018 indicated once again that the
19-27740

12/09/2019

number of public meetings increased, the Council has
maintained its anti-democratic nature and inaccessible
and exclusionary practices by working primarily in
closed formats. In that regard, Cuba requests that
such meetings should be the exception rather than the
rule. We want a Security Council that responds to the
concerns of all Member States, including before taking
decisions, and that gives them real access to its work
and that of its subsidiary bodies. We will need effective
measures, including the elimination of the veto, to
ensure the democratization of the Council and genuine
participation in its work and decision-making.
Beyond presidential note 507 (S/2017/507), which
was an important step, what is needed is comprehensive
reform of the Security Council, including its
working methods, without delay, in order to make it
a transparent, democratic and representative body,
in keeping with the evolution of the United Nations
and international relations. Reform would include
formalizing the Council’s rules of procedure, which
have remained provisional for more than 70 years, and
expanding its membership in both the permanent and
non-permanent categories to not less than 26 members,
all with the aim of rectifying the underrepresentation
of developing countries. Cuba will continue to support
the intergovernmental negotiations in the General
Assembly on reforming the Council.
Cuba would like to reiterate its concern about the
unjustified expansion of the Security Council’s agenda
in the past few years. The annual report once again
reveals the Council’s tendency to continue considering
issues that do not necessarily pose an immediate
threat to international peace and security and to its
continued usurpation of roles assigned to other bodies,
particularly the General Assembly. The Council must
ensure that its functions conform to the mandate
conferred on it by the Charter. It must stop interfering
in matters outside its competence, particularly when
they concern the mandate of the General Assembly,
and it must respect all resolutions of the General
Assembly as the main deliberative, policymaking and
representative body of the United Nations. We reject
the Council’s selective manipulation of its methods and
practices to suit various political agendas and efforts to
dominate, particularly attempts to introduce issues that
are not part of its agenda and the politicization of the
consideration of other issues submitted to it. The use of
the Security Council as a tool to put political pressure
on sovereign States must stop.

A/73/PV.106

Mr. Trejo Blanco (El Salvador) (spoke in Spanish):
We take note of the annual report (A/73/2) of the
Security Council to the General Assembly and thank
the Russian presidency for its presentation. We would
particularly like to thank the delegation of the United
Kingdom for its leadership in preparing the draft
introduction to the report.
For El Salvador, the annual presentation of the
Security Council’s report to the General Assembly
is especially relevant, and it represents part of the
primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security conferred on the Council by the
States Members of the United Nations. We believe
that the report is an exercise in transparency and
accountability, which are essential to the proper
functioning of our Organization. We appreciate the
report as a valuable compilation of documents and
statistics that will undoubtedly assist my delegation in
its work and serve as a future reference. However, we
believe it could have been enhanced by including more
in-depth analysis of the challenges facing the Council
as well as proposals for tackling those challenges,
given the extensive mandate and scope of the Security
Council and its subsidiary bodies. We have no doubt
that more in-depth analysis would facilitate discussion
of the report and, even more importantly, would give
members of the General Assembly an opportunity
to formulate recommendations on how the Security
Council should respond to the demands that global
situations present today.
In our view, holding consultations on the drafting of
the Council’s annual report would be a demonstration of
its willingness to democratize its procedures. We also
believe that the report could include references to the
major proceedings held under each monthly presidency,
which would significantly enrich the report’s content.
We also believe it would be relevant for the report to
include analyses of the decision-making processes
within the Council as well as insights that would provide
greater clarity on the reasons motivating permanent
members of the Council to exercise their right to veto,
when such cases occur.
Apart from that, we deplore the length of time
that it takes to draft, approve and submit the report
to the General Assembly. In that regard, we believe
it is important to insist that the Security Council do
everything possible to ensure that the report is made
available in a time frame that allows delegations the
time they need to study and analyse it. We therefore

19-2774013/29

A/73/PV.106

propose that next year this process should take place
no later than the spring, thereby duly implementing the
provisions of presidential note 507 (S/2017/507). We
also request that consideration be given to circulating
the report to the entire membership so that we have
sufficient time to review it, which should probably be
no less than two weeks prior to its presentation to the
General Assembly. Finally, we believe that improving
the working methods of the Security Council to ensure
they reflect changing global realities is crucial if it is
to fulfil its mandate, as enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations, and make decisions quickly and
effectively in order to maintain international peace
and security.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): We thank the Security Council for the
presentation of its annual report for 2018 (A/73/2) and
commend you, Madam, for your leadership as President
of the General Assembly.
At the outset, I want to point out that it is not good
practice for the Council’s report to be presented so
close to the closure of this session of the Assembly,
particularly when so little time is provided for its review.
Like other delegations, we would like to reiterate our
request that the report be presented during the spring,
in accordance with the provisions of presidential
note 507 (S/2017/507). Today the General Assembly
is considering developments with implications for
international peace and security that took place almost
20 months ago. This delay is clearly far from ideal
for generating a relevant dialogue between two main
bodies of the United Nations. Every year the General
Assembly authorizes billions of dollars for funding
mandates approved or renewed by the Security Council.
The international community expects and deserves
much greater accountability in both form and content.
We acknowledge the efforts of those Council
presidencies that held meetings in the Toledo format at
the end of their terms, and we believe that this practice
should be systematized. We also deplore the fact that
six of the monthly evaluations for the 2018 presidencies
are missing. That is not good practice.
As a Latin American country, we welcome the
Security Council’s attention to issues related to
Latin America and the Caribbean, in which, without
downplaying the problems intrinsic to each situation,
we see an encouraging trend. Two situations, in April
and June, stood out, when a single negative vote by
14/29

12/09/2019

one permanent member prevented the Council from
acting. And yet the report makes no mention of the
reasons that led to such votes. The report’s omission
of the reasons why the veto was exercised and the
circumstances in which it occurred represents a crucial
failure of transparency and accountability and a lack of
consideration for the international community, which
has conferred on the Security Council the delicate task
of maintaining international peace and security. We
believe that mechanisms should be formally adopted
to ensure that the General Assembly is informed
expeditiously when such situations arise, and that
when the Council is deadlocked, it is incumbent on the
Assembly to consider intervening to avoid a situation in
which the United Nations stands by as a passive witness
to conflicts leading to mass atrocities. We reiterate our
call to the permanent members of the Security Council
to refrain from using the veto, particularly in the case
of mass atrocities, and we call on the international
community to join the initiative of France and Mexico
aimed at enhancing the Council’s working methods,
which would improve our Organization’s effectiveness.
In this regard, we welcome the fact that Argentina
recently joined our initiative, bringing the number of
supporting States to 102, and we urge all States that
have not yet done so to do the same.
Sustainable peace was adopted as a new paradigm
of our Organization in Security Council resolution
2282 (2016) and General Assembly resolution 70/262.
Its major contribution lies in ensuring that the peace
and security pillar is linked to that of sustainable
development, thereby emphasizing the importance
of the issue of prevention. This link should be geared
towards building inclusive communities with a healthy
social fabric. Sustainable peace represents a major
aim of the work of the United Nations. It requires a
redesigned institutional architecture that is stronger
and at the same time more flexible and efficient, a goal
that we can promote in the context of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. Sustainable peace does
not guarantee development, but no development is
possible without it. Improving the articulation of our
efforts around sustainable peace will ensure that the
prevention of conflicts will become the priority of the
United Nations in practice. Achieving lasting peace
is the responsibility of us all, but to accomplish that
we must ensure that peace and security are fully in
harmony with sustainable development and with human
rights. All of that will require a more functional and
19-27740

12/09/2019

harmonious relationship between the Security Council
and the General Assembly.
Ms. Juul (Norway): Norway has consistently
promoted a more transparent, inclusive and accountable
Security Council, a Council that acts on behalf of the
larger United Nations membership to end conflicts and
tackle threats to peace and security.
The United Nations Charter provides a clear
obligation for the Security Council to submit to the
General Assembly an annual report for its consideration.
As a result, we welcome this opportunity to consider
the Council’s report (A/73/2). We maintain that the
report should be submitted to the Assembly in a timely
manner, as this will ensure that there is an opportunity
for its adequate review by the membership.
The Council has committed itself to the full
implementation of note 507 (S/2017/507), which states
that the Security Council will take the necessary action
to ensure the timely submission of the report to the
General Assembly in the spring of the calendar year.
Given that we are well into September, and with the
report circulated to the general membership only weeks
ago, it is clear that the commitments of the Council
have, unfortunately, not been honoured at this session.
Turning to the report itself, the annual report
paints a clear picture of a Security Council that is more
important than ever, meeting to face global challenges
both new and recurring. It also shows that a large
proportion of these meetings are open sessions, which
we welcome.
We welcome the efforts to add more analytical
introductions to the report in recent years. However, a
truly analytical look at the Council’s work would ideally
include an assessment of the Council’s work during
the previous calendar year, the impact of its work and
possible areas for further action. The report we have
before us today is still largely a listing of meeting dates
and letters received. While these tell an important
story about the Council’s work and considerations, this
information is also accessible on the Council’s website.
Where we do see a lot of value is in the section
“Monthly assessments by former Presidents of the
work of the Security Council in 2018”. These form a
useful complement to the information presented in the
introduction to the report. The assessments often give a
more in-depth look at the monthly work of the Council.
They include useful information and statistics, for

A/73/PV.106

example, on the number of civil-society briefers or
details of the missions undertaken by the Council during
that month. We would welcome a better integration of
these monthly reports into the annual report.
We must also note that, unfortunately, only five of
the twelve presidencies in 2018 completed such a report.
The transparency and accessibility of the work of
the Council is of the utmost priority to Norway. That
is why, together with Security Council Report, we will
launch today “The United Nations Security Council
Handbook: a user’s guide to Practice and Procedure”.
The handbook aims to provide clear, straightforward
guidance to the written rules and practice of the
Council, how it conducts its business, its subsidiary
bodies and its relationship with other organs of the
United Nations. We hope that this will be a useful tool
for Member States, incoming Council members, new
representatives, civil society and academics, and even
everyday people looking to get better insight into the
work of the Council. Moreover, this will further boost
the accessibility and understanding of the vital work
that the Security Council undertakes on our behalf.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
Looking ahead to next year’s consideration of the
annual report of the Council, as a Charter obligation
of the Council vis-à-vis the General Assembly, we
consider this process of review as a key element for
dialogue. We call on the Security Council, together
with the President of the General Assembly, to explore
ways of strengthening this important process, allowing
for a substantive interaction between the General
Assembly and the Security Council, and to allow the
wider membership to comment on the content of the
report, as well as on the Council’s implementation of
its mandate for the maintenance of international peace
and security.
Mrs. Zappia (Italy): We welcome this opportunity
to comment on the report of the Security Council to
the General Assembly for 2018 (A/73/2) and to reflect
on the sensitive issue of the relationship between the
Security Council and the General Assembly.
We believe that this interaction should be
strengthened, considering that the General Assembly
is the only United Nations body with universal
representation. As stated in Article 24 of the Charter of
the United Nations, the Security Council acts on behalf

19-2774015/29

A/73/PV.106

of Member States. It is essential, therefore, to have a
Council that is accountable to the wider membership.
The report is detailed and comprehensive. It lists all
the resolutions, presidential statements and meetings
of the Security Council and its subsidiary organs. It
does not say much, however, about the inaction of the
Security Council. It states in paragraph 2 that “Divisions
in the Council prevented it from taking effective
action on some key conflicts”, but it does not elaborate
further on the inability of the Council to deliver. The
report simply lists those cases — Syria and the Middle
East — in which veto power was applied but does not
say anything about other issues where the mere threat
of the veto prevented the Council from taking action.
During this year’s intergovernmental negotiations
on the reform of the Security Council, the nature of the
report was the subject of intensive discussions; it was, in
fact, one of the areas where a substantial understanding
was reached. In the co-Chair’s final document of the
negotiations, under the section “Commonalities”, it is
stated that it is important to
“Strengthen the cooperation and communication
between the Security Council and the General
Assembly, in particular through the submission by
the Security Council of annual reports of a more
analytical nature and of special reports to the
General Assembly”.
In this regard, we would like to stress that having
more analytical content in the Security Council’s
annual report would indeed allow for a more structured
discussion of the action, and especially on reasons for
the inaction, of the Security Council. Such inaction is
closely linked to the veto, regardless of whether it is
actually applied or simply threatened.
Therefore, we view with interest initiatives aimed
at restricting the use of the veto, such as the FrenchMexican initiative, the Code of Conduct put forward by
the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group
and the proposal by Liechtenstein to hold a debate in
the General Assembly every time a veto is cast in the
Security Council. All of these suggestions lead in the
direction of a more accountable Security Council.
The principle of accountability through elections
in the General Assembly and the rotation of members
of the Security Council should also be the guiding
principle for the long-awaited reform of the Security
Council in the direction of making it more democratic,
16/29

12/09/2019

transparent and efficient. That is what Italy and the
Uniting for Consensus group are advocating within the
intergovernmental negotiations, in the conviction that
only an enlargement of the category of elected members
of the Security Council would make the Council more
accountable and prevent the inaction that too often
results from veto power.
Ms. Agladze (Georgia): We highly value this
opportunity to discuss the report of the Security Council
and we welcome the 2018 report (A/73/2). It is a critical
exercise to ensure transparency and accountability in
the relationship between the Security Council and the
General Assembly. It is an important and necessary
practice that provides an opportunity for the general
membership to reflect upon the most pressing peace
and security issues addressed by the Council.
Given the gravity of the issues, when we speak of
humanitarian crises, active armed conflicts and even
mass atrocities timely reporting is of the essence. That
is why we regret that again this year, the report was
submitted with considerable delay and that practice
has already become a trend. We join others in calling
for respect of the timetable provided by presidential
note S/2017/507 and further encourage the Council to
report by 1 April of every subsequent year to ensure
substantial and timely consideration of the report no
later than in the month of June of the year.
Let me also express our appreciation to the United
Kingdom for compiling the introduction to the report.
Having the key facts provided on the work of the Security
Council presented in a coherent narrative is critical. At
the same time, we call on the Council to explore ways
to enrich the report with more analytical content so that
the report provides more depth and substance on the
key challenges facing the Council with regard to each
of the situations with which it is seized.
From my national perspective, let me acknowledge
that the Council was briefed on the situation in Georgia
following Russia’s full-scale military aggression against
Georgia in August 2008. Given the grave human rights
situation in the occupied area, which is an ongoing
militarization and occupation of the Abkhazia and
Tskhinvali regions of Georgia, we deem it important
that the Council continue its practice, and also provide
other opportunities, with a dedicated agenda item first
and foremost on the situation in Georgia and under
the format of open debates to discuss the situation of
protracted conflicts in more depth.
19-27740

12/09/2019

In conclusion, allow me to recall the detrimental
impact of the abuse of the veto right that Georgia itself
experienced a decade ago. Let me reiterate that the veto
right should be restricted when a permanent member is
involved in the conflict or situation under consideration,
in line with Article 27, paragraph 3, of the Charter of
the United Nations, which clearly stipulates that a party
to a dispute shall abstain from voting.
Mr. Castañeda Solares (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): We appreciate the convening of this meeting
on the consideration of the report of the Security
Council to the General Assembly, contained in
document A/73/2. We thank the delegation of the United
Kingdom for preparing the report and the delegation of
the Russian Federation for presenting it.
The consideration of the report contained in
document A/73/2 is of great importance, particularly
since it sets out the work carried out by the Security
Council in 2018, as well as providing an account of the
adoption of the various resolutions and the issuance of
press statements and presidential statements on items on
the global agenda concerning international peace and
security. In addition, we note the concise information
on thematic issues.
The Security Council has the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
In accordance with the Charter of the Organization, all
Members of the United Nations have the obligation to
comply with Security Council resolutions. Accordingly,
the presentation of the activities of the Security Council,
through the relevant report, represents a step towards
the transparency that we welcome, since it serves as a
mechanism for accountability to the membership of the
General Assembly.
Guatemala believes that it is important to continue
the trend for the Security Council to hold public meetings
more regularly. The inclusion of the entire membership
in matters that affect international peace and security
clearly contributes to an understanding of the gravity of
conflict situations. We therefore acknowledge the need
for closer cooperation between the Council and regional
and subregional organizations on crisis management in
armed conflicts by increasing, inter alia, the number
of consultations meetings among such organizations,
which play an active role in the resolution of crises and
the settlement of armed conflicts. It will undoubtedly
lead to greater effectiveness in the short, medium and
long term with regard to lasting solutions to crises.

A/73/PV.106

Without a timely and comprehensive approach,
conflicts can worsen and, as a State that is currently
a member of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
and its specific configurations, we believe that it is
vital to leverage the role of the PBC in supporting the
work of the Security Council. We also believe that it is
important to continue the very useful wrap-up sessions
and informal meetings at the end of each presidency
in order to broaden the perspective of the Council’s
work and, clearly, to contribute to the understanding
of its work.
Our delegation takes note of the efforts to improve the
content and presentation of the Security Council annual
report to the General Assembly. As a result, we believe
that the Security Council should continue to explore
in its Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions possible ways to improve
its scope and analysis. We therefore wish to emphasize
the importance of the Council fulfilling its obligation,
as set out in Article 24, paragraph 3, of the Charter of
the United Nations, with regard to submitting an annual
report to the General Assembly.
We of course recognize the value of the information
posted on the Security Council’s website but, at the
same time, we stress that it can in no way be a substitute
for the Council’s report. The timely submission of
reports is an obligation that meets the requirements
for the transparency and accountability of the Security
Council before the universal organ of the Organization.
In conclusion, as a troop-contributor to the
Organization, Guatemala acknowledges the importance
of the Security Council mandates. We therefore
believe that it is essential to foster even greater
interaction between the Security Council and troopand police-contributing countries. We believe that the
stronger information flows allow for a broader country
base participating in the important and very noble task
of maintaining international peace and security.
Mr. Carazo (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Convening this meeting makes it possible to fulfil two
mandates of the Charter of the United Nations: that the
Security Council shall submit to the General Assembly
its work report, pursuant to Article 24 of the Charter of
the United Nations; and that the Assembly shall consider
the report, as stipulated in Article 15. The Ambassador
of the Russian Federation presented the report (A/73/2),
just adopted by the Council and submitted by the United
Kingdom, which drafted the introduction to the report.

19-2774017/29

A/73/PV.106

We thank the President of the General Assembly, the
President of the Security Council and the author of the
first part of the report.
Costa Rica associates itself with the statement
made by the Permanent Representative of Switzerland
on behalf of the members of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency Group. We would like to
make some additional remarks in our national capacity.
The Security Council is accountable to the
General Assembly. It has the responsibility to provide
a comprehensive report to the General Assembly that
includes substantive information and an in-depth
analysis of the work of the Council. In that regard, I
refer to paragraph 138 of presidential note S/2017/507
on the Council’s working methods. It is only such
substantive and analytical information that can enable
the Assembly to make sound decisions about it, and
especially about the foundations that support world
peace and security on the basis of the Council’s work.
That substantive content is what the Member States
would like to consider in depth on the basis of the
Council’s report next year.
We are pleased that in his presentation of the
report on Tuesday (see A/73/PV.105), the President of
the Council offered to convey to his colleagues the
content and nature of our remarks in today’s debate
on the report, since we note that the statements made
when the 2017 report (A/72/2) was presented to the
Assembly (see A/72/PV.114) do not appear in the
report under consideration today. We believe that
accountability includes the obligation to consider what
is discussed in the Assembly, which is otherwise a
meaningless exercise.
An organization’s working methods are a
fundamental component of the processes that ensure
that it is efficient and transparent. We have been pleased
to see how the Security Council has made progress in
establishing and regulating processes and norms, as
reflected in presidential note 507 (S/2017/507). Greater
openness and accountability, and the inclusion of views
expressed by Member States, will all help consolidate
the efficiency and transparency of the Security Council
and as a result will imbue its resolutions and decisions
with the strength and respect that its noble purposes
strive for.
The premise established in Article 24 of the
Charter whereby Member States recognize that the
Security Council acts on their behalf must be applied
18/29

12/09/2019

reciprocally. The annual report of the Security Council
to the General Assembly reflects the principles of
transparency and accountability of representatives
to those they represent. It is crucial to maintain and
respect those principles in order to encourage a better
relationship between the two organs. The analysis of
the annual report of the Security Council is practically
the only opportunity that the General Assembly has to
consider and evaluate the Council’s work, as well as
the challenges and deficiencies the Council faces in
fulfilling the mandates it has established.
One of the objectives of this exercise should
therefore not only be reporting on what the Security
Council has addressed but also providing an opportunity
to hold the Council to account for situations in
which it has failed to fulfil its primary mandate, the
maintenance of international peace and security. Such
inaction has worsened the humanitarian situation of
millions, displaced entire populations and resulted in
the loss of thousands of innocent lives as a result of
attacks, most of them in clear violation of international
law and our Charter. It bears mentioning that this idea
is accepted starting in the second paragraph of the
introduction to the report that we are studying today,
quoted in its entirety by the President of the Council
in his presentation to this Assembly on Tuesday. The
text reads, “Divisions in the Council prevented it from
taking effective action on some key conflicts.” That
is a very serious statement, and the report does not
elaborate on it in any way. It is an opportunity that the
Assembly could use, in the analysis of such statements,
to delve deeper into the reasons for the divisions
among Council member States, which the report itself
acknowledges and which have so many serious and
regrettable consequences.
We agree with the thoughts that have been
expressed on the time frames for the presentation and
consideration of the report, as well as on the need to
restrict the indiscriminate and often unexplained use
of the veto. That is why we support Liechtenstein’s
initiative to establish an additional mechanism for
ensuring accountability.
We urge the members of the Security Council to
preserve and respect the procedures established to
improve its transparency and accountability, such as
the use of defined consultation processes, including
requesting the membership’s views on certain aspects
of the report to be submitted, as indicated in paragraph
129 of note 507. A closer relationship between the
19-27740

12/09/2019

General Assembly and the Security Council can
contribute to a more efficient Council that responds
not just to the priorities of the membership at large but
above all to the needs of humankind, which is beset
by conflicts that the Organization, in general, and the
Security Council, in particular, are called on to prevent
and attend to. Those conflicts, as accepted without
further explanation in the report, are due to what it calls
divisions in the Council.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Let me start by saying
that Pakistan supports efforts aimed at improving the
analytical and qualitative value of the Council’s annual
report (A/73/2). The information in the report is a useful
quick-reference compendium and overview of the
Council’s work during the reporting period. However,
as we have consistently underscored, more must be
done for the report to become not merely a repository
of dry facts, but instead an illuminating entry point for
undertaking a critical review of the work of the Security
Council. After all, since the Council acts on the behalf of
the entire membership as the primary organ responsible
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
the General Assembly must assess whether the Council
has been effective in that task. Has it reflected the
views and interests of the entire membership? Has it
acted in accordance with the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations?
We also join others in reaffirming that the reports
of the Council should be submitted to the General
Assembly in a timely manner in order to facilitate real,
substantive discussion. After all, this is not only an
imperative of necessity, in the spirit of paragraph 3 of
Article 24 of the Charter. The Council has also pledged,
through several presidential notes, to present annual
reports to the General Assembly during the spring
session following each reporting year. We hope those
issues will be duly addressed when subsequent reports
of the Council to the General Assembly are compiled.
In recent years the Council has been most
effective in dealing with internal crises and conflicts,
particularly in Africa. Peacekeeping has emerged as
a flagship United Nations enterprise in halting and
addressing several conflicts across the globe. As one
of the world’s leading troop-contributing countries,
Pakistan takes great pride in its role and its contribution
to those efforts. Even today, more than 5,000 Pakistani
soldiers continue to serve as flag bearers of hope and
a progressive future for millions afflicted by conflict
around the world.

A/73/PV.106

But we must also acknowledge in all candour that
the Council has been considerably less effective in
resolving threats to and breaches of international peace
and security, which is its primary mandate, after all.
Unfortunately, we have witnessed double standards in
the work of the Council all too often, with prolonged
inaction and silence in some cases and a quick resort to
threats or authorizations of sanctions and enforcement
action in others. The provisions for the peaceful
settlement of disputes remain grossly underutilized,
while there is a dangerous tendency to have recourse
much too often and too hastily to measures under
Chapter VII of the Charter. The implementation of some
resolutions is actively pursued while others are ignored.
In our region, the festering Jammu and Kashmir
dispute represents not only a reprehensible facet of
brutal and repressive occupation, but also a constant
reminder of the Security Council’s solemn commitment,
through its several resolutions — at least 11 — made
to the people of Jammu and Kashmir, promising them
the right to self-determination. Faced with India’s
illegal annexation on 5 August of occupied Jammu and
Kashmir, the grim reality of occupation has become
ever more stark for the Kashmiri people. Now in its
second month, the darkness that has been imposed on
the occupied territory shows no sign of abating.
As elsewhere, when the Council fails to implement
its own resolutions, the price for that failure is paid in
blood by generations of innocent people. In the case of
Kashmir, the bloodletting has lasted more than 70 years
and has taken the lives of more than 95,000 Kashmiris,
including countless women and children. This travesty
must end. The Security Council must act by demanding
that India lift the curfew, end the communication
blackout and allow the people to freely exercise all
their rights, including their right to peaceful assembly.
Those detained, all political prisoners, must be released.
Human rights violations must be halted, and so must the
use of force against unarmed demonstrators, including
the use of pellet guns and live ammunition. All of
that must end. After all, unilateral actions and gross
violations of Council resolutions not only threaten the
very foundations of the rule-based international order,
they also erode the credibility and legitimacy of the
Council itself.
However much the virtues of impartiality and
consistency can shore up the Security Council’s
standing from within, it goes without saying that the
imperative of creating legitimacy and credibility cannot

19-2774019/29

A/73/PV.106

be achieved without comprehensive reform of the
Council. Pakistan seeks a Council that is democratic
in composition, effective in decision-making and
accountable to the general membership; a Council
where power and privilege are not the preserve of a
few but rather represent the interests of all Member
States, small, medium and large; a Council that is in
sync with the contemporary world and not wedded to
outdated political notions and realities. Our experience
of the intergovernmental negotiations has shown that
divisive tactics and piecemeal approaches only prolong
impasses and vitiate the atmosphere for negotiations. We
must avoid those pitfalls in order to make meaningful
progress. The reform process cannot be held hostage
to individual national pursuits of permanent seats. We
look forward to engaging with the wider membership in
the coming months, with a clear sense of purpose and
in a spirit of flexibility based on the agreed parameters
outlined in decision 62/557.
Ms. Prince (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
Our delegation would like to express its gratitude to the
Security Council and the Secretariat for the preparation
of the annual report for the period 1 January to
31 December 2018, contained in document A/73/2.
The submission of the annual report speaks to
the Security Council’s important duty to the General
Assembly enshrined in paragraph 3 of Article 24 of the
Charter of the United Nations. The Security Council
is the primary organ charged with the maintenance
of international peace and security, and its work is
of critical importance to all Member States. The
annual report chronicling its activities must therefore
be comprehensive, accessible and transparent. The
General Assembly’s consideration and debate of the
annual report is equally important. This debate is not a
mere formality. It fosters enhanced interaction between
the Council and the Assembly, and we must support that
mutually reinforcing relationship. It is also essential
to ensure that the Council remains accountable to
Member States and that they have an opportunity to
constructively express their views and expectations of
the work of the Council. After all, the Council carries
out its mandate on behalf of all Member States.
That said, it is unfortunate that this year’s report
was not submitted in a timely fashion, having been made
available to Member States only on 22 August. The late
submission is worrying, and Member States have not
ceased to express their dissatisfaction with it. When
Member States are not given an appropriate period in
20/29

12/09/2019

which to prepare and to consider what is a very extensive
report, we are left at a disadvantage, as we cannot then
effectively debate its contents. That runs counter to the
purpose for which we are gathered here. Our delegation
therefore encourages the Security Council to observe
the guidelines in presidential note 507 (S/2017/507),
and specifically with regard to paragraph 132, which
provides that the annual report should be adopted by
the Council in time for consideration by the General
Assembly in the spring of that calendar year.
Turning to the substance of the report, our
delegation commends the Security Council for the
excellent overview of its activities for the reporting
period. However, we echo the call that has been made
time and again for the report to have a stronger focus on
analysis. The General Assembly would be greatly aided
in its assessment of the Council’s work if additional
insights were provided. Our delegation eagerly looks
forward to our forthcoming tenure on the Council,
starting on 1 January 2020. We remain mindful that the
General Assembly has placed its trust in us by electing
us. We are committed to the continued improvement of
the Security Council’s annual report to ensure that it is
an instrument that is not only transparent but one that
can lead to a more accountable and effective Council.
Mr. Seifi Pargou (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
thank the President for convening this meeting. I also
thank the Russian presidency of the Security Council
for presenting the Council’s annual report (A/73/2).
Despite improvements to the Council’s recent
reports, which have become more informative and
useful, we are still a long way from fulfilling the raison
d’être of the Security Council’s annual report and its
consideration by the General Assembly. Paragraph
1 of Article 15 and paragraph 3 of Article 24 of the
Charter of the United Nations clearly state not only that
the Council shall submit an annual report but also that
the Assembly shall receive and consider it. What is the
rationale and the logic behind such a strong obligation?
One of the main reasons for such strong language is
definitely the principle of accountability. The Council’s
power and authority are not intrinsic. They come
from the Organization’s Members, who, as stated in
paragraph 1 of Article 24 of the Charter,
“confer on the Security Council primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, and agree that … it acts on
their behalf.”
19-27740

12/09/2019

It is therefore fully expected that the Council must
be accountable to the Assembly, in which all States
Members are represented and from which the Council
derives its power. The Assembly must therefore assess
the Council’s performance, evaluate the effectiveness
of its actions, identify situations where it has failed to
act and ultimately make recommendations to it with
respect to any questions relating to the maintenance
of international peace and security, as provided for in
paragraph 2 of Article 11 of the Charter.
In reviewing the Council’s 2018 report, I would
like to touch on its performance with respect to our
region, the Middle East. The occupation of Palestine,
the longest-standing crisis in the history of the United
Nations and the main source of conflict in the region,
remains unresolved. The brutalities of the Israeli regime
continue, and the Council continues to fail to fulfil
its responsibilities in that regard. A living example
of such failure can be seen in the Council’s silence
regarding the transfer of the United States embassy to
Al-Quds Al-Sharif, as well as the recognition by the
United States of the annexation of the occupied Syrian
Golan to Israel, both of which are flagrant violations of
peremptory norms of international law, not to mention
the Council’s own resolutions.
In Yemen in 2018, the Council did not take the
measures necessary to prevent the aggressors from
killing more civilians, committing more crimes,
including using starvation as a tactic of war, and
bringing the country to the verge of disintegration. In
another case, the United States, a permanent member
of the Council, withdrew from the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action, which had been endorsed by the Council
in its unanimous adoption of resolution 2231 (2015).
That was a gross violation of both the Charter and the
resolution. Moreover, the United States continues to
force other countries either to violate that resolution or
face punishment. A permanent member of the Council
intimidating Member States and compelling them
to violate the Council’s resolutions is unprecedented
and seriously alarming. At a time when the Security
Council is dealing with a growing trust deficit and
the rule of law at the international level badly needs
shoring up, such irresponsible policies are disastrous
for the rule-based international order.
Another issue that the Assembly should consider is
finding ways and means of putting an end to abuse of
the Council by some of its permanent members, who,
by misusing their power and in order to further their

A/73/PV.106

own narrow national interests, force the Council to
consider issues that do not fall under its purview. That
includes the consideration of issues related to States’
internal affairs, interference in which is explicitly
prohibited by the Charter. One clear example of the
Council’s exploitation by the United States in 2018
was its consideration of a matter that was internal
to my country. And it is the case with regard to the
consideration of issues that do not pose a threat to
international peace and security. Likewise, the Council
is resorting increasingly, excessively and hastily to its
Chapter VII functions. Chapter VII should be invoked
as intended, as a measure of last resort and only if
necessary. Some of the longest-standing demands of
the majority of the Organization’s Members are that
the Council should cease its consideration of such
issues and exhibit maximum restraint in resorting to
Chapter VII functions. The Council should listen to
those demands.
While there is therefore a need to further improve
the Council’s report, particularly by including more
substantive and analytical information on the issues
under its consideration, the Assembly must also
improve its consideration of the Council’s annual
reports, particularly by appraising its performance
and making recommendations to the Council where
needed. These are essential to avoid further erosion of
the Council’s already tarnished credibility. That is our
common responsibility, and we should take it seriously.
Ms. Ioannou (Cyprus): I would like to thank the
President of the Security Council for the month of
September for his presentation of the Council’s annual
report for 2018 (A/73/2).
We consider the General Assembly’s meaningful
discussion of this report to be essential, given that
the Council discharges its responsibilities on behalf
of all of us, and that the success of the international
political and legal order established by the United
Nations depends on the principal organs fulfilling
their distinct but complementary roles. The objective
of such a discussion is not to stoke antagonism between
the General Assembly and the Council or to suggest
a hierarchy between them. A substantive exchange
serves as a mechanism for self-preservation through
introspection and self-assessment. It is simply not in our
collective best interests if any part of our system is not
subject to rigorous scrutiny. Every mandated structure
must be accountable, particularly if its mission is one
that the entire international community has a stake in.

19-2774021/29

A/73/PV.106

We need to be able to assess whether the Council is
fulfilling its responsibilities, and we should do the same
for all other principal organs, including the General
Assembly. It is clear to us that if there is malaise in
one part of the system, that can only imply a broader
condition that reflects poorly on the entire system. The
large number of conflicts in the world today shows
that the Council’s performance is suboptimal, despite
the unquestionable fact that the situation would be
much worse if the Council did not exist. At the same
time, the Charter does not prevent the Assembly
from discussing matters of international peace and
security, while organizational practice has even
included the Assembly’s adoption of recommendations
on such matters. Where the Council is too divided to
take action, the General Assembly has more power to
act than it is currently using, and we need to consider
our own role and responsibility in enabling the United
Nations as a whole to deliver on its core, overarching
mandate, and in compelling the Council to act based on
principles rather than power.
The key to delivering as an organization may lie
in achieving the right synergies between the General
Assembly and the Security Council. Without affecting
the clear delimitation between the two bodies’ respective
competencies, their complementarity, combined with
the individual effectiveness of each, can keep the United
Nations credible and relevant. But their interaction
is insufficient. An annual report cannot serve as a
platform for proper institutional dialogue. The Charter
of the United Nations, for example, provides for special
reports to be submitted, something that has never
happened. Beyond the Charter, there are a number of
informal ways to connect the wider membership to the
work of the Council on a regular basis. The presidency
of the Council could provide a weekly briefing on its
work for delegations. End-of-presidency meetings could
also be conducted in more depth. While we appreciate
that a significant part of Council negotiations must take
place in a closed setting, that need not be at the expense
of transparency.
Like others, we believe that a more meaningful
exchange on the report before us would be possible if it
were to be submitted and discussed earlier in the year.
Moreover, while the report’s overview of the Council’s
work is very useful, we believe the membership would
benefit from more substantive and analytical content.
We would like to see, among other elements, an
overview of the actual work done by the Council and of
22/29

12/09/2019

the situation on the ground for each item on the agenda,
including in each case an assessment of the levels of the
threat and of the implementation of Council mandates
and general compliance with Council resolutions, as
well as what the wider membership can do regarding
every unresolved conflict.
Small States that are not members of the Council
and that have a long-standing ongoing conflict that
is on the Council’s agenda, like Cyprus, absolutely
rely on its effectiveness. We cannot overstate the
importance of having a Council that is not distracted
from focusing purely on threats to peace and on the use
of force and conflict resolution. The Council should be
resolute in recognizing, condemning and addressing
the unauthorized use of force. While a comprehensive
notion of security involves a multitude of root causes
and complicating factors, there are other bodies in the
United Nations system whose job is to mitigate those
factors, and we must ensure that they can effectively
discharge their own responsibilities. We also cannot
overstate the importance of ensuring that the Council
upholds the primacy of international law when making
decisions. It must consistently apply the same set of rules
that we have collectively formulated and mainstreamed
in international relations. When resolving conflict,
justice cannot be sacrificed for the sake of peace, or
peace will not be sustainable. On an individual level,
the only form of redemption for victims of conflict
is the prospect of justice. We must use the judicial
institutions that we have created to fight impunity,
including through referrals by the Security Council.
In the light of the ever-increasing violence against
civilians in armed conflict, and of the changing nature
of conflict with the significant rise in non-State actors
as belligerents, we require more targeted action on
the part of the Council to ensure compliance with
international humanitarian law and accountability for
perpetrators. In that regard I would like to make special
mention of the Council’s adoption of resolution 2474
(2019), on missing persons, initiated by Kuwait, which
we wholeheartedly welcome and support.
If the Assembly will allow me a couple of last
remarks, I want to devote one to peacekeeping, which
has proved to be the most potent tool at the Council’s
disposal. In deploying, managing, and withdrawing
peacekeeping operations, the Council must make
decisions solely on the basis of criteria pertaining
to peace and security, based on expertise and true
knowledge of the situation on the ground. While
19-27740

12/09/2019

the $6.7 billion annual budget for United Nations
peacekeeping operations is admittedly high, it is much
less costly than the alternative would be.
My penultimate point concerns synergies in
the maintenance of international peace and security
between the United Nations and regional organizations
with corresponding capabilities and local knowledge
of the situation on the ground. While there can be no
doubt that such cooperation helps the Council deal with
conflicts more effectively, it must be done within the
rules-based framework of the United Nations and on
the condition that the Council does not relinquish its
primary competence in such cases.
Lastly, I would be remiss if I did not stress the need
for greater access to the Council’s work for Member
States that are on or directly affected by its agenda.
Ms. De Schot (New Zealand): In the past few
years, the list of speakers for this annual debate has
been almost unbelievably short. New Zealand is
pleased to join other delegations that have decided that
the work of the Security Council is too important for
the General Assembly to remain silent. In that regard,
New Zealand aligns itself with the statement made by
Switzerland on behalf of the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group (see A/73/PV.105).
The Security Council’s annual report (A/73/2) is
a lengthy document, and New Zealand acknowledges
the work of those who produced it. Having held that
responsibility only a few years ago, we know it is not
an easy task. We are grateful to the President of the
General Assembly for delaying this debate in order to
allow Member States to fully consider the report. It is
regrettable, however, that delays in the finalization of
the report meant that it was once again submitted only at
the end of the current session of the General Assembly.
New Zealand joins other speakers in requesting
that the President of the General Assembly continue
to ensure that delegations are given adequate time
to consider reports in future. We also encourage
members of the Security Council, both permanent and
non-permanent, to fulfil the commitment outlined in
presidential note 507 (S/2017/507) to submitting the
annual report to the General Assembly in a timely
manner. The report should not be a box-ticking
exercise. It should offer the opportunity to reflect on
global challenges and threats to international peace and
security and should give a sense of the progress and
performance of the Security Council.

A/73/PV.106

On the substance of the report, we are pleased
to observe that the Council’s work in 2018 produced
several examples of positive contributions to
international peace and security. In Liberia, Colombia
and Iraq, among other countries, the Council supported
growing stability. They are important examples of the
critical role the Council can and does play when it is
able to act with a clear voice and purpose. The report
also lays bare that in 2018, the Council was defined
by its divisions and by what it did not do. Differences
of opinion are to be expected and even welcomed as a
means to identify the most appropriate response to any
situation. But the threat and use of the veto mean that
differences of opinion between permanent members of
the Council rapidly calcify into inaction.
The Security Council has an unenviable task. Its
deliberations and decisions matter profoundly. Whether
it acts or not, and how it acts, affects the lives of millions.
While the preservation of international peace and
security falls primarily to the Council, the Council does
not and should not act entirely in isolation. The report
of the Security Council is an important step in ensuring
the Council’s transparency and accountability.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): My country, Ireland,
welcomes the holding of today’s debate. It is an
important one for us for a number of reasons. First,
the debate is clearly part of the Security Council’s
obligation, as set forth in the Charter of the United
Nations, to submit an annual report to the General
Assembly (A/73/2). Secondly, as we see it, members
of the Security Council, elected or permanent, act on
behalf of the general membership. Debates such as
these are critical for us in the general membership in
assessing the work of the Council and the work that
the Council does on our behalf. It is also a means of
holding the Council accountable for its actions and
indeed, frankly, for the occasions where it fails to act.
Finally, we see this debate as allowing the membership
to give its views on a lengthy and important report that
is intended to cover the entire work of the Council and
its important subsidiary bodies over a 12-month period.
So while we welcome the additional time provided
for today’s debate, we nevertheless regret the Council’s
failure to submit its report in the spring, as required.
Abiding by the agreed schedule would both allow for
a more timely assessment of the Council’s work and
also for the general membership’s more substantive
engagement on the issues that arise from it. This is an
example of why Ireland strongly supports efforts to

19-2774023/29

A/73/PV.106

improve the working methods of the Council. While
not an end in themselves, improved working methods
increase the Council’s accountability, transparency
and coherence. I would add that being seen to act in
accordance with procedures and on behalf of the broad
membership actually enhances the Council’s own
legitimacy and authority.
Again, while the report is welcome, it does not offer
the kind of self-critical analysis that would provide a
basis for improving the way the Council operates. We
feel that the introductory narrative section should be
expanded and should endeavour to assess the Council’s
effectiveness in carrying out its tasks, both in terms
of how it functions and, more importantly, how it
addresses the core task of maintaining international
peace and security. We recognize that the requirement
for unanimity among the Council members may make
a frank assessment difficult. But, truthfully, innovation
is possible. For example, we think that the report
could specifically cite the views of departing elected
Council members without the need for unanimity on
their contributions.
We note that the number of vetoed and non-consensus
draft resolutions has been rising in the Council for years.
In 2018, three draft resolutions were vetoed, while four
submitted drafts were not adopted due to insufficient
votes. Overall, fewer resolutions were adopted than in
2017. There were also more procedural votes than in the
past. In some of these cases, one permanent member
used its veto to block action by the Council. In our
view that is unacceptable. Ireland wants to see an end
to the use of the veto, particularly in cases of actual or
potential mass atrocity crimes.
While there are serious divisions in the Council,
progress can nevertheless occur even on the most
difficult issues. For example, we commend the efforts
of Kuwait and Sweden, both of them elected members,
which were instrumental in ensuring that the Council
adopted resolution 2449 (2018), renewing the crossborder delivery of humanitarian aid in Syria, and
resolution 2401 (2018), demanding a month-long
humanitarian pause for the delivery of aid following
an escalation of the conflict in February of that year.
We also welcome the Council’s increased focus on key
thematic issues. In that regard, we emphasize women
and peace and security, the protection of civilians,
conflict prevention and sustaining peace, and drivers
of conflicts such as hunger, climatic issues and scarce
natural resources. However, as we see it, despite good
24/29

12/09/2019

work, particularly on the part of elected members,
mainstreaming and giving attention to these important
thematic priorities across individual country situations
in the Council remains at best a work in progress.
As a country seeking election to the Security
Council, Ireland will vow to make these issues a priority
during its tenure if we are lucky enough to be elected.
We will also make efforts to ensure that the Council
is held accountable to the wider membership and, of
course, as an elected member, to work as effectively
as possible to ensure that maintaining international
peace and security is actually at the heart of the
Council’s business.
Mrs. Kaeval (Estonia): The principles of
accountability, coherence and transparency are key in
governing the Estonian State. That is also why Estonia
joined the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
(ACT) group, in order to work to improve the working
methods of the Security Council so as to reflect those
principles. As a body representing all the members of
the United Nations, the Security Council should adhere
to them.
Today we are discussing the annual report of
the Security Council (A/73/2), which the Council is
obliged to present to the General Assembly pursuant to
paragraph 3 of Article 24 of the Charter of the United
Nations. Its annual report is a key accountability
mechanism established by the Charter in order to
govern the relationship between these two main organs
of the United Nations. We fully subscribe to the call
of the ACT group regarding improving the interaction
between the Security Council and the General
Assembly and ensuring that the Council brings greater
transparency and accountability to the wider United
Nations membership where its work is concerned.
It is unfortunate that the report before us today
has been given to the General Assembly so late in
the session, and we want to remind the Assembly
that through several presidential notes, including
the most recent note 507 (S/2017/507), adopted two
years ago today, the Security Council has committed
to presenting the annual report during the spring of
the session following the reporting year. Discussions
such as today’s and those earlier this week (see A/73/
PV.105) clearly indicate the wish of the wider United
Nations membership to engage in serious discussion
of the report. As an incoming member of the Security
19-27740

12/09/2019

Council, we will be able to engage in that process and
to contribute to the principles I have mentioned.
Ms. Eneström (Sweden): I thank the President of
the General Assembly for organizing today’s meeting,
which constitutes one of the few and therefore highly
important opportunities that the wider membership has
to discuss the work of the Security Council.
As a member of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency (ACT) group, Sweden aligns itself with
the statement delivered by Switzerland on behalf of the
ACT group on Tuesday (see A/73/PV.105), but I would
like to add a few remarks in my national capacity.
Sweden served on the Security Council in 2017
and 2018. When we started our term by assuming
the presidency of the Council in January 2017, we
encouraged our fellow Council members to rise above
national interests and shoulder their responsibilities
under the Charter. We insisted that despite differences
between its members the Council should always seek
meaningful outcomes. The fruits of the Council’s
labour are described in the annual report before us
today (A/73/2). In a difficult international climate
with an ever-growing number of complex challenges,
there were ups and downs during the two years in
which we served. For our part, we were pleased to be
able to contribute to an increased Council engagement
in Yemen. We co-led Council efforts to respond to the
humanitarian situation in Syria. We worked diligently
to enhance the participation of women and children
and consideration of their perspectives. We sought to
advance the Council’s engagement on broader concepts
of security such as climate change and security. We
also attempted to open the Council’s work to those
affected — women, young people and civil society. We
talked not just about countries on the agenda but with
them, and we attempted to involve larger parts of the
wider membership in the work of the Council.
But while I am proud to report on Sweden’s
contributions to some of the Council’s relative
successes during our term, we must also recognize the
shortcomings and sometimes even abject failures of
the Council in upholding its mandate. Its inability to
respond adequately to the use of chemical weapons in
Syria may have been one of its most serious failures in
2017 and 2018. The failure to retain the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United
Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism or to establish
another mechanism in its place not only denied justice

A/73/PV.106

to the victims of those heinous crimes, it undermined
the global non-proliferation regime and the Security
Council’s role in its defence. Another example was
the Council’s failure to prevent the persecution of the
Rohingya in Myanmar and to demand accountability
after the fact.
While there are different reasons for the Council’s
shortcomings, the main source of its inability to act is
the veto, whether through its use or threat of use. During
Sweden’s term, the veto prevented Council action on
nine occasions. It was used a number of times on Syria,
twice on the situation in the Middle East and once to
prevent Council action on Yemen. In addition, action
on Myanmar was prevented due to the risk of the veto
being used. What is striking is that on virtually all of
those occasions, there was a clear majority of Council
members in favour of action, but with one or two
permanent members standing in the way. The misuse
of the veto undermines the Council’s legitimacy. We
must ensure that the political cost of misusing the veto
increases. The General Assembly is not tasked with
bearing the responsibility for international peace and
security, but what it can do is to raise the threshold
for the use of the veto by exercising some sort of veto
accountability. Efforts to that end are being discussed,
as we heard during the debate today, and Sweden stands
firmly behind them.
Fundamentally, if we are to achieve a more
responsive, effective, and transparent Council, in step
with our times, we must make progress on Security
Council reform. But efforts to achieve comprehensive
reform must be combined with continued improvements
of the Council in its current incarnation. Our experience
tells us that elected members have an important role to
play. A number of steps have been taken to improve the
10 non-permanent members’ ability to fulfil the mandate
they have been given by the Assembly. Continuity is
key. Earlier elections, extended observation periods
and a more organized transition between former,
current and potential members have paved the way for
better-prepared members who can collaborate more
effectively with one another and with the permanent
members. While permanent members must be held
to their Charter obligations and should refrain from
abusing their veto power for the sake of narrow national
interests, elected members should make the most of the
opportunities available to them by being constructive,
innovative and courageous. By raising the cost of the
use of the veto by the permanent five, we can level

19-2774025/29

A/73/PV.106

the playing field and ensure that the Council becomes
better at fulfilling its mandate.
Let me end by responding to the comments made
by colleagues regarding the submission of monthly
assessments. I want to assure them and the Assembly
that this is a responsibility that Sweden took seriously
during its term. The assessment of our January 2017
presidency has been duly submitted, and the report on
our presidency in 2018 will be available imminently.
Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would like
to thank the President for convening today’s plenary
meeting to consider the annual report of the Security
Council, as contained in document A/73/2.
General Assembly deliberations on the annual
reports of the Security Council, as required by Article
24 of the Charter of the United Nations, are important
avenues for Member States to share their views on
the work of the Council and to emphasize the areas of
concern that require special attention and dedication.
Taking into account the fact that the Security Council,
in discharging its functions, acts on behalf of all
Member States, the broader United Nations membership
should be given more opportunities to be heard. We
take positive note of some developments in that respect
and look forward to additional efforts to enhance the
transparency and accountability of the Council and its
interaction with the wider membership.
The current challenges to peace and security that the
world is facing call for strengthening the international
legal order and redoubled efforts at all levels. Strict
compliance with the generally accepted norms and
principles of international law guiding relations among
States is crucial to that end. The Security Council’s
effectiveness and accountable functioning require the
implementation of its decisions first and foremost.
Article 25 of the Charter is clear about Member States’
obligations in that regard. The fact that the unlawful
use of force against sovereign States and the resulting
territorial acquisitions continue, despite Security
Council resolutions to the contrary, does not mean
that such a state of affairs can constitute an accepted
practice for the Council.
As is well known, through its unanimous adoption
of resolutions 822 (1993), 853 (1993), 874 (1993) and
884 (1993), the Security Council condemned the
use of force against my country, Azerbaijan, along
with the occupation of its territories, attacks on its
civilians and the bombardment of its inhabited areas.
26/29

12/09/2019

It reaffirmed respect for Azerbaijan’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity, the inviolability of international
borders and the inadmissibility of the use of force
for the acquisition of territory. In those resolutions,
in response to territorial claims and forcible actions,
the Security Council confirmed that the Nagorno
Karabakh region is an integral part of the Republic of
Azerbaijan and demanded the immediate, complete and
unconditional withdrawal of the occupying forces from
all the occupied territories.
It was attacks by Armenia’s armed forces on
Azerbaijan and their occupation of its territories that
elicited four Council resolutions and seven presidential
statements. The resolutions provided authoritative
clarification as to the acts committed, the obligations
violated and the obligations to put an end to the illegal
situation thereby created. They characterized Armenia’s
actions as the unlawful use of force and invalidated its
claims to the territories of Azerbaijan once and for all.
The numerous decisions and documents adopted by
other international organizations are framed along the
same lines.
As a result, in its declaration made in connection
with the capture and occupation of the territories
of Azerbaijan, the Minsk group of the Conference
on Security and Cooperation in Europe, which was
mandated to promote a resolution of the conflict and
facilitate negotiations to that end, stated in particular
that
“[n]o acquisition of territory by force can
be recognized, and the occupation of territory
cannot be used to obtain international recognition
or to impose a change of legal status” (S/26718,
enclosure I).
However, the key Security Council demands
have still not been implemented, and the immediate
corollary is that this unresolved conflict and its
military and humanitarian consequences continue to
endanger peace, security and development. Against
that background, we have seen Armenia attempt to
downplay the relevance of the Security Council’s
resolutions and misinterpret their purpose and content.
Armenia has also persistently obstructed the conflict
settlement process and regularly resorts to various
provocations aimed at escalating the situation on the
ground and consolidating the status quo, as some recent
notorious examples make abundantly clear.
19-27740

12/09/2019

Last month, at the highest political level, Armenia
declared the Nagorno Karabakh region, which is my
country’s sovereign territory, to be part of Armenia,
thereby disclosing its plans to annex the occupied areas
of Azerbaijan, in blatant violation of international law
and the Security Council’s resolutions on the subject.
That statement was preceded by other provocative
pronouncements by various senior members of the
Armenian Government, asserting, for instance, that not
an inch of land would be returned to Azerbaijan, and
threatening a new war for new territories. Furthermore,
despite earlier warnings and condemnation on the part of
the international community, and against a background
of ongoing efforts to achieve a political settlement of
the conflict, deliberate actions are being carried out
in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan with a view
to securing their colonization and annexation. Among
other things, those actions include the implantation of
settlers, the destruction or appropriation of historical
and cultural heritage, and the exploitation, pillage and
illicit trafficking of assets, natural resources and other
wealth in the occupied territories.
Armenia’s attempts to introduce internationally
recognized territories of Azerbaijan — the Nagorno
Karabakh region and other occupied areas — under
various fake names, as well as to promote and advertise
the unlawful puppet regime that it has established
in those territories, are equally null and void. The
illegality of that regime has been repeatedly stated at
the international level. It is under Yerevan’s direction
and control and is ultimately nothing but a product of
aggression, racial discrimination and ethnic cleansing.
All of this confirms the urgent need for action
by the United Nations and the wider international
community. We have consistently brought the
challenges resulting from the continued aggression
against my country to the Security Council’s attention.
The communications submitted by Azerbaijan and
circulated as documents of the Security Council and
General Assembly during the reporting period are
referred to in Chapter 4 of Part V of the report of the
Security Council under consideration. It is pertinent to
recall in that regard that serious breaches of obligations
under peremptory norms of general international law
give rise to additional consequences. They include the
duty of States to cooperate in order to end such breaches
by lawful means and to refrain from recognizing
as lawful a situation created by a serious breach and
from rendering aid or assistance in maintaining that

A/73/PV.106

situation. It is therefore critical that the international
community insist on the implementation of Security
Council resolutions 822 (1993), 853 (1993), 874 (1993)
and 884 (1993) and Armenia’s strict compliance with its
international obligations.
The primary objective of the ongoing peace process,
whose mandate is based on those Security Council
resolutions, is to ensure the immediate, complete and
unconditional withdrawal of the occupying forces
from all the occupied territories of Azerbaijan, the
restoration of Azerbaijan’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity within its internationally recognized borders
and the return of forcibly displaced persons to their
homes and properties. The achievement of that objective
is a must, not a compromise, and it is also inevitable
and urgent, because the unlawful use of force and the
resulting military occupation and ethnic cleansing of
the territories of Azerbaijan do not represent a solution
and will never bring about peace, reconciliation
and stability.
Mr. Bayyapu (India): We welcome the opportunity
to participate in the debate on the annual report of the
Security Council (A/73/2), and we thank the members of
the Security Council and the Secretariat for producing
the report.
India congratulates Estonia, the Niger, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Tunisia and Vietnam for
their election to the Security Council for the period
from 2020 to 2021. We look forward to working with
them constructively and positively.
We note that the report under consideration
continues to be a statistical compilation of events and
a bland summary and listing of meetings and outcome
documents. The membership of the General Assembly
has repeatedly asked the Security Council to ensure that
the annual report is more analytical and incisive rather
than a mere narration of Council meetings. The debate
on the annual report has become a ritual and a formality
in a long list of formalities. We need to reinvigorate
this interaction between the most representative organ
of the United Nations and its most empowered brethren.
The Charter of the United Nations itself bestows a
profound seriousness on the report, as is evident from
the existence of a separate provision mandating such
a report rather than its inclusion in the provision for
reports from other United Nations bodies. That means
that the annual report of the Security Council should
inform, highlight and analyse the measures that it has

19-2774027/29

A/73/PV.106

decided on or taken to maintain international peace and
security during the reporting period.
Many believed that streamlining the reporting
period to the calendar year would result in its early
submission, but the situation has remained the same.
A report that is lacking in substance and submitted
very late — almost in the last quarter of the following
year — does not generate the attention needed for
a proper discussion. That must be rectified. There
should be definite timelines for completing the
report, circulating it to the wider General Assembly
membership and holding the debate earlier, not near the
close of the session.
The 2018 report reflects the fact that only half of
the monthly assessments of the work of the Security
Council were published, and the statistics for this year
are not looking good. Not one monthly assessment has
been published so far. We know from the available
information that monthly assessments were issued for
all the months from 2000 to 2013. The number has
started to decline since 2014.
The annual report is also short of analysis of United
Nations peacekeeping operations, the flagship tool for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
There is little information on how peacekeeping
operations are run and the problems they face, why
certain mandates are set or changed and when and why
they are strengthened, scaled down or ended. Since
most peacekeepers are contributed by States that are
not Council members, putting the lives of their troops
at risk to serve the cause of international peace, we
need a better partnership between the Security Council
and the troop-contributing countries.
Most of us who have voiced our opinions here
today will be dissatisfied with the Council’s work
and its report, but under the terms of Article 12 of the
Charter, the General Assembly can neither replicate
its discussions nor compensate for its shortcomings.
Many of the flaws in the functioning of the Council
are structural. Its composition is demonstrably out of
touch with realities on the ground. It neither reflects
nor represents the aspirations and views of the larger
membership. Like most others, we remain convinced
that the only remedy is comprehensive reform of
the Security Council, involving the expansion of
its permanent and non-permanent categories. Since
performance assessment has become one of the focus
areas at the United Nations, the Security Council also has
28/29

12/09/2019

to prove its credibility and improve its performance. We
hope that the Council will give the views and comments
expressed by Member States serious consideration.
One delegation has made yet another attempt to
misuse this forum to spread baseless and deceitful
narratives about my country. Such attempts have not
succeeded in the past and will not succeed now. The
truth is that the delegation in question represents a
geographical space that is now widely known as a hub
for terrorism that has jeopardized innocent lives in our
region and beyond. We do not wish to dignify such
diatribes with a response.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly takes note of the report of the
Security Council contained in document A/73/2?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Two delegations have asked
to speak in exercise of the right of reply. I would like
to remind members that statements in the exercise
of the right of reply are limited to 10 minutes for the
first intervention and five minutes for the second, and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Knyazyan (Armenia): I would like to speak
in exercise of our right of reply with regard to the
statement made by the representative of Azerbaijan.
We resolutely reject Azerbaijan’s unfounded
allegations, which have nothing to do with reality.
On a number of occasions Armenia has presented its
position with regard to the Security Council resolutions
that Azerbaijan referred to. We regret that Azerbaijan
has continued its practice of distortion and one-sided
interpretation of the resolutions’ provisions. The
primary requirement of the resolutions, which is a
full cessation of hostilities, was not implemented by
Azerbaijan, which opted to continue its armed aggression
against the people of Nagorno Karabakh. Azerbaijan’s
hostile rhetoric and uncontrolled military build-up, in
violation of obligations under the conventional armscontrol regime, along with its promotion of a policy of
anti-Armenian hatred, constitute a major impediment
and threat to peace and security in our region and hamper
the efforts of the agreed format of the co-chairmanship
of the Minsk Group of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, aimed at achieving a peaceful
solution to the Nagorno Karabakh conflict. We call on
Azerbaijan to fully adhere to its commitments under the
1994 trilateral ceasefire agreement between Nagorno
19-27740

12/09/2019

Karabakh, Azerbaijan and Armenia, and to engage in
good-faith negotiations under the auspices of the Minsk
Group co-Chairs.
The gross violations of the human rights of the
people of Nagorno Karabakh, including their inalienable
right to self-determination, are the underlying cause
of the conflict in Nagorno Karabakh. In April 2016,
a large-scale military offensive by Azerbaijani armed
forces against the people of Nagorno Karabakh led
to mass atrocities, involving gross violations of
international humanitarian law by the Azerbaijani
armed forces against civilians. Those practices show
that Azerbaijan is interested solely in the territory,
not in restoring people’s human rights. We once again
call on Azerbaijan not to abuse the General Assembly
but to engage in negotiations in good faith in their
respective formats.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): My response to the
remarks just made by the representative of Armenia
will be brief. The international obligations of Member
States derive from the Charter of the United Nations and
international law, including the decisions of the Security
Council and the treaties to which they are party. The
obvious question here is whether Armenia complies
with those obligations. It definitely and categorically
does not. The comments by the representative of
Armenia are illustrative in that regard. Our position and
comprehensive information on the issue are reflected
in the communications submitted by Azerbaijan and
circulated as documents of the Security Council and
the General Assembly, as referred to in Chapter 4 of
Part V of the report of the Security Council under
consideration (A/73/2).
Mr. Knyazyan (Armenia): I apologize for taking
the floor for a second time.
The lack of a response by the representative of
Azerbaijan with regard to the points raised by my
delegation is indicative of the fact that the statements he
made are unfounded and have nothing to do with reality.
We have stated time and again that we have presented
exhaustive remarks and written communications with

A/73/PV.106

regard to our position on the relevant Security Council
resolutions. The points made by the representative of
Azerbaijan distort the provisions of the resolutions.
They are one-sided and refer only to certain elements
in a baseless and very distorted manner. I would like
to stress that the Security Council resolutions under
discussion recognize Nagorno Karabakh as a party
to the conflict. If Azerbaijan is genuinely interested
in implementing those resolutions, it should first and
foremost approach the elected authorities of Nagorno
Karabakh and implement its commitments under those
resolutions to ensure a full cessation of hostilities.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): The remarks just made
by the representative of Armenia, with their standard
distortions and misinterpretations, leave no doubt that
Armenia’s policy of aggression, racism and deep-rooted
hatred remains intact, notwithstanding the recent
change of Government in that Member State.
There can be no doubt that the claims of Armenia
run counter to the norms of international law and are
without foundation. It is well known that the Nagorno
Karabakh region and seven surrounding districts of
Azerbaijan are under Armenian military occupation.
The fact is that Armenia used military force to occupy
the territory of Azerbaijan and establish a subordinate,
racist puppet regime on it. The fact that those actions
are incompatible with international law and therefore
unlawful is evident in the resolutions of the Security
Council and in numerous documents of other
international organizations.
We consider Armenia’s position an open challenge
to the conflict settlement process and a serious threat
to international and regional peace and security. The
sooner its Government realizes that its dangerous and
unconstructive political agenda has no prospects, the
sooner our peoples will be able to benefit from peace,
stability and cooperation.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 31.
The meeting rose at 1.50 p.m.

19-2774029/29
