United Nations

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 3)

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-seventh year

4625

th meeting
Thursday, 17 October 2002, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Belinga Eboutou . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Cameroon)

Members:

Bulgaria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guinea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ireland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mauritius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Syrian Arab Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Tafrov
Mr. Zhang Yishan
Mr. Valdivieso
Mr. Levitte
Mr. Traoré
Mr. Ryan
Mr. Koonjul
Mr. Aguilar Zinser
Mr. Kolby
Mr. Lavrov
Mr. Mahbubani
Mr. Mekdad
Sir Jeremy Greenstock
Mr. Negroponte

Agenda
The situation between Iraq and Kuwait
Letter dated 10 October 2002 from the Permanent Representative of South
Africa to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2002/1132).

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

02-64455 (E)

*0264455*

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 3)

The meeting resumed at 3.10 p.m.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Israel. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Lancry (Israel): Israel feels compelled to
take the floor in the light of the numerous charges,
made in the course of this debate, that the Security
Council has adopted a double standard with regard to
Israel’s compliance with Council resolutions.
In fact, those statements are the strongest proof
that there is indeed a double standard: one directed
against Israel. What else could explain such a
deliberate blindness to the fundamental differences
between Iraq’s defiance of the Council and Israel’s
commitment to a peaceful settlement of conflict with
its neighbours? What else could explain the failure to
see any distinction between binding resolutions,
adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter —
resolutions that set out specific actions to be taken by
Iraq, independent of the actions of any other party —
and interdependent recommendations or statements of
principle, adopted under Chapter VI, that are designed
to move all the parties forward in the Middle East? The
Charter of the United Nations is itself founded on the
understanding that different situations and disputes
require different responses and that not every conflict
requires identical action. The distinction between
resolutions adopted under Chapter VI and those
adopted under Chapter VII recognizes that in certain
cases the Council might wish to express itself in the
form of a recommendation or in a broadly outlined
statement of principles, rather than an explicit demand
of one particular Member State.
What else but a double standard could possibly
blur the gaping distinctions between Iraq, which has
repeatedly violated and flouted the resolutions of the
Council, and Israel, which has repeatedly taken
significant steps, at considerable risk to its own
security, to implement the Council’s will? Indeed, the
principles set out by the Council in resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973) provided the basis for Israel’s
peace treaties with Egypt and Jordan, and will
hopefully enable us to reach peace with our other
neighbours as well. All parties accepted those
resolutions as the basis of the Madrid Peace
Conference. They also provided the basis for our

2

peacemaking with the Palestinians, for our mutual
recognition, for the Oslo accords and for nearly a
decade of peace negotiations. Those negotiations broke
off as a result of the decision by the Palestinian side to
revert to a strategy of violence and terrorism and as a
result of its rejection, both in word and deed, of the
right of States in the region to live in peace within
secure and recognized boundaries, as required by
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
In May 2000, Israel fully implemented its
obligations under Security Council resolution 425
(1978), a fact that has been confirmed by the SecretaryGeneral and endorsed by the Council. Despite that,
Hizbullah terrorists have continued to launch crossborder attacks against Israel. The group has abducted
three Israeli soldiers and one civilian, jeopardized
security and stability in the area and threatens to
provoke a broader regional confrontation. These illegal
and dangerous activities are carried out in blatant
violation of resolution 425 (1978) and with the ongoing
support of the Government of Syria, which is itself a
member of the Council, and the acquiescence of the
Government of Lebanon.
Israel has also taken significant steps to
implement the resolutions adopted by the Council since
September 2000. Following the adoption of resolution
1402 (2002), Israel has gradually withdrawn its troops
from
Palestinian
cities,
including
Ramallah,
successfully negotiated a peaceful end to the stand-off
at the Church of the Nativity and redeployed our forces
to the perimeter of population centres, in the hope that
reciprocal Palestinian measures called for in the
resolution would follow. But despite the call on the
Palestinian Authority to adhere to a meaningful
ceasefire and to end all acts of violence, terror and
incitement, it did none of those things. Similarly, the
recently adopted resolution 1435 (2002) placed
obligations on both parties, including a call upon the
Palestinian Authority to end all acts of violence, terror
and incitement, and to bring to justice those
responsible for terrorist acts. The Palestinian Authority
has thus far refused to live up to its obligation to arrest
and prosecute terrorists and has thereby forced Israel to
take actions to protect its citizens. In short, these
obligations were totally ignored by the Palestinian
Authority.
Unlike resolutions concerning Iraq, the Council’s
resolutions on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict do not
envision Israeli actions without reciprocal commitment

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 3)

and implementation by other parties to the dispute.
They are part and parcel of a number of interdependent
actions aimed at ending violence and terrorism and
returning the parties to a political process. They cannot
be compared to resolutions adopted under Chapter VII,
which address the threat posed by the aggressive
intentions of one regime to both the region and the
world.
But beyond all that lies a more significant, and
indeed more fundamental, distinction between Iraq and
Israel. Israel is a country confronting the daily threat of
terrorist attacks against its civilians, as well as repeated
threats to destroy it, including threats from remote
neighbours like Iran and Iraq. Are we to forget that just
months before the Gulf War, Saddam Hussein
threatened to “completely burn half of Israel”, and that
in the course of that war 39 Iraqi Scud missiles fell on
Israeli cities without any provocation?
Is there a double standard, as certain Member
States have alleged? There is a simple test. Take two
States, one a dictatorship and serial violator of Council
resolutions and human rights that is dedicated to the
acquisition of chemical, biological and nuclear
weapons and fighting for regional domination; the
other is a democracy upholding the principles of the
rule of law and freedom of speech, a people whose
survival has been tested for decades but who are still
committed to peace, both for themselves and for future
generations in the Middle East.
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is a serious one,
and deservedly a source of international concern. But
the cause of peace in the Middle East is not served by
the charges we have heard in the course of this debate,
nor is it served by false comparisons and deliberate
obfuscation intended not to foster constructive action,
but rather to prevent it. We cannot lose sight of the fact
that the resolution of the conflict in the Middle East is
only possible through both sides fulfilling their
obligations and negotiating the terms of a final
settlement in an atmosphere of partnership and
cooperation. We hope that other Member States will do
their utmost to help create such an atmosphere.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Costa Rica. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Stagno (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Several member States of the Rio Group have already

spoken in this open meeting of the Security Council on
the situation between Iraq and Kuwait and two
additional non-members of the Council will speak later.
I shall therefore limit myself, in my capacity as the
acting secretary of the Rio Group, to highlighting some
of the principles of greatest importance to the members
of the Group.
The members of the Rio Group, fully committed
to multilateralism and to the principles embodied in the
Charter of the United Nations as basic rules of conduct
in international relations, reiterate their confidence in
multilateral mechanisms for the peaceful settlement of
disputes.
The members of the Rio Group confirm their
confidence that, in the face of the topic under debate in
this public meeting, the Security Council will ensure
respect for the principles and norms of international
law. Likewise, the members of the Rio Group are fully
certain that the Council will apply all necessary
measures and use all appropriate means available in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations to
induce Iraq to comply with its resolutions,
safeguarding the interests of the international
community.
The resolutions of the Security Council must be
complied with as provided by the Charter. We cannot
permit any excuses of any nature in the fulfilment of
that obligation. Therefore, the Rio Group calls for full
and immediate compliance by Iraq with the resolutions
pertaining to disarmament of its weapons of mass
destruction.
The Rio Group urges Iraq to cooperate without
conditions or restrictions with the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC) in accordance with resolution 1284
(1999), the other relevant resolutions adopted by this
organ, the practical agreements on resumption of
inspections agreed upon by the Government of Iraq, the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and
UNMOVIC in Vienna on 1 October 2002, and other
measures that this Council may so adopt.
The Rio Group stresses its full support for the
work of Mr. Hans Blix, Executive Chairman of the
Commission, and his technical team. We note that the
legitimacy and effectiveness of the Commission
depend upon its impartiality, in keeping with paragraph
6 of resolution 1284 (1999). The Rio Group calls on
the Security Council to strengthen UNMOVIC in order

3

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 3)

to permit the mission to verify the existence of
weapons of mass destruction on the Iraqi territory and,
should they be found, to ensure their destruction.
In conclusion, on behalf of the Rio Group, I wish
to express our satisfaction for the convening of this
public meeting of the Council that makes it possible for
Member States to express their opinions and views on a
situation that is of crucial importance in the
maintenance of international peace and security.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Mexico. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I would like to congratulate the President
of the Security Council for holding this debate, which
bears witness to the Council’s commitment to
transparency. I also wish to express my country’s
support for the text read out a moment ago by the
representative of Costa Rica on behalf of the Rio
Group.
Mexico reiterates its deepest commitment to the
primacy of the United Nations with respect to the
maintenance of world peace, and we repeat our
conviction as regards the validity of the collective
system
of
international
security.
The
lofty
responsibility that world public opinion and
international community place upon the members of
the Security Council is to maintain and restore
international peace and security through the adoption
of multilateral actions that are timely and effective in
the solution of conflicts. Therefore, the legitimacy and
credibility
of
this
collective-security
system
fundamentally lie in the decisions of the Council being
in keeping with the Charter and international law.
Mexico has firmly condemned, as have a large
majority of nations, the continued non-compliance by
the Government of Iraq with the international
obligations imposed upon it by the Security Council.
Our country considers that its failure to observe the
resolutions adopted with regard to disarmament and to
renouncing the use of weapons of mass destruction
under Chapter VII of the Charter for more than a
decade represents a potential threat to peace and
regional stability.
has

4

Therefore we cannot fail to recognize that there
been non-compliance with United Nations

resolutions in other situations, moments and latitudes.
Mexico thus reiterates once again that it is important
for the Government of Iraq to comply immediately,
unconditionally and without restrictions with all
Security Council resolutions with regard to
disarmament and renunciation of the use of weapons of
mass destruction.
As is well known, Mexico has always upheld the
necessity of achieving general and complete
disarmament under effective international control. In
keeping with that position, Mexico addresses an appeal
to Iraq to accept, by actions, the inspection activities in
order to ensure the destruction, removal or
neutralization under international supervision of all
chemical, biological and nuclear weapons that it may
have under its control. We are convinced that the
acceptance by the Government of Iraq of the return of
inspectors to its national territory, unconditionally,
immediately and without restriction, constitutes a first
step towards restoring confidence between the United
Nations and that country, in addition to its fully
complying with its international obligations with
respect to disarmament and renunciation of the use of
weapons of mass destruction.
The least that the international community can
expect is that Iraq will cooperate in all aspects without
subterfuge or pretext, at all times and in all places, with
both UNMOVIC and IAEA, so that we can be in a
position to reliably determine that Iraq does not posses
the type of weapons which it renounced as part of the
conditions laid down in resolution 687 (1991), or that it
is not in a position to use such weapons.
In this process, the Security Council must
preserve its authority to determine the composition,
mandate and rules of operation of the inspection teams
and, in general, the supervision of the implementation
of the enforcement measures adopted pursuant to
Chapter VII of the Charter. Similarly, UNMOVIC must
preserve its identity and independence as a subsidiary
organ of the Security Council, and the inspectors will
have to act in accordance with United Nations
regulations. Thus, the militarization of inspections
could prove to be counterproductive, since it would
have the potential to generate situations of
confrontation or other kinds of unforeseen incidents.
Furthermore, this would constitute a deplorable and
dangerous precedent in international practice. Mexico
believes that the inspection missions should not foresee
having armed escorts or anticipate the assistance of

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 3)

representatives of the permanent members of this
Council. We do not consider it appropriate that the
inspections regime should be determined exclusively
by the five permanent members, since the inspectors
will have the obligation to report to the Council as a
whole.
In my country’s opinion, the Council’s
determination should be based on two essential
conditions: first, a reliable assessment of Iraq’s actual
military capacity, as well as of its intentions to use that
weaponry or the capacity of terrorist groups to gain
access to it; and secondly, the agreement of members
of the Council and of other involved nations on the
measures to be adopted.
The Security Council cannot renounce the
responsibilities imposed on it by the United Nations
Charter in the maintenance of international peace and
security, nor can it disregard its competence to
determine the existence of a threat to international
peace and security. Accordingly, Mexico supports a
two-stage action of the Security Council.
The first of these two stages would be the
establishment, under a new resolution, of a revised
system of inspections in Iraq and of the conditions
necessary to ensure that the inspection missions meet
with no obstacle. The second stage would be triggered
by Iraq’s non-compliance with that resolution. In that
event, if it were to occur, the Security Council will
have to determine, on the basis of UNMOVIC and
IAEA reports, whether the non-compliance constitutes
a threat to international peace and security and to
decide on the measures to be adopted, preferably
unanimously, including the possible use of force.
In any consideration of the latter issue, the
Security Council must establish clear criteria
guaranteeing the conditions of proportionality,
immediacy and necessity that must be present in any
legitimate use of force. We nurture the hope that the
incipient signs of an agreement will emerge, enabling
us — as the Secretary-General has called for — to
preserve the Council’s unity. Accordingly, we would
view favourably acceptance of action in two stages,
such as that which I have described.
Mexico reiterates its willingness to pursue
constructive cooperation in the work of the Council on
this question, convinced of the need to exhaust
multilateral efforts to reach a comprehensive, peaceful
and definitive settlement.

Mexico will continue supporting the efforts
pursued in the framework of the United Nations, with
full respect for the powers of the Security Council, to
resolve a grave problem that has faced the international
community as a whole for more than decade: the
continued non-compliance of the Government of
Saddam Hussein with its international obligations
under the Charter of our Organization.
Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Allow me to express to you, Sir, our
appreciation of your efforts to convene this meeting.
We also wish to offer Ambassador Dumisani
Shadrack Kumalo, Permanent Representative of South
Africa to the United Nations and Chairman of the
Coordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned Movement,
our deep thanks for his call on the Security Council to
convene this general debate on the question of Iraq. We
believe that this debate is timely, especially given the
increased talk of grave developments in Iraq in
particular and the region in general.
We have listened carefully yesterday and today to
all the statements made before the Council. In their
entirety, they have conveyed the urgency of settling the
Iraqi question by peaceful means and in accordance
with the principles and purposes of the United Nations
Charter and with international law. In this regard, we
are pleased to express our satisfaction at the assertion
by most delegations of the need to preserve Iraq’s
territorial integrity and the unity of its people.
In his statement to the General Assembly on 15
September, Mr. Farouk Al-Shara’, Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Syrian
Arab Republic, defined Syria’s clear position on
developments in the Iraqi situation. He stated:
“The international community is committed to the
unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq.
We cannot recall anyone doubting that
commitment. We also stress that it is the right of
the Iraqi people alone to decide their future
without any interference in their internal affairs.
It is the duty of all Members of our Organization
to commit themselves to the implementation of
United Nations resolutions. In keeping with that
commitment, Syria supports the resumption of
dialogue between Iraq and the Secretary-General
with the objective of reaching a political solution
that meets the requirements of the Security
Council and that grants Iraq hope of peace,

5

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 3)

security and the lifting of the sanctions imposed
on it, especially as Iraq has officially recognized
the State of Kuwait and its international borders.”
(A/57/PV.8, p. 13)
The Arab Summit convened in Beirut and the
Ministerial Meeting held in Cairo a few weeks ago
affirmed their rejection of any military attack on Iraq.
Syria is pleased whenever certain States declare their
commitment to resorting to international legitimacy to
solve pending problems between the United Nations
and Iraq. Syria encourages and supports this approach,
because it is the real guarantee of maintaining
international peace and security in spite of our bitter
feeling at the double standard used in dealing with
Security Council resolutions. However, we continue to
call on Iraq to comply with the relevant Security
Council resolutions, including those relevant to the
return of inspectors to Iraq.
At the same time, we must recall the need to
implement the provisions of Security Council
resolution 687 (1991), especially its paragraph 14,
which calls for the establishment of a zone free of
weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East.
Serious developments in recent weeks have attracted
the interest of the international community as they may
be conducive to reaching the required solution
guaranteeing the implementation of Security Council
resolutions on Iraq.
In Vienna on 30 September and 1 October,
Mr. Hans Blix, the Executive Chairman of UNMOVIC,
and Mr. Mohammed ElBaradei, the Director General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), met
with an Iraqi delegation. A constructive and successful
debate was held on the practical arrangements for the
return of United Nations inspectors to Iraq.
Reports and statements by Messrs. Blix and
ElBaradei describe this meeting as successful, since it
proved possible to achieve a mutual understanding on
the practical arrangements for the work of the
inspectors in Iraq.
Furthermore, the Iraqi side displayed the
necessary flexibility and consented to the facilities
requested by the representatives of the United Nations.
The letters exchanged between Mr. Blix and
Mr. ElBaradei on the one hand, and Iraqi officials on
the other hand, made it clear that the Iraqi side has
endorsed all the understandings achieved.

6

Iraq displayed its readiness to accept the
inspectors as of 19 October. Syria and other States have
affirmed, during all the debates held in the Security
Council, the utmost importance of benefiting
immediately from such positive developments, calling
for the dispatch of inspectors to Iraq promptly so that
they can resume their work without delay, especially
since the Council has been calling, for the last four
years, for the return of inspectors to Iraq.
If we take into account the accomplishments
achieved during the previous phases of inspection and
the conclusions of the Arab Summit in Beirut and
Iraq’s expression of its will to return the Kuwaiti
national archives and to find a mechanism that is now
under discussion to solve the question of Kuwaiti
prisoners, through the efforts to be undertaken by
Mr. Yuli Vorontsov, the High-level Coordinator, we
could say that the goal of closing the entire Iraq file in
the Security Council is now within reach.
The Security Council during this period has
witnessed consultations and discussions on the next
step in the work of the Council as regards Iraq. In the
context of our understanding of the developments we
referred to, Syria believes that the basic task now is to
preserve as much as possible unity of action in the
Council and unity of position in support of the task of
the inspectors.
We have declared on more than one occasion that
there is no justification to sacrifice the unity of action
in the Council, especially since Iraq has fulfilled all the
requirements of the practical arrangements needed by
the inspectors. Also, the questions raised by Mr. Blix in
his meeting with the Security Council and the
consultations last Tuesday can be solved in the context
of the great flexibility displayed by the Iraqi side and
in the context of the mutual wish of all sides to
scrupulously implement relevant Security Council
resolutions on Iraq. We must recall that escalating the
tone of military aggression against Iraq and beating the
drums of war do not serve the principles and purposes
to which we have agreed in the United Nations Charter.
The founding of the United Nations in the wake
of the Second World War aimed at establishing a world
of peace and security. In no way can we accept an
unwarranted war whose victims will be mainly
innocent civilians.
Also, the repercussions of such wars will be
devastating to Iraq in particular and will increase

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 3)

extremism and its grave consequences in a turbulent
area because of events in the occupied territories and
Israel’s flagrant defiance of relevant Security Council
resolutions.
We would like to affirm the need for goodwill in
dealing with the Iraq issue, especially since the
Security Council has not taken any action to mitigate
the severe effects of the sanctions imposed on Iraq, in
spite of the progress in the destruction of weapons of
mass destruction in Iraq in the previous inspection
phases.
Most delegations that have addressed this
meeting have affirmed the need to implement Security
Council resolutions without double standard, in
particular not excluding Israel from the implementation
of Security Council resolutions. Unlike the distortion
practised by the representative of Israel, who spoke just
a little while ago, in his attempt to distort the Charter,
we affirm that Article 25 of the Charter calls on all
States to implement Security Council resolutions and
that all Council resolutions are binding and must be
implemented. For the first time we hear about
resolutions adopted by the Council that are mere
recommendations or resolutions of a different nature.
This is distortion. All Security Council resolutions are
binding on all Members.
As for Israel, which has attempted to avoid the
implementation of these resolutions for more than five
decades, it must not be allowed to shirk its
responsibility to implement relevant Security Council
resolutions. What is truly strange about the Israeli logic
is the talk about democracy while Israel is practising
various kinds of murder and destruction in the
occupied Arab territories. Is there a new concept called
the democracy of occupation? Or is there a new logic
regarding democratic occupation? This is a distortion.
And this is clowning before this Council. It is
unacceptable clowning. The representative of Israel
spoke about South Lebanon. However, he forgot to
mention Israel’s twenty-year occupation of South
Lebanon in flagrant defiance of Security Council
resolution 425 (1978). Had it not been for the sacrifices
of the Lebanese national resistance, Israel would not
have withdrawn. The other fact the Israeli
representative failed to mention is the existence of
scores of Lebanese prisoners, kidnapped by Israel from
their homes and families, their mosques and from the
streets and villages of South Lebanon. Obfuscation of
facts will not serve the representative of Israel, because

the facts are known to all members of the Council.
Israel should recommit itself to the peace process and
put an end to its occupation of the occupied Arab
territories. That is the only solution that will achieve a
just and comprehensive peace in the region.
Finally, we must affirm that the Iraqi people have
suffered long enough from the effects of the embargoes
and sanctions imposed upon Iraq for more than eleven
years. These people have not seen any light at the end
of this long dark tunnel of suffering, death and
destruction. Will our current open debates in the
Council over the next few days define the next step
needed to embark on a phase of peace, hope and
security for the Iraqi people, the region and the entire
world? This is the challenge for us all. Let us work
towards achieving peace instead of waging war, and let
us work towards the implementation of all Security
Council resolutions in order to achieve peace and
security for all.
Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): You
were right, Sir, to schedule this debate. The United
Kingdom was one of the first to call for it. The Council
needs to hear the voice of the wider membership,
particularly when we are on the edge of decisions that
could make the difference between war and peace.
It is a debate, clearly, that is about more than
Iraq. The delegation and I have been listening carefully
to it. The issues in our minds, whether we all refer to
them or not, go much wider: the security of the whole
neighbourhood of Iraq; the reinforcement of our
collective effort to eliminate terrorism; justice for
Palestine and security for Israel within the law; the role
of the Security Council when serious matters of
national security are before its members and the overall
effectiveness of the United Nations itself.
I wish to be very clear. The United Kingdom’s
firm objective is the complete disarmament of Iraq in
the area of weapons of mass destruction, by peaceful
means. I repeat, our first preference is a peaceful
solution to the current crisis surrounding Iraq. Ensuring
that there is such a solution lies in the hands of Iraq.
In 1991, following the Gulf War, the Security
Council set out the conditions governing the ceasefire
between Iraq and the international coalition. Sadly,
over eleven years later, Iraq remains in material breach
of these obligations. We all know of the myriad ways
in which Iraq sought, almost immediately after

7

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 3)

inspections began, to
intimidate inspectors.

frustrate

inspections

and

We all know of the succession of allegedly final
declarations submitted by Iraq after inspectors
discovered some new incriminating fact or evidence.
We all know how Iraq tried to limit and hinder
inspections to the extent that in August 1998 the then
head of the United Nations Special Commission
(UNSCOM) said it was impossible for him to do his
job. We all know of the outstanding weapons of mass
destruction for which UNSCOM was unable to
account. We all know of the multiple warnings sent to
Iraq in resolution after resolution and presidential
statement after presidential statement.
No shadow of a doubt remains that Iraq has
defied the United Nations - not any particular Member
State, the United Nations - over the whole of this
period. As Prime Minister Blair has said
“it is not that for 10 years Saddam Hussein has
not been a problem, he has been a problem
throughout the last 10 years. What has changed is
first, that the policy of containment isn’t any
longer working, certainly without a massive
change in the way that the regime is monitored
and inspected; and secondly, we know from 11
September that it is sensible to deal with these
problems before, not after.”
Iraq could have invited the inspectors back
without conditions at any time in the last few years.
Sanctions could have been lifted and Iraqis restored to
a normal life. They are a talented and spirited people;
but they have been betrayed and stunted by a
Government unworthy of them. Only Baghdad’s
insistence on retaining weapons of mass destruction
capability has blocked that path of good sense and
humanity. Only under the recent intense diplomatic
pressure, and particularly the threat of military action,
has the Iraqi Government’s letter of 16 September 2002
emerged.
These Iraqi words, while necessary, are of
themselves not enough. We remain deeply perturbed by
evidence that Iraq believes it can hide its weapons of
mass destruction rather than declare them, that it can
again fool the inspectors and play games with them.
The United Kingdom analysis, backed up by reliable
intelligence, indicates that Iraq still possesses chemical
and biological materials, has continued to produce
them, has sought to weaponize them, and has active

8

military plans for the deployment of such weapons.
The United Kingdom analysis, backed up by reliable
intelligence, shows that Iraq has in recent years tried to
buy multiple components relevant to the production of
a nuclear bomb. The United Kingdom analysis, backed
up by reliable intelligence, points to the retention of
extended-range missiles and to the employment of
hundreds of people in projects to develop weapons with
a range of over 1,000 kilometres that could carry both
weapons of mass destruction and conventional
warheads.
It would be an abdication of responsibility to
ignore this challenge to the international community.
We cannot afford to bury our heads in the sand and
pretend the problem does not exist. We cannot accept
the Iraqi Government’s word at face value, knowing
what we know.
We wish to see the Security Council, which Iraq
has been defying for so long, express its will and its
unity in a clear, strong resolution. That resolution must
give the regime in Baghdad an unequivocal choice:
complete weapons of mass destruction disarmament
and normal membership of the international
community, or refusal and the inevitable consequences.
The United Kingdom has made it clear to Iraq,
privately at a senior official level, that this choice is
being offered genuinely. It represents a single, final
chance for Iraq. If this is understood, and if the Council
keeps its nerve, then maybe there is a prospect that Iraq
will finally comply with its obligations and that
military action can be averted. If we fail to send that
tough signal, we shall be ignoring the realities. The
weaker we collectively appear, the more probable it is
that military action will be the outcome.
An essential component of this message is to
ensure
that
inspections
—
United
Nations
inspections — are effective. That means giving the
inspectors the penetrating strength to ensure the
successful weapons-of-mass- destruction disarmament
of Iraq. We cannot afford a return to the ambiguous
modalities and memorandums of understanding
(MOUs) of the past; we cannot afford exceptions to
unconditional, unrestricted and immediate access; we
cannot afford to have inspectors again standing by
helplessly while crucial documents are burned or while
convoys leave from the back door as inspectors arrive
at the front; we cannot afford interviews compromised
by intimidating minders. The recent Iraqi letters on
practical arrangements, the language of which brings

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 3)

back the obfuscations of the past, reinforce the need for
strengthened inspections and for practical arrangements
to be made legally binding. Stronger inspections will
be crucial to ensuring that all countries have
confidence in them and that Iraq makes the decision to
comply rather than to continue hiding its weapons of
mass destruction — crucial, if we are to succeed in
achieving a peaceful resolution of this issue.
I have heard loud and clear the concerns of many
speakers that, on a decision so crucial, we should not
rush into a war; that on a decision so crucial, any Iraqi
violations must be discussed by the Security Council.
Let me make totally clear that the United Kingdom
Government would expect there to be a detailed
Security Council discussion if either Mr. Blix or Mr.
ElBaradei, whose professionalism and independence
are not in question, reports that Iraq is not fully
cooperating with the inspections process. We would
want at that point to hear the views of all our Security
Council colleagues.
I have heard in a number of interventions a
concern that the non-permanent members of the
Council have been kept in the dark. Some have even
spoken of humiliation. I believe the facts have been
misrepresented. None of the permanent members has
been in a position so far to bring a draft resolution to
each other here or to the Council as a whole. The
permanent five have done no negotiating on a text in
New York. Discussion in capitals has taken place on
bilateral channels. Of course our Governments have
been working to make a negotiation worthwhile; proper
preparation is a responsible approach. We, the United
Kingdom and the United States, have met with the nonpermanent 10 twice as often since 12 September as we
have with the other permanent members. Once there is
a draft with a prospect of broad acceptance in the
Council, no Council member will be excluded from
discussion. Let us remain connected with reality in this
respect.
I could not close these remarks without referring
to the fact that Iraq is in breach of other Security
Council obligations, including on the repatriation of all
Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and the return of
all Kuwaiti property. These other violations may not
threaten international peace and security in the same
way as the issue of Iraqi weapons of mass destruction,
but they are perhaps more important issues in human
and emotional terms, particularly for the families
concerned. There can be no humane reason why Iraq

has failed to comply for so long. We call on Iraq now
to rectify that non-compliance, including by resuming
its participation in the Tripartite Commission under the
auspices of the International Committee of the Red
Cross.
Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
should like at the outset to express our appreciation to
South Africa for having requested, on behalf of the
countries of the Non-Aligned Movement, that the
Council hold this emergency open debate. I should like
also to thank you, Mr. President, for having made
prompt arrangements in this respect.
The absence for so long of a solution to the
question of Iraq has not served peace and stability in
the Gulf region or the authority and credibility of the
Security Council, nor has it been conducive to
improving the humanitarian situation in Iraq. An early
and appropriate settlement of the Iraqi question is the
important and urgent task facing the international
community and the United Nations in particular.
To hold an open debate and earnestly heed the
views of a large number of Member States under such
circumstances will undoubtedly enable the Council
better to handle the Iraqi question. The Chinese
Government has consistently maintained that Iraq
should unconditionally and strictly implement the
relevant Security Council at an early date and fully
cooperate with the United Nations on questions of
weapons inspections and other questions.
We believe also that the international community
should work tirelessly to seek a comprehensive
settlement of the Iraqi question through political and
diplomatic means on the basis of the relevant Council
resolutions. Over the past few days, dozens of
countries have participated in this open debate, which
clearly attests to the importance that a large number of
Member States attach to the question of Iraq, and to
their concerns about the possible implications of this
question for international relations.
The overwhelming majority of States have
emphasized during the debate that the question of Iraq
should be settled within the framework of the United
Nations, that the Security Council should play a central
role in the process and that the unity of the Security
Council is of paramount importance.
A number of countries, especially the Arab
States, have also expressed their strong for wish for

9

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 3)

peace, not war. They have pointed out that war can
only further exacerbate the already tense situation in
the Middle East. The independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Iraq, Kuwait and other countries
of the region should be respected. These views and
positions are very important, and we agree with them.
We hope that the Security Council will give them
serious consideration.

continue to earnestly implement the oil-for-food
programme and make further efforts to improve the
humanitarian situation in Iraq. We would also like to
urge the Iraqi side to implement, as soon as possible,
its obligations in accordance with relevant Security
Council resolutions and to take concrete steps for an
early settlement of the question of the missing
Kuwaitis and third country nationals.

The question of disarmament is at the core of the
Iraqi question. On the basis of resolution 687 (1991),
Iraq must destroy all weapons of mass destruction in its
possession and refrain from developing or using such
weapons. But since the end of 1998, the United Nations
disarmament process in Iraq has been suspended. Only
when the United Nations weapons inspectors return to
Iraq and conduct effective inspections can the truth
ultimately emerge.

The Iraqi question has reached a crucial juncture.
The international community in general has high hopes
of the Security Council. It hopes that the Council will
be able to effectively undertake its responsibility to
maintain international peace and security and take
action to safeguard the purposes and principles of the
Charter. The Chinese Government is ready to join other
countries in promoting an appropriate settlement of the
Iraqi question within the Security Council.

We are pleased to note that, thanks to the positive
endeavours of Secretary-General Kofi Annan,
Secretary-General Moussa of the Arab League and
other concerned parties, the Iraqi side announced last
September that it would unconditionally accept the
return of weapons inspectors. The United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC) and the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) then engaged in a dialogue with the
Iraqi side on practical arrangements for the inspection
and achieved positive results. We hope that Iraq will
honour its commitments and translate them into actual
deeds.

Mr. Negroponte (United States of America): On
12 September, President George Bush outlined to the
General Assembly the history of Iraq’s defiance of
Security Council resolutions, listed the steps that Iraq
must take if it wants peace and stated that the United
States would work with the Security Council to hold
Iraq to account.

We believe that the United Nations weapons
inspectors should return to Iraq as soon as possible to
conduct independent, fair and professional inspections
and report truthfully and in a timely manner to the
Council the results of such inspections, so that the
Council can draw objective, fair and realistic
conclusions on that basis.

President Bush’s speech was a declaration of
purpose, not a declaration of war. It put the United
Nations in the spotlight and challenged the
international community to restore the Security
Council’s relevance on this issue by confronting this
threat to international peace and security and 11 years
of failure by Iraq to accept the demands made of it
after its invasion and destruction of Kuwait.

Under such circumstances, it is not that we
cannot consider the adoption by the Council of a new
resolution on the question of the inspection. Such a
draft resolution, however, should call for support for
UNMOVIC and the IAEA. Its contents should be
practical and feasible, in the interests of an appropriate
settlement of the Iraqi question.

The threat today is serious and unique, and it
arises directly from the Iraqi regime’s own actions: its
history of aggression and brutality, its defiance of the
international community and its drive towards an
arsenal of terror and destruction. This is a regime that
has invaded two of its neighbours and tried to
annihilate one of them; a regime that has used chemical
weapons on its neighbours and its very own citizens; a
regime that has lied about its development of weapons
of mass destruction; a regime that signed the Nuclear
Non-Proliferation Treaty and then proceeded to
develop a major nuclear weapons programme.

The Iraqi question involves many elements in
addition to disarmament, including the humanitarian
situation in Iraq and the missing Kuwaiti nationals and
property. We call on all the parties concerned to

Eleven years ago, as one of the conditions for
ending the Persian Gulf war, the Security Council
required the Iraqi regime to destroy its weapons of
mass destruction and cease all development of such

10

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 3)

weapons. As President Bush noted yesterday when
signing the Congressional resolution on Iraq, at that
time Iraq was given 15 days to fully disclose its
weapons of mass destruction. The Baghdad regime has
defied this obligation for 4,199 days.
The Security Council also demanded, 11 years
ago, that Iraq return all prisoners from Kuwait and
other lands and renounce all involvement with
terrorism. Iraq agreed to these demands and more at the
time, and these are commitments with which Iraq must
comply. The Council has tried in every way to bring
Iraq to peaceful fulfilment of the Gulf war ceasefire,
yet the Iraqi regime has violated all of its obligations.
As President Bush said earlier this month in Cincinnati,
“the entire world has witnessed Iraq’s 11-year history
of defiance, deception and bad faith”.
The Security Council is not the only international
body that has focused on the behaviour of the Iraqi
regime. Last year, a year when the United States was
not a member, the Commission on Human Rights,
based in Geneva, adopted resolution 2001/14, which
strongly condemns the
“systematic, widespread and extremely grave
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law by the Government of Iraq,
resulting in an all-pervasive repression and
oppression
sustained
by
broad-based
discrimination and widespread terror”.
Today, exactly five weeks after the President
spoke, we meet for the first time to publicly discuss the
message that the Security Council will send to Iraq and
to its leader, Saddam Hussein. Our view of that
message has been clear from 12 September. There can
be no more business as usual or toothless resolutions
that Iraq will continue to ignore. Our intent is that the
Council should meet the challenge and stand firm,
resolute and united in adopting a draft resolution that
holds Iraq to its commitments, lays out clearly what
Iraq must do to comply and states that there will be
consequences if Iraq refuses to do so.
We expect the Council to act, and when the
Council adopts a draft resolution that sends a clear and
united message to Iraq that it must fulfil its obligations,
Iraq will have a choice. It will have to decide whether
to take this last chance to comply. We hope that it will
choose to comply. If it does not, we will seek
compliance and disarmament by other means.

This is not an easy issue for any of us on the
Council. The world’s united response to aggression by
Iraq in 1990 and 1991, expressed through a series of
unique, ground-breaking Security Council resolutions,
brought the world body closest to the visions of its
founders. The Council’s requirements were far
reaching, commensurate with both the threat and the
Council’s determination that Iraq never again possess
the means to threaten and even destroy its neighbours.
In the ensuing decade, however, Iraq’s failure to
implement this body’s peace terms became for the
United Nations a question of enormous significance.
The challenge now is whether the United Nations can
perform the function its founders envisaged. We very
much hope the answer will be, “Yes”.
The five weeks since the President came to the
United Nations to discuss the threat posed by Iraq have
passed quickly. We have seen signs of emerging
Council unity during intensive discussions here and in
capitals, involving the highest levels of our respective
Governments. We have also seen clear signs that Iraq is
reverting to form. We have seen Iraq invite inspectors
to return without conditions, and then immediately
place conditions. We have seen requests for clarity
from the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) on
practical arrangements met by Iraqi obfuscation and
multiple answers, which in fact avoid answering at all.
Not surprisingly, in the first test of the so-called
new Iraqi cooperation, Iraq has shown that it hopes to
return to the word games, ephemeral commitments and
misdirection of the past, while continuing to develop
the world’s deadliest weapons.
That is why a clear, firm message from the
Council is so important. Miscalculation by Iraq will be
dangerous. This body and, indeed, the entire
membership of the United Nations do no favour to the
people of Iraq, do no favour to those who seek a better
future for Iraq, do no favour to the countries of the
region and do no favour to the credibility of the United
Nations if they create the impression that an outcome
in which Iraq retains its chemical, biological and
nuclear weapons programmes is an acceptable or
possible outcome.
Over the past five weeks, a consensus has been
forming in the Council that the time for denial,
deception and delay has come to an end and that Iraq

11

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 3)

must be verifiably disarmed. There is growing
agreement that there must be immediate, unconditional
and unrestricted inspections of all Iraqi facilities that
may have a role in the development of weapons of
mass destruction.
The United States, together with the United
Kingdom, has shared with the other members of the
Council the elements of our vision of a resolution that
will address Iraq’s material breach of its obligations
under relevant Security Council resolutions, specify the
types of access and authorities that UNMOVIC and
IAEA must have to be able to effectively verify Iraqi
disarmament, make clear Iraq’s obligations and
articulate to Iraq that there will be consequences to
non-compliance.
The United States believes that the best way to
ensure Iraqi compliance is through one resolution that
is firm and unambiguous in its message.
We are considering the reactions we have
received and will be placing before the Council, in the
near future, a resolution with clear and immediate
requirements — requirements that Iraq would
voluntarily meet if it chooses to cooperate.
We have also shared these elements with the
Executive Chairman of UNMOVIC and the Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency.
While they can and should speak for themselves, both
Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei have made it clear that they
would welcome a new Security Council resolution that
strengthens their hands and allows for more effective
inspections.
While all this diplomatic activity has been taking
place, in the United States we have been having our
own great national debate. Last week, the House of
Representatives and the Senate passed a joint
resolution
that
expressed
support
for
the
administration’s diplomatic efforts in the Security
Council to ensure that “Iraq abandons its strategy of
delay, evasion and non-compliance” and authorized the
use of United States armed forces should diplomatic
efforts fail. This resolution tells the world that the
United States speaks with one determined voice.
Yesterday, when President Bush signed this resolution,
he said that he had not ordered the use of force. The
United States hopes that the use of force will not
become necessary. But the President also said that the
choice for Iraq is straightforward: “Either the Iraqi
regime will give up its weapons of mass destruction,

12

or, for the sake of peace, the United States will lead a
global coalition to disarm that regime.”
Now, the spotlight is back on the Security
Council. We hope and expect that the Council will act
and play its proper role as a safeguard of our common
security. If it fails to do so, then we and other States
will be forced to act.
The approach of the United States and the United
Kingdom aims at clarity — clarity with respect to what
Iraq must now do to fulfil its 1991 obligations to
restore peace and security in the region; clarity with
respect to what inspectors must be allowed to do; and
clarity with respect to our seriousness. Without such
clarity, there is too high a danger that Iraq will
miscalculate. And miscalculation by Iraq will lead to
precisely the military action we all hope to avoid.
The Security Council faces a defining moment.
The Council works best on Iraq when it works together.
As we witnessed last spring with the successful
passage of resolution 1409 (2002) and the
establishment of the Goods Review List, when the
Security Council is resolute and united, its actions
produce results. We must stand together and show Iraq
that its failure to comply will no longer be tolerated.
Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): Since
December 1998, United Nations disarmament
inspectors have no longer been present in Iraq. For
nearly four years now, the international community has
not been able to verify whether Iraq possesses weapons
of mass destruction and whether it is pursuing
programmes to that end.
By refusing to allow the return of United Nations
inspectors, Iraq has defied the international community
and the authority of the Security Council. Even though
France does not possess irrefutable proof, there are
several indications that Iraq has used this situation to
pursue or resume its prohibited programmes, notably in
the chemical and biological areas. The behaviour of the
Baghdad authorities has given rise to strong suspicions
in this regard.
This situation cannot be tolerated. The
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their
delivery systems, in Iraq or elsewhere, constitutes a
serious threat to international security. In the face of
this challenge, it is the Security Council’s duty to place
firmness and lucidity in the service of a common
objective. For France, that objective is the disarmament

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 3)

of Iraq. This implies the return of the inspectors and
the resumption of monitoring on the ground.
On 16 September, Iraq, under unanimous pressure
from the international community and thanks to the
efforts of the United Nations Secretary-General and the
Secretary General of the League of Arab States, agreed
to the unconditional return of the inspectors. During
discussions conducted in Vienna by the Executive
Chairman of the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC)
and the Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), Baghdad confirmed this
decision. Practical arrangements were made for
carrying out inspections. UNMOVIC and the IAEA
must now return to Iraq as soon as possible. The United
Nations must verify the sincerity of its commitments.
In the light of past experience, the international
community cannot be satisfied with words alone. Iraq
must translate its promises into concrete, verifiable and
lasting acts.
Here and there, doubts and reservations have
been expressed about the inspectors’ ability to fulfil
their mission. France has the greatest confidence in the
ability of Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei to achieve the
mandate entrusted to them by the Security Council with
the utmost rigor and professionalism. In any case, there
is no reason to question the effectiveness of their teams
a priori, as the inspection regime established under
resolution 1284 (1999) has not yet been tested on the
ground.
Furthermore, the outcome of United Nations
inspections has been very positive. It is a fact that
United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM)
inspectors destroyed more weapons of mass destruction
between 1991 and 1998 than did the military operations
during the Gulf War. In 1998, the IAEA believed it had
succeeded in dismantling the Iraqi nuclear programme.
It was not the inspections that failed, but the
international community’s ability to enforce its
decisions in a sufficiently firm and united manner.
France, however, is fully disposed to support measures
strengthening the inspection regime, insofar as that
proves necessary to facilitate the inspectors’ work. The
question of immediate access to the presidential sites,
for example, must be examined by the Security
Council.
On the other hand, we reject measures that would
in fact multiply the risk of incidents without improving

the effectiveness of the work carried out by UNMOVIC
and the IAEA. We also set store by the multinational,
independent nature of the inspectors; any measure
countering this fundamental element would be
tantamount to repeating past mistakes and would not
have our support.
Finally, it is the opinion of Mr. Blix and
Mr ElBaradei — that is, those who will have to lead
the inspections on the ground — that should guide the
Security Council in its choices. It is up to them to
determine what would help them achieve their mission.
Our duty is to assist them, not to complicate their task.
France attaches importance to the principle of
collective security, which lies at the heart of the
functioning of our Organization and the international
order. The Iraqi question cannot be an exception. That
is why we are proposing a two-stage approach. During
the first stage, the Security Council should adopt a
resolution clearly specifying the “rules of the game.” It
would define the inspection regime with a view to
ensuring that the inspectors can accomplish their
mission fully and without any hindrance. This
resolution should also send a clear warning to Iraq that
the Council will not tolerate new violations.
During the second stage, if UNMOVIC or the
IAEA observe that Iraq is refusing to cooperate fully
with inspectors, the Security Council would meet
immediately to decide on the appropriate measures to
take, without ruling out anything a priori.
France believes that this approach, which is also
the one proposed by the Secretary-General in his
message to the Council, is the only one that can offer
us the unity, cohesion, fairness and legitimacy so
crucial to the effectiveness of our action.
The unity of the Security Council is absolutely
vital. In the past, Iraq has taken advantage of divisions
within the international community to renege on its
obligations and defy the Council’s authority. Only a
united front will convince it not to repeat this error.
Only a two-stage approach will allow us to preserve
our Council’s unity; any kind of “automaticity” in the
use of force will profoundly divide us.
The two-stage approach is, rather, the choice of
cohesion. United in sending Iraq a message of firmness
in an initial resolution, the Security Council will, we
have no doubt, remain united to assume all of its

13

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 3)

responsibilities during the second stage, should Iraq
violate its commitments.
The Security Council must also demonstrate
fairness by showing Iraq that war is not inevitable if it
fully and scrupulously fulfils its obligations. This new
behaviour would open the way to the suspension and
then the lifting of sanctions, in accordance with
Security Council resolutions.
Finally, given the gravity of the situation, in
which nothing less than peace or war is at stake, it is
essential for the Security Council to remain in charge
of the process every step of the way. This is
fundamental for the legitimacy of our action and
essential for maintaining unanimous support for our
common objectives.
This debate constitutes an important, perhaps
even cardinal, moment for our Council and, beyond
that, for our Organization. What is at stake in the
ongoing negotiations is fundamental: even beyond Iraq,
we are talking about the future of the international
order, relations between North and South, and notably,
our relationship with the Arab world. An action of
uncertain legitimacy, one that does not enjoy the
support of the international community, would not be
understood and could gravely affect these relations.
By placing this action within the framework of
collective security, the French approach aims to ensure
its legitimacy and effectiveness, while respecting the
principles defined by the United Nations Charter.
Mr. Traore (Guinea) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I wish to thank you, Sir, for organizing this
public meeting on the situation between Iraq and
Kuwait. My thanks also go to the Ambassador of South
Africa, who, in his capacity as Chairman of the
Coordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned Movement
(NAM), made this request.
The holding of this debate is most timely. The
subject we are discussing is at the heart of current
international events and at the centre of the Council’s
concerns. This is an important occasion for United
Nations Member States to engage in a broad exchange
of views on what should be done to resolve the thorny
Iraqi question.
Since the resumption of discussions some months
ago with the Iraqi Government on the modalities for
the return of the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC)

14

and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),
how many comments have been made, and how many
questions have arisen regarding this crisis? Even if the
latest meeting in Vienna on practical arrangements did
not meet all expectations, it did allow for a significant
advance in the resolution of the necessary
preconditions for resuming inspections in Iraq.
In that regard, we should mention in particular
the acceptance by the Iraqi authorities of all the rights
of inspection, in conformity with the provisions
contained in the relevant Security Council resolutions.
That means that the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC)
and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
will have immediate, unconditional and unrestricted
access to all sites, mobile or fixed, that they deem
appropriate to inspect. While taking note of that
commitment, my delegation is of the view that the
Security Council should ensure that it is carried out
fully and completely in order to avoid a repetition of
the bad precedent of 1998, which many delegations
still bear in mind. That means that a precise, updated
mandate should be given to inspectors, whose activities
should not meet with any hindrance.
My delegation is prepared to make its
contribution to any approach in line with that rationale.
We note that the objective is the elimination of all
weapons of mass destruction. Furthermore, we believe
that all other related and pending questions should be
resolved as swiftly as possible in order to enable the
inspectors to get back to work. From that perspective,
the talks entered into must be pursued and brought to
fruition in a spirit of good cooperation and objectivity.
In that regard, my delegation wishes to express its
thanks to Mr. Blix and to Mr. ElBaradei for their efforts
and determination to carry out their mandate
effectively. Moreover, we take this opportunity to urge
the Iraqi authorities to make every effort to achieve a
definitive settlement of the issue of missing persons
and that of confiscated Kuwaiti property, in conformity
with the relevant Security Council resolutions.
My country, Guinea, is devoted to the scrupulous
respect for Council resolutions and to the maintenance
of international peace and security. We hope that we
shall continue to give pride of place to negotiation,
with a view to peacefully resolving this crisis and to
keeping the international community safe from a
conflagration that would have grave consequences. My
delegation is convinced that, if the measures that we

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 3)

have described are effectively carried out in a spirit of
good will and frank cooperation, supported by
flexibility and impartiality, we shall together be able to
overcome the obstacles and to achieve the
comprehensive implementation of all the relevant
Council resolutions. Thus, we shall have done good
work by having contributed to preserving the unity and
the credibility of the Council as well as peace and
security in the sensitive region of the Middle East.
Mr. Kolby (Norway): Our point of departure
must be full Iraqi compliance with Security Council
resolutions. That must be the clear message that
emerges from this open meeting.
The international community is faced with a
grave threat from the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. We are uncertain and insecure because we
do not know the extent of that threat, apart from its
potentially devastating effects. Iraq is an important
reason for this insecurity.
There is, however, no uncertainty whatsoever
with respect to the obligations of Iraq. Since the end of
the Gulf war, the world community has demanded,
through the Security Council, that Iraq destroy, remove
or render harmless all its weapons of mass destruction.
A system of monitoring and verification — the United
Nations weapons inspectors — was set up to ensure
Iraqi compliance. The inspections are not an end in
themselves, but a means for the international
community to satisfy itself that Iraq no longer
possesses weapons of mass destruction.
For almost 12 years, Iraq has ignored the
demands of the Security Council. Under strong
pressure, the Government of Iraq has now agreed to
receive inspectors without conditions. Norway hopes
that that represents an Iraqi change of attitude and a
willingness to comply with its obligation to cooperate
fully with the United Nations. There are still, however,
practical and unresolved questions to be tackled before
inspectors can start fulfilling their mandate.
As members of the Security Council, we are
faced with the challenge of determining how we can
ensure credible inspections that remove the insecurity
with which we are faced today. In the immediate
future, we should have a clear and unambiguous
Security Council resolution, with a clear and
unambiguous timetable, as a basis for the new
inspections. Another important element must be the
free and unconditional access of the inspectors to the

whole of Iraq. That means the Security Council will
have to repeal the agreement concluded between Iraq
and the United Nations in 1998 on special procedures
for inspecting the so-called presidential sites — which
include several hundred buildings — unless Iraq itself
declares that it will disregard the agreement. No
buildings or sites can be given immunity from
inspections if we are to get definite answers to the
questions linked to Iraq’s weapons of mass destruction.
We cannot have an inspections regime with loopholes.
In our view, the mandate of the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
and of the International Atomic Energy Agency must
be fully clarified before the inspectors return.
To summarize, two main concerns must be dealt
with. First, it is essential to work towards the
elimination of Iraq’s weapons of mass destruction and
of their delivery systems without using military force.
But if Iraq should yet again fail to comply, there must,
in our view, be absolutely no doubt that that will have
extremely serious consequences for the country.
Secondly, any reaction towards Iraq must be anchored
in international law. The Security Council’s demands
on Iraq are clear and precise. We feel strongly that this
matter is the province of the Security Council. In that
regard, it is vital that the Security Council stand united.
Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): The topic we are
discussing is a very serious one, but I hope that I may
begin with a slightly mischievous remark. One of the
most common themes that we have heard in the
discussion so far is that this whole process has seen the
marginalization of the elected members of the Council.
Yet this afternoon, when all of the permanent members
except one had spoken and an elected member began to
speak, the Chamber emptied. I think the actions in this
Chamber indicate the realities that we must deal with.
I turn now to my text. This meeting is timely. The
whole world is focused on the issue of Iraq. As more
than 15 months have passed since the Security Council
last met formally to consider the situation between Iraq
and Kuwait, it is time for the Council to revisit the key
issues. As we conduct our debate in this Chamber, we
cannot ignore a wider global debate that is taking place
on the same subject. There is a clear international
consensus that Iraq must comply with the Council's
resolutions that it has hitherto defied. But a
simultaneous discussion is taking place about the
possibility of war in Iraq, a war that would have
potentially far-reaching consequences. That is why the

15

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 3)

Council needs to confront this issue squarely. Only the
Council can deliver a credible alternative path towards
peace.
The good news is that United Nations weapons
inspectors are poised to return to Iraq, after a hiatus of
nearly four years. To ensure that they return to Iraq
with a strong hand, intensive consultations are
underway on a new resolution. Most Member States
have learned through the media about the concepts
contained in the various draft texts. Intensive
discussions in the corridors have, in turn, led to today's
discussions in the Chamber. We are pleased that the
wider membership has decided to participate in this
debate and to provide their views on how the Council
should proceed.
As we conduct our meeting today it is vital to
remind ourselves that the Security Council, pursuant to
Article 24 of the Charter, has the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
In his address to the General Assembly on 12
September, United States President George Bush urged
that the terms of the Council's previous resolutions
against Iraq be enforced. Secretary-General Kofi
Annan also declared to the General Assembly on 12
September that “If Iraq's defiance continues, the
Security Council must face its responsibilities.”
Virtually all of us, including Singapore, have
consistently taken the position that Iraq must comply
with the relevant Security Council resolutions, in
particular resolutions 687 (1991), and 1284 (1999).
Those two key resolutions provide the governing
standards for Iraqi compliance. Article 25 of the
Charter clearly states that the decisions of the Security
Council are legally binding on all States. All Security
Council resolutions, irrespective of whether they are
adopted under Chapter VI or Chapter VII of the
Charter, must be complied with. No Council resolution
on any issue can be cast aside without consequence.
Hence, to maintain its credibility and authority, the
Council must vigorously pursue the implementation of
all its resolutions, whether they are on Iraq, the Middle
East, the Balkans or Africa. Selective implementation
will undermine the Council's moral authority.
In the case of Iraq, some important questions
have remained outstanding since the end of the Gulf
War, in 1991. One of the most critical of those
questions is the disarmament of all Iraq's weapons of
mass destruction. That obligation was the keystone of

16

the post-Gulf War ceasefire settlement reached between
the coalition forces and Iraq. The ceasefire terms
adopted by the Council in resolution 687 (1991)
required Iraq to end its weapons of mass destruction
programmes, recognize Kuwait, account for missing
Kuwaitis and third-party nationals, return Kuwaiti
property and end its support for international terrorism.
Resolution 687 (1991) was designed as a
comprehensive framework to restore peace and
maintain the security of the region. Regrettably, Iraq
has not complied with many of the terms of that
resolution, even though 11 and-a-half years have
passed.
The United Nations Special Commission
(UNSCOM) was also formed under resolution 687
(1991) to oversee Iraq's compliance with its
disarmament obligations. Unfortunately, problems over
access to suspected weapons of mass destruction sites
began almost as soon as UNSCOM commenced
operations, in April 1991. Instead of declarations and
verifications, inspections soon turned into a persistent
pattern of hide-and-seek. The inspections crises
became especially acute after 1997 and 1998. The tense
stand-offs and expulsions of inspectors were followed
by temporary compromises that allowed UNSCOM to
resume inspections.
In February 1998, a
memorandum of
understanding was signed between Iraq and the
Secretary-General. It provided for access to eight
presidential sites by inspectors and diplomatic
observers. Resolution 1154 (1998), which was adopted
under Chapter VII of the Charter, stressed that
compliance by Iraq with its obligations to accord
immediate, unconditional and unrestricted access in
conformity with the relevant resolutions was necessary
for the implementation of resolution 687 (1991). It also
warned that “any violation would have severest
consequences for Iraq”.
Despite that, the situation deteriorated. Iraq
barred UNSCOM from inspecting new facilities. In
November 1998, the Security Council unanimously
adopted resolution 1205 (1998). Iraq's refusal to
cooperate with UNSCOM was deemed a flagrant
violation of the ceasefire agreement. Further efforts to
obtain Iraqi cooperation were not successful. The
inspectors were withdrawn. That was followed by a
bombing campaign in December 1998 by the United
States and the United Kingdom. Known as Operation
Desert Fox, that campaign was directed against Iraqi

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 3)

weapons of mass destruction facilities and other
military targets. We should bear in mind this
unfortunate turn of events in 1998 as we attempt once
more to achieve the full implementation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions on Iraq.
After December 1998, it took the Council almost
a year to reach agreement on a new resolution.
Resolution 1284 (1999) was adopted by a vote of 11 in
favour and 4 abstentions. It provided for the suspension
of most sanctions if Iraq cooperated fully with
UNSCOM's successor, the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC).
Almost three years have passed since that resolution
was adopted, but UNMOVIC has been unable to
resume its inspections. Today, even though UNMOVIC
can return to Iraq without the legal necessity of a new
resolution, a consensus is developing that there may be
wisdom in obtaining agreement on a new resolution
before the return of inspectors.
First, resolution 1284 (1999) was not adopted
unanimously. Three permanent members and one nonpermanent member abstained because of ambiguities in
that resolution. This also underscores the need to
secure Council unity and the will to enforce the
decisions of the Council, which is ultimately more
important than passing new resolutions. Indeed, in a
statement delivered on his behalf yesterday by Deputy
Secretary-General Louise Fréchette, the SecretaryGeneral also emphasized the importance of Security
Council unity.
Secondly, we must recognize that the geopolitics
of this issue have shifted since December 1999. A
Security Council that does not recognize new
geopolitical realities will inevitably become a Council
that is unable to carry out its work effectively. We note
that in the statement delivered on his behalf by the
Deputy Secretary-General the Secretary-General also
said that the Council may “choose to pass a new
resolution strengthening the inspectors’ hands so that
there are no weaknesses or ambiguities”. Indeed, the
Secretary-General considered that such a step would be
appropriate.
The events of 11 September have also brought
new focus to the threat posed by weapons of mass
destruction. Singapore attaches great importance to this
question. In our view, the emphasis of any new
resolution should be on disarming Iraq of its weapons
of mass destruction, in compliance with the decisions

of the Security Council. The return of United Nations
inspectors is the first step towards Iraq's compliance
with all Council resolutions. But inspections per se are
not the goal. The final goal is to ensure that Iraq does
not retain any weapons of mass destruction and that it
does not revive any such weapons programmes in that
regard.
We believe that United Nations weapons
inspectors must have all the rights of inspection that
would enable them to achieve these goals. We urge Iraq
to cooperate fully with UNMOVIC and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to enable
their inspectors to perform effective inspections and
monitoring.
This
means
giving
immediate,
unconditional and unrestricted access to all sites,
including presidential sites, without exception.
Unfettered access and the provision of solid evidence
matching Iraq’s declarations will provide a high level
of confidence that Iraq is complying with its
obligations to eradicate all weapons of mass
destruction.
We note that the Government of Iraq has yet to
provide its confirmation of the points of understanding
reached in the Vienna talks on the practical
arrangements for inspections, as outlined in the joint
letter of 8 October from Mr. Hans Blix and Mr.
Mohamed ElBaradei. We urge the Government of Iraq
to do so unequivocally and without delay. As Mr. Blix
told the Security Council at its informal consultations
on 15 October, the simplest way to clear up remaining
points would be to affirm the contents of the joint
letter.
At the same time, UNMOVIC and IAEA must
ensure that all inspections are carried out, as Mr. Blix
has repeatedly put it, in an effective but correct
manner. Today, the stakes are very high. The difference
between successful and unsuccessful inspections may
be the difference between war and peace. Mr. Blix
therefore bears a heavy burden. However, we have full
confidence in him and his team, and his long
experience, professionalism, judgement, impartiality
and temperament are eminently suited to the task
ahead. It is therefore essential that the Security Council
not attempt to micromanage him as he carries out his
tasks. As one of our colleagues said in the Council’s
informal consultations, we should strengthen his hand
and not tie his feet.

17

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 3)

Even as we focus on the important question of
disarming Iraq’s weapons of mass destruction, we must
not lose sight of the human dimension of the Iraq issue.
Singapore attaches great importance to improving the
humanitarian situation of the people of Iraq, who have
suffered greatly over the past decade. Security Council
resolution 661 (1990) was adopted 12 years ago.
Although the sanctions were aimed at the Government
of Iraq, the innocent people of Iraq have borne the
heaviest burden of sanctions, due largely to the
Government’s continued non-compliance with Council
resolutions. Furthermore, after more than a decade,
Kuwaiti and other families continue to be deprived of a
sense of closure on the issue of missing Kuwaitis and
third country nationals.
In an effort to address the humanitarian needs of
the Iraqi people, the oil-for-food programme was
established under resolution 986 (1995) of April 1995.
It has been in effect since December 1996 and has
made a considerable difference in the lives of the Iraqi
people. But it is not a perfect system. It has had to be
modified over the years to meet the humanitarian needs
of the people. The revised procedures for the Goods
Review List adopted in resolution 1409 (2002) of May
2002 were another step forward in the efforts to further
improve that system. But the current shortfall in
funding for humanitarian contracts due to the fall in oil
exports is of great concern. We will work with our
colleagues in the Council to urgently address the
factors contributing to the drop in exports. This is an
urgent issue.
According to the latest figures of the oil-for-food
programme, Iraq would need to export about $7 billion
worth of oil during the current phase which ends on 25
November, to meet its humanitarian programme budget
of $5 billion. Since the current phase began on 30 May
2002, only $3.3 billion worth of oil has been shipped.
In other words, exports would have to be doubled in
half the time to meet the programme’s target.
The oil-for-food programme was conceived as a
temporary measure to provide for the humanitarian
needs of the Iraqi people. It is not a substitute for
normal economic activity in Iraq. It will end as soon as
the Government of Iraq has fully complied with
relevant resolutions. Therefore, Iraq’s full compliance
with relevant Council resolutions provides the path for
sanctions relief.

18

We urge Iraq to cooperate fully with UNMOVIC
in identifying and accounting for all of its weapons of
mass destruction programmes. Under paragraph 22 of
resolution 687 (1991), the embargo on Iraqi exports
will have no further force or effect once the Council
agrees that Iraq has complied with all the requirements
relating to its weapons of mass destruction
disarmament obligations. It is also important to recall
that resolution 687 (1991) notes in paragraph 14 that
these actions to be taken by Iraq “represent steps
towards the goal of establishing in the Middle East a
zone free from weapons of mass destruction”.
We stand at a crossroads on this issue. Only one
path will bring us towards peace. If Iraq refuses to
meet its disarmament obligations, it will most certainly
take itself down the other path. This is an outcome that
all of us would like to avoid. The final choice therefore
lies with the Government of Iraq. The people of Iraq
have suffered for far too long. We urge this
Government to make the right decision at this critical
moment.
Mr. Ryan (Ireland): I would like to thank the
group of the Non-Aligned Movement for taking the
initiative in seeking this debate. It is most important
that all Members of the United Nations have the
opportunity to state their views in the Security Council
on this critical issue.
Ireland fully associates itself with the statement
made earlier in the debate by the representative of
Denmark on behalf of the European Union.
Ireland is a strong advocate of the system of
collective international security enshrined in the United
Nations Charter. Under that system, the Security
Council has the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
On the issue before us, as on every issue, Ireland
considers that it becomes all of us, whether serving on
the Council or not, to respect in every way the integrity
of the Council in the exercise of its duty. The primary
responsibility to make decisions in accordance with the
Charter regarding the maintenance of international
peace and security belongs to the Council, and it must
rest there. Likewise, the Council has the right and the
responsibility under the Charter to make the necessary
judgement if and when its decisions are not respected
or implemented in full. It is for the Council to decide
on the appropriate response.

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 3)

To be a member of the Security Council is to be
especially aware — as all of us surely are aware — of
how Governments and people around the world look to
the Council for a clear lead on grave and sensitive
matters of which it is seized. It is also to be aware that
many Governments and people around the world —
people living their day-to-day lives, not just political
elites — very often define their positions and set their
moral and political compass by the judgements and
decisions of the Council. This is something that is new
in international affairs. And it is a trust we must in
every respect be worthy of.
The Charter provides that all United Nations
Member States, without exception, agree to accept and
carry out the decisions of the Security Council. It is a
matter of grave concern when any Member State
ignores the will of the international community and
continues over many years to disregard the resolutions
of the Council. It undermines respect for international
law. It weakens the international system that we depend
on for our individual and collective security.
This system was put in place to protect us all. We
are all made less secure when any Member State, on
any issue, flouts its rules. The Council has a clear duty
to address such situations and to ensure compliance, in
accordance with the Charter.
In the case of Iraq, Ireland has long been
concerned that legally binding obligations imposed
under
Security
Council
resolutions
remain
unimplemented. The effects of Iraq’s failure to respect
the Council’s resolutions have weighed heavily on the
people of Iraq. Having endured a cruel decade of war,
they have had to endure a decade of comprehensive
economic sanctions on their country. The blame for this
suffering rests primarily with the Government of Iraq.
If it had implemented all its obligations, if it had
cooperated fully and immediately with arms inspectors,
the sanctions would have been removed long ago. It
chose not to do so and it is the people of Iraq who have
suffered from this choice, made by those who govern
them.
The situation has also borne heavily on Iraq’s
neighbours, and particularly on Kuwait. As long as the
Council’s resolutions remain unimplemented, the
security of the region cannot be assured. The failure to
return or to account for all Kuwaiti and third country
nationals and to return all Kuwaiti property defies the
authority of the Security Council and calls into

question the sincerity of the commitments that Iraq
entered into at the Arab League Summit in Baghdad.
Ireland welcomed the fact that President Bush
came to the United Nations and laid before us the
concerns of his country regarding the threat posed by
Iraq’s failure to comply with its obligations under
Security Council resolutions. It is right that the
Security Council give these concerns the most careful
consideration.
Iraq’s failure to comply with its obligations has
long presented a challenge to the United Nations and
the Security Council. Ireland strongly commends the
Secretary-General for his efforts to secure Iraq’s
agreement to accept weapons inspections, which, as he
himself told us in the General Assembly, is the
indispensable first step towards assuring the world that
all Iraq’s weapons of mass destruction have been
eliminated.
We welcomed Iraq’s agreement on 16 September
to accept the return of weapons inspectors
unconditionally. We strongly urge the Iraqi authorities
to back words with action. They must cooperate fully
with the inspectors, hold nothing back, and allow full,
free and unfettered access to all places in the country,
to all relevant documentation and to all relevant
personnel.
We also urge Iraq to make it clear that the
inspectors will be allowed immediate and complete
access to all parts of the country, including presidential
sites. Such access is necessary if the inspections are to
have the necessary credibility within the international
community. Iraq should, without further delay, confirm
that it accepts and will facilitate all the practical
arrangements required for the conduct of inspections.
Ireland has the strongest conviction that the
United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission and the International Atomic Energy
Agency, under the leadership of, respectively, Hans
Blix and Mohamed ElBaradei, will carry out the
inspections for which this Council has provided with
the required rigour and professionalism. We are
entirely confident that they will be guided solely by
their mandate and that their judgements will be
objective and impartial. Ireland believes that the
inspectors should enter Iraq as soon as possible and
begin the process of disarmament, in accordance with
resolution 1284 (1999) and any new provisions which
might be put in place by the Council. We also believe

19

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 3)

that if Iraq, despite its recent commitment, again fails
to cooperate with inspectors, the Council must, as the
Secretary-General said, face its responsibilities.
As a member of the Security Council, Ireland is
deeply conscious of the overwhelming wish of the
international community that the solution to this issue
be found through peaceful means and in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations. We will weigh
very carefully the views expressed by the membership
in this debate.
We believe that this common goal can be
achieved and that it is well within the ability of the
Security Council to devise a resolution which will
create the necessary conditions to do so. In Article 24
of the Charter, the Members of the United Nations
agreed that, in carrying out its primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
the Council acts on their behalf. The Security Council
is therefore entitled to expect the full support of the
international community, but it must also ensure that it
retains that support. The full authority of the Security
Council is greatly enhanced when its actions
correspond to the wishes of the broader United Nations
membership and are seen to enjoy their support.
In particular, in a matter of such moment as this,
the Security Council should make every effort to
command the widest possible consensus among its own
members. There could be no better demonstration of
the strength of the Council’s resolve. The resolution
should insist on unfettered access for the arms
inspectors. It should clarify the modalities, remove
ambiguities and facilitate their work so as to ensure
effective inspection of all sites. The resolution should
leave no doubt that Iraq must come into compliance
and do so without delay or further attempts to evade
the obligations imposed on it by the Security Council.
The resolution should make it clear that the Council
will take any necessary decision to enforce compliance
if Iraq does not cooperate as required. Any such
decision must be taken by the Security Council in full
accordance with the Charter.
From our discussions with other Council
members, it is clear to us that the vast majority,
perhaps all, believe that such an approach would be
most likely to lead to the peaceful solution desired by
the international community and that they would be
willing to support such a resolution.

20

I have already referred to the suffering of the
people of Iraq, which is primarily due to the disastrous
choices made by their Government. This is why Ireland
actively supported the negotiation and adoption earlier
this year of resolution 1409 (2002), which established
the Goods Review List, setting the humanitarian
programme on a new footing.
That programme, however, depends on a flow of
oil sufficient to provide it with the necessary funding.
It is most regrettable that, for various reasons — chief
among them Iraq’s interruptions of its oil exports,
Iraq’s imposition of illegal surcharges and Iraq’s sales
of oil outside the escrow account — funding for the
humanitarian programme remains inadequate. It is
most important that this issue be addressed by the
Council in the period ahead.
Finally, Ireland hopes that an effective and
thorough inspection process, with the full cooperation
of the Iraqi authorities, will lead on to an early
suspension of sanctions, in full accordance with the
provisions of resolution 1284 (1999).
The Government of Iraq has it in its power to
remove the present tensions and to end the suffering of
its people. All it has to do is to meet in full and without
delay its obligations under Security Council
resolutions. It should do so without any further
prevarication.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation actively supported
the request of the Non-Aligned Movement to convene
this open debate on Iraq. It gives the Security Council
an opportunity to hear and consider the opinions of all
States Members of the United Nations before
determining how to proceed on the question of Iraq.
This approach is in full consonance with the United
Nations Charter.
For almost 12 years now, the international
community has sought a way to settle the Iraqi
situation. Throughout that time, the Security Council
has adopted more than 50 resolutions and endured
several severe crises. The current ongoing impasse is
rooted not only in the position of the Iraqi side,
although we are far from condoning Baghdad’s
behaviour, while the need for Iraq to meet all its
obligations under Security Council resolutions has
been frequently alluded to yesterday and today. We
fully support such assessments. At the same time, in a
number of instances the Security Council has been

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 3)

unable to hold up its own end with respect to an
objective assessment of the situation and to meeting its
own obligations to work for a comprehensive
settlement in the Persian Gulf.

The former UNSCOM, in this way, through its
acts of provocation, fully discredited itself and
simultaneously undermined the pre-December 1998
prospects for reaching a comprehensive settlement.

Throughout their many years of work in Iraq, the
United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) and
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
conducted some 7,000 inspections. As a result, they
achieved significant progress in shutting down Iraq’s
weapons of mass destruction programmes. The
inspections allowed us to destroy more components of
weapons of mass destruction than were destroyed by
the military strikes against Iraq during the Gulf War.

The Security Council then found itself in a
profound crisis not of its own making on the question
of Iraq and for a long time was unable to get out of this
impasse. And then, a year later, we drafted Security
Council resolution 1284 (1999), which allowed us to
renew the inspections on a new genuinely international
basis. However, this resolution contained extremely
ambiguous criteria for suspension of the sanctions,
which gave an opportunity to individual Security
Council members at their discretion to maintain the
embargo indefinitely.

We have managed to structure a material balance
in the nuclear sphere which, in 1998, in the opinion of
IAEA, allowed us to convert this file into a long-term
monitoring regime.
Unfortunately, the Security Council was not able
to recognize this fact four years ago. It is an important
thing that this conclusion was supported by the
Director General of IAEA, Mr. ElBaradei, in his letter
to the President of the Security Council of 14 October,
in which he clearly indicated that there are no
outstanding unresolved nuclear disarmament issues.
This has been circulated to Security Council Members
and everyone can become acquainted with it.
There is a virtually complete picture of the
missile situation as well. A significant portion of the
stocks of chemical weapons have been destroyed,
although there were some outstanding issues requiring
further clarification. The largest problems persisted in
the biological sphere. But on these issues and all the
outstanding issues, solutions were possible. At any
rate, documents of the former UNSCOM testify that
such was the case.
However, this did not in fact happen. In
December 1998 the head of the former UNSCOM
provoked a crisis, arbitrarily withdrawing inspectors
from Iraq without the approval of the Security Council.
His report came to the Council only after United States
and United Kingdom aviation had launched military
strikes against Iraq. In fact, the United States
Government, after these strikes, stated that the strikes
had dealt with the issue of eliminating the vestiges of
Iraqi weapons of mass destruction programmes,
although the relevant information was not given to the
Security Council.

For this reason Russia, together with France,
China and Malaysia, abstained in the vote on resolution
1284 (1999). We made proposals to give concrete
substance to the criteria of sanctions suspension in the
context of a comprehensive settlement. These
proposals are well known and they remain in force.
We will not forget the fact that in resolution 1382
(2001), the members unanimously stated their
commitment to a comprehensive settlement on the
basis of existing Council decisions, including a finetuned Security Council resolution 1284 (1999). The
Security Council must carry out these commitments, as
the other part of Council resolution 1382 (2001) was
carried out, and create a goods review list. So there
were two parts to the resolution. One part of it has been
complied with, the other has not.
Russia, being a responsible member of the
international community, has done and will do its
utmost to prevent a renewal of Iraqi weapons of mass
destruction programmes. We are prepared to cooperate
on this matter with all States. Up to now, we, like all
unbiased observers, have not seen any kind of
persuasive evidence that there are weapons of mass
destruction in Iraq or programmes to develop them.
Nor have we seen any other facts that would situate
Iraq in the context of combating terrorism. The only
way to remove any doubts is the immediate
redeployment of the international inspectors to Iraq.
And today, there are no legal or technical impediments
to doing this. Moreover, as a result of the intensive
efforts of a whole host of countries, including Russia,
as well as the United Nations Secretary-General, the
leadership of UNMOVIC and IAEA, Baghdad has

21

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 3)

consented, not only to an unconditional return of the
United Nations inspectors, but also to UNMOVIC’s
and IAEA’s new, enhanced and very effective
parameters for conducting the inspections.
In this way we have everything we need to ensure
that there is no renewal of the proscribed military
programmes in Iraq and that there is a political and
diplomatic settlement of the crisis. We see no reason to
delay deployment of the UNMOVIC and IAEA
structures in Iraq. Neither formally nor legally, in order
to begin the inspections, do we need any new decisions
to be taken by the Security Council. This has been
confirmed by Messrs. Blix and ElBaradei. They do not
need new decisions. They need clarity.
Do all Security Council members support the
swift redeployment of the inspectors in Iraq? If the
Council has a prevailing desire to give further support
to UNMOVIC and the IAEA in the interest of an
effective implementation of existing resolutions, then
we will be prepared to look at the relevant proposals,
including and based on the great importance of
maintaining Council unity.
We are calling for collective steps by the
international community. Unilateral actions do not
facilitate the efforts for a settlement, as we see over
and over again, according to the example of the
unilaterally announced so-called no-fly zones. At the
same time, with the efforts of non-renewal of Weapons
of Mass Destruction programmes in Iraq, we must
continue to press for Iraq’s compliance with all other
Security Council requirements, particularly the need to
shed light on the fate of the missing detainees, a swift
conclusion of the process underway to return the
Kuwaiti archives and a return of Kuwaiti property.
When we listen to the media, we might get the
impression that the most important thing is to reach an
agreement on whether or nor we are adopting one
resolution or two. In fact, the issue is not how many
resolutions, or do we need any resolutions. That diverts
attention from the crux of the matter. But in fact we
believe that the crux of the matter is the following.
If we are all sincerely interested in the nonrenewal of weapons of mass destruction programmes in
Iraq, then what is the remaining issue? What are we
waiting for? The inspectors can travel as early as
tomorrow and Iraq knows that it must fully and
scrupulously cooperate with the inspectors. If we are
talking not about the deployment of the inspections but

22

about an attempt to use the Security Council to create a
legal basis for the use of force, or even for a regime
change of a United Nations Member State — and this
goal has been constantly and publicly alluded to by
several officials — then we see no way how the
Security Council could give its consent to that. I
reiterate that the crux of the matter is not in the number
of resolutions.
The Charter powers of the Security Council allow
it at any time to make decisions about any measures
which could be required to eliminate real threats. The
important thing now is to achieve a comprehensive
settlement, based on political and diplomatic methods,
with the central role of the Security Council and in
strict compliance with Council resolutions on the
norms of international law.
In this we see the common platform for the
United Nations work on Iraq and we are prepared to
interact on this platform with other members of the
Security Council. This is what we have been called to
by the vast majority of the international community
during the discussions yesterday and today. That is the
opinion of the world community. And that is geopolitical reality as well. We are convinced that Security
Council members will not be able to ignore this call.
The President (spoke in French): I would like to
reassure the representative of the Russian Federation
that, according to the details provided by the
Secretariat, all of the letters received from the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) have now
been circulated to all members of the Council. The
latest document received is that sent by the
representative of the Director General of the IAEA, at
the United Nations. It was sent to all Member States
Wednesday night 16 October 2002.
Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation endorses the statement made by Costa
Rica on behalf of the Rio Group. We are also grateful
also for the statements that have been made here by so
many delegations during the past two days where we
find a variety of perspectives on this issue that will
serve as a frame of reference for further discussions
within the Security Council.
In recognizing the importance of this general
debate on Iraq, we wish to stress the centrality of this
multilateral forum in discussing this situation that has
attracted enormous attention on the part of the Security
Council over the past twelve years. We also stress the

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 3)

special importance of using multilateral means to
respond adequately and legitimately to issues of global
concern. We trust that, at the end of our exchange, the
actions adopted will confirm the Security Council as
the central and indispensable actor in any international
decision regarding Iraq.
Colombia is participating in the consideration of
this issue, motivated essentially by the need to preserve
the role and effectiveness of the United Nations and the
multilateral system; by the need to stress the role of the
Security Council as the principal guarantor of
international peace and security; by the need to have all
Member States comply unconditionally with its
resolutions, and by the need to reaffirm international
law and the general principles that make possible our
peaceful coexistence.
We are aware of the general dissatisfaction in the
international community regarding the response the
Iraqi Government has given in the past to the demands
set by the Security Council following the events of
2 August 1990. Up until just a few weeks ago, the
attitude of Iraq towards the Secretary-General was
intransigent. Its communications with regard to the
Council were defiant and its views on the resolutions
adopted were a source of considerable surprise. Iraq
sowed doubt and mistrust in the international
community and thus, in turn, well-founded suspicions
were created with regard to the possibility that Iraq was
continuing its programmes for the development of
weapons of mass destruction.
We value the intention of Iraq to cooperate
unconditionally with the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC)
for the return of weapons inspectors. We recognize the
progress made and the practical results achieved in
negotiations between the Executive Chairman of
UNMOVIC and the Baghdad Government. But we
note, at the same time, that the work of the Security
Council and each of its members would have been
considerably easier if, from the outset, the Baghdad
authorities had cooperated unconditionally in applying
the Security Council resolutions in accordance with
Article 25 of the Charter.
It was clear to the international community that
its unequivocal signals that measures would be taken in
the case of Iraq’s non-compliance with Security
Council resolutions led to a change of attitude on the
part of the Iraqi authorities.

We firmly support the work of Dr. Hans Blix and
his UNMOVIC team, as well as that of Dr. Mohamed
ElBaradei of the IAEA. Their professionalism and
great diplomatic skill have been evident in recent
weeks. We are certain the Security Council will
continue to support their leadership so that they can
achieve the objective of disarmament, which has not
been possible for more than a decade.
We consider it indispensable that the weapons
inspectors should be able, as soon as possible, to finish
the work that the United Nations Special Commission
(UNSCOM) was unable to complete. It is urgent that
they examine and verify the information the Iraqi
Government is obligated to provide its compliance with
Security Council resolutions. We are sure there will be
credible, serious, respectful, professional and firm
inspections, for which purpose we need genuine
cooperation on the part of the Iraqi authorities.
UNMOVIC, however, must arrive on site with a
renewed mandate from the Security Council that
validates its determinations and adapts them to the new
realities. For Colombia, there are political and legal
reasons that make it necessary to define with precision,
firmness and clarity the parameters for the inspections.
This would be consistent with the statements of Dr.
Blix to the effect that it is advisable to begin activities
on the ground after the Council has reached a decision.
Our greatest challenge is striking a balance
between, on one hand, the willingness of the Baghdad
Government to fulfil its obligations, and, on the other,
the steadfastness and determination that the
international community must maintain to prevent a
repetition of the challenge faced by the Council during
the last four years.
Given present circumstances, this is a unique
opportunity and, in any event, the only opportunity for
a nation that must overcome isolation and rejoin the
community of nations on equal footing. Therefore, the
greatest challenge for Iraq is to demonstrate to the
world that it does not constitute a threat to anyone.
Iraq not only has problems relating to its potential
capacity to produce weapons of mass destruction.
There is a disturbing humanitarian situation concerning
the Iraqi population, for which the Iraqi Government is
directly responsible. The oil-for-food programme
established by the Council to respond effectively to
that situation has shown favourable results, despite
difficulties in its implementation.

23

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 3)

There are also other pending issues which must
be resolved satisfactorily. We refer to the return of
Kuwaiti property by Iraq, especially the national
archives, on which a commitment was recently
reached. Additionally, there is the matter of prisonersof-war and missing persons who are nationals of
Kuwait and other States. The discussion on the return
of weapons inspectors should not distract us from those
obligations of the Baghdad Government.
Twelve years ago, when Iraq launched its terrible
invasion of Kuwait in 1990, Colombia was, at that time
also, a non-permanent member of this Council. On that
occasion, Iraq disregarded the decisions of the Council
and other means had to be resorted to, which,
unfortunately, did not achieve their goal. This time we
have great confidence in the statesmanship of the
actors involved and their ability to ensure that we will
not become involved in a political and military cycle
similar to that of 1990.
We, the Council members, must make a
fundamental contribution, which would begin with a
supreme effort to narrow differences and decide, in a
cohesive, even unanimous, manner, what course to
follow to resolve this critical conflict.
Let me conclude with two thoughts. First, we
should separate the subject of this general debate from
the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian issue. The political motivations that
underlie our positions on the two situations are
substantially different.
Secondly, developments in this situation and in
other situations on the Council’s agenda should not
distract us from the fight against international
terrorism, which is the biggest challenge facing today’s
world. Terrorism does not rest, and it has continued to
show its almost unlimited capacity for causing
destruction and death. We must continue facing it with
renewed determination.
Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): My
delegation wishes to express its gratitude to South
Africa and to the Non-Aligned Movement for having
taken the initiative to hold this very timely open debate
on the situation in Iraq.
My delegation listened with interest to the
statements made by preceding speakers and shares the
general concern at the mounting tension created by the
problem of disarming Iraq.

24

As a country associated with the European Union,
Bulgaria supports the statement made yesterday by the
representative of Denmark on behalf of the European
Union.
As the Secretary-General recalled in the
statement he made at the outset of the debate — a
statement that my country endorses — it is now more
than ever necessary to maintain the credibility of the
United Nations. For Bulgaria, maintaining the central
role of the Security Council in resolving the Iraqi
problem is of crucial importance. My country is
convinced that the United Nations and the Security
Council are in a position to resolve the crisis through
diplomatic means in keeping with the Charter of the
United Nations and the principles of international law.
President Bush’s speech before the General
Assembly on 12 September 2002, as well as his
subsequent public statements and those of other
American leaders, attest to the fact that the United
States has made the fundamental choice to use the
mechanism of the Security Council, which cannot be
circumvented, to resolve the problem of disarming
Iraq. Bulgaria, which attaches great importance to the
principle of multilateralism as a regulating principle for
international relations, is encouraged by this choice on
the part of the United States.
My country is convinced that the range of
diplomatic means for a peaceful solution of the crisis
has not yet been exhausted.
The Bulgarian delegation is grateful to the
Secretary-General for his constructive role in the
dialogue with Iraq. His political experience, wisdom,
humanity and moral prestige are valuable assets for the
United Nations and the Security Council at this crucial
moment in the history of our Organization, at a time
when its credibility is being sorely tested.
Bulgaria is grateful to the Executive Chairman of
the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC), Mr. Hans Blix,
for having made his skills and professionalism
available to the Council. His independent judgement is
not to be doubted. Bulgaria reiterates its full
confidence in him and wishes to assure him, as well as
Mr. ElBaradei, the head of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), of its full support.
The time has come objectively to assess the often
turbulent relations that have existed between Iraq and

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 3)

the Security Council since 1991. It must be
acknowledged that, had Iraq abided by resolution 687
(1991) in 1991, the sanctions would have been lifted at
that time. However, that was not what happened. The
cat-and-mouse game between the Iraqi authorities and
the inspectors mandated by the Security Council has
benefited no one, least of all international peace and
security, which have been put at risk on more than one
occasion.
Bulgaria is categorical that only a frank and
honest dialogue between the Security Council and Iraq
can alleviate existing tensions. My country calls on
Iraq fully to cooperate with the Security Council and to
abide fully, unconditionally and without delay by the
Council’s resolutions.
Among Iraq’s obligations under the relevant
Security Council resolutions, those relating to the
destruction of weapons of mass destruction are an
undeniable priority for the international community.
Our debate has once again made this clear.
Yesterday the representative of Iraq said — as did
the Iraqi Minister for Foreign Affairs in the General
Assembly almost a month ago — that Iraq had no
weapons of mass destruction. Let us take the Iraqi
authorities at their word. If that is the case, nothing
should stop them from providing immediate,
unconditional and unimpeded access to UNMOVIC
and IAEA inspectors, to all sites that the latter deem
necessary and to all organizations and individuals that
the inspectors might wish to question, under the
conditions that they deem necessary for the fulfilment
of their task.
One very important aspect of the Iraqi
question — a human aspect — is Iraq’s noncompliance with the provisions of the relevant Security
Council resolutions regarding the return of Kuwaiti and
third-country nationals, Kuwait property and the
Kuwaiti national archives, as well as the resumption of
Iraq’s participation in the work of the Tripartite
Commission, under the auspices of the International
Committee of the Red Cross. Bulgaria takes this
opportunity to reiterate its appeal to Iraq to comply
with these resolutions.
Given the difficult history of relations between
Iraq and the Security Council, it is clear that
UNMOVIC will not be able to complete its work
without a stronger and clearer mandate. This mandate
can emanate only from a new Security Council

resolution. My country is prepared to work for the
adoption of such a resolution as soon as possible.
Bulgaria is firmly convinced that a peaceful
solution to the problem of disarming Iraq is possible.
The road to peace is certainly narrow; it is not easy and
has obstacles of all kinds, but it does exist. At the end
of the road is the lifting of sanctions against Iraq and
the lasting normalization of the situation in that
country and throughout the region.
Aware of its obligations under Article 24 of the
Charter of the United Nations as an elected member of
the Security Council, my country will make a
constructive contribution to the settlement of the
problem of the disarmament of Iraq. Bulgaria is
prepared to work together with the other members of
the Council to find a solution to this problem that is in
keeping with the Charter of the United Nations and the
principles of international law. We all have heard the
appeal of the Secretary-General, who reminded us that
only unity in the Security Council can enable us to
send a strong and clear message to Iraq so that it will
fully comply with the relevant Council resolutions. My
country unreservedly supports this appeal. Bulgaria
believes that in the current situation, the unity of the
Council is at the heart of its approach and of its action.
Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): During this two-day
debate, there has been a very rich and much-needed
exchange of views on the situation between Iraq and
Kuwait. We welcome the participation in this debate of
such a large number of countries from the general
membership. This was a clear indication of the wish of
the membership to see this issue discussed within this
multilateral setting. We thank the representative of
South Africa, who, in his capacity as Chairman of the
Non-Aligned Movement, requested this meeting.
Mauritius fully supported this request.
We have noted a convergence of views on several
important points, and one on which there is complete
unanimity is the fact that Iraq must dispose of all of its
weapons of mass destruction in compliance with
Security Council resolutions 687 (1991) and 1284
(1999).
Following the adoption of resolution 687 (1991),
Iraq ought to have completely disposed of its weapons
of mass destruction and inspectors ought to have been
allowed to complete their work. However, by choosing
to reject the return of United Nations inspectors and by
using other delaying tactics, Iraq defied the

25

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 3)

international community and the authority of the
Security Council. Such defiance has not helped either
the Government of Iraq or the people of Iraq, who
continue to live under the regime of United Nationsimposed sanctions. Yet the United Nations Special
Commission (UNSCOM) made significant progress,
and if resolution 1284 (1999) had been duly complied
with, the situation today could have been altogether
different.
The almost four-year absence of United Nations
inspectors has not only caused a serious break and
delay in resolving the whole issue of the disarmament
of Iraq in the area of weapons of mass destruction, but
has intensified the uncertainties regarding the actual
state of the Iraqi programme of weapons of mass
destruction. With its delaying and evasive tactics, Iraq
has created greater doubts and suspicions about its
possession of weapons of mass destruction.
Admittedly, Iraq is not the only country with
regard to which the issue of the proliferation of
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons of mass
destruction arises, and we certainly support all actions
aimed at eliminating all such weapons throughout the
world. But on the basis of past actions by Iraq, the
Security Council has determined that Iraq’s possession
of such weapons constitutes a real threat to
international peace and security. It is therefore
imperative that Iraqi weapons of mass destruction be
completely destroyed.
Notwithstanding the track record of Iraq, we are
pleased that there has been a positive evolution in the
Iraqi position in the last few weeks. Following the
intervention of the Secretary-General and Arab States,
and appeals from the international community, Iraq has
been persuaded to accept the return of United Nations
inspectors. We welcome the decision of the
Government of Iraq to accept the unconditional return
of the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC). We also
welcome the outcome of the recent talks in Vienna
between, on the one hand, Mr. Hans Blix, Executive
Chairman of UNMOVIC, and Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei,
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), and, on the other, the Iraqi authorities.
We also note with satisfaction that agreements have
been reached on a wide range of issues pertaining to
the modalities and practical arrangements for the return
of inspectors.

26

Iraq must now stand by its engagement. It must
fully respect the commitment it has undertaken. We
appeal to the Iraqi Government to extend its full
cooperation with the inspection teams. Iraq must
understand that if it is to provide all the necessary
cooperation and information required by UNMOVIC, it
will enable the Council to lay this matter to rest and
review the sanctions regime imposed on the country.
The return of the inspectors to Iraq is in the interests of
all, especially the Government and the people of Iraq.
As many delegations have pointed out, on a
purely legal basis no new resolution is necessary for
the return of the inspectors. However, if in its
collective wisdom the Council feels that the inspection
regime needs to be reinforced in order to provide
greater clarity and, inter alia, to give inspectors
immediate and unfettered access to all sites, including
presidential sites, as well as to ensure Iraqi
cooperation, Mauritius will give careful and positive
consideration to such an initiative, which we believe
should take into account the principles and objectives
of the Charter, including respect for the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Iraq and for the dignity of
the Iraqi people.
It will also be important for such a resolution to
enjoy the full support of the Council as a whole, since,
as we all know, the Council’s action is most effective
when it acts in unison. It is our expectation that Iraq
will fully cooperate with the inspectors and comply
with any such resolution that the Council might adopt.
Mauritius considers it important that UNMOVIC
resume its activities in Iraq as soon as possible. Exactly
one month has elapsed since Iraq expressed its
readiness to allow, without any conditions, a United
Nations inspection team into Iraq. We should not be
perceived as delaying the process. Instead, all efforts
need to be made to expedite the departure of
UNMOVIC and the IAEA with clear and defined
mandates. Here, let me express my delegation’s full
support for and confidence in Mr. Hans Blix and
Mr. ElBaradei, who, guided by the principles of
professionalism, independent vigour, impartiality and
transparency, will carry out their task with efficiency
and credibility. We should avoid prejudging the
effectiveness of their work, as well as that of their
respective multinational and independent teams. Nor
should we – as the Permanent Representative of
Singapore said – try to micromanage them and their
teams.

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 3)

It is equally important that Iraq also address all
the outstanding issues pertaining to Kuwaiti prisoners
of war and the return of Kuwaiti property, as well as
the question of missing third party nationals, so that
there can be a complete normalization of relations
between Iraq and its neighbour.
As much as it is important for Iraq to comply
with Security Council resolutions and to cooperate with
weapons inspectors, it is equally important that in the
event of any non-compliance, the Security Council
retain its centrality and authority in deciding the most
appropriate course of action to obtain compliance.
There is clearly a strong determination on the part of
the international community to enforce compliance.
There is equally a strong desire to exhaust all
diplomatic efforts in that regard, and Mauritius will
continue to support such efforts.
Mauritius has full confidence that in case of
non-compliance and on the basis of an appropriate
report by Mr. Blix, the Security Council would
collectively take the required action in full compliance
with the principles of international law, taking into
account the geopolitical realities. All of that can be
avoided if Iraq takes the right steps.
Mauritius reiterates its view that it is the duty of
all United Nations Members to comply with Security
Council resolutions, in accordance with Article 25 of
the Charter. There should be no exceptions, and the
Security Council should show even-handedness and
impartiality in dealing with all those who defy its
resolutions.
With its immense wealth in agricultural and
petroleum, with the qualities of its men, its women and
children, with its culture, Iraq can and should have a
positive influence on the region and its stability and
future. Unfortunately, that is not the case today. Iraq
today is at the confluence of all crises.
Our debate over the last two days has confirmed
the importance that the United Nations community
attaches to questions concerning international peace
and security.
Cameroon has noted and shares the twin
challenges facing the United Nations of carrying out its
peace and security missions, promptly and effectively,
and its ongoing concern to ensure that in doing so, its
actions are legitimate, credible and transparent.

The problems involved in the question of Iraq
very clearly demonstrate this dual concern of the
international community.
My delegation notes and condemns that in many
ways the Iraqi authorities have not always respected
the letter and the spirit of the numerous resolutions
adopted by the Security Council, neither on the
situation between Iraq and Kuwait nor on the
disarmament of Iraq.
Iraq must demonstrate that it does not possess
weapons of mass destruction. The challenge of our
debate today is precisely the disarmament of Iraq.
Despite some promising actions on Iraq’s part,
especially since the recent Arab League Summit of
March 2002, we must note that crucial problems such
as the restitution of Kuwaiti property; Kuwait’s
veritable national memory, including the national
archives; and the return of Kuwaiti and third country
nationals, as well as the remains of the deceased, are
issues still pending.
Iraq’s blatant non-compliance with Council
resolutions has been noted by all. It is unacceptable
because it undermines the credibility of the United
Nations and could pave the way for an undesirable and
very harmful unilateralism, which could plunge us into
relations governed by the law of the jungle and
displace us from our organized world based on the
Charter of the United Nations and international law.
Today’s debate, going beyond the important
question of disarming Iraq through United Nations
inspections, poses questions of principle. I would like
to talk about two such principles. The first and most
important is the obligation of every United Nations
Member State to comply unconditionally and without
delay with the decisions of the Security Council. The
other, which is linked to the first, is the Council’s
obligation to act quickly and fairly in deciding the
measures it deems necessary, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter.
Coming back specifically to the need to see Iraq
without the proscribed weapons — biological,
chemical or nuclear — my country is in favour of an
immediate and unconditional resumption of inspections
for the disarmament of Iraq by the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC) and the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA).

27

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 3)

The Iraqi position, as found in a letter addressed
to the Secretary-General dated 16 September 2002,
indicates considerable progress; it is a large step in the
right direction by Iraq, in keeping with what is
demanded of it by the Council.
It is the interest of all that the inspections be
carried out in strict respect of the relevant Security
Council resolutions, especially resolutions 1284 (1999)
and 687 (1991).
We all believe that Iraq question is the one of
greatest interest to the international community. The
international community’s expectations contain two
hopes: that Iraq does not possess weapons of mass
destruction and that the world will not wake up
tomorrow to a widespread military conflagration.
Those
hopes
create
an
extraordinary
responsibility for the inspection teams led by Mr. Blix,
Executive Chairman of UNMOVIC and Mr. ElBaradei,
Director General of IAEA.
For that reason, Cameroon believes that it would
be highly useful for the Council to reaffirm in a new
resolution its firm and total support for Hans Blix and
his colleagues at UNMOVIC, as well as for the teams
of IAEA, before their departure for Iraq.
This new resolution is therefore more a political
opportunity — just as is our present public meeting —
than a legal necessity.
Beyond reiterating firm support for the
inspectors, the new resolution must define once again
the practical details of the inspections so as to remove
any ambiguities that have arisen on the question. The
effectiveness of the inspections depends on it. Also, the
resolution must clearly indicate that the Council will
take the appropriate measures if it observes once again
that Iraq does not respect its decisions. The resolution
must, in addition, without prejudice to Iraq’s conduct,
contain provisions foreseeing the possibility of
suspending or even removing all relevant sanctions, if
Iraq meets all the Council’s demands.

deployed to Iraq. It is the only way for Iraq to prove its
sincerity and good faith and to spare the world one
more conflict, which would only exacerbate the
suffering of the Iraqi people, who are the main if not
the sole victims of the procrastinations and posturing
which have been frequent in this episode in the history
of international relations over the last 12 years. Iraq,
then, could reassume the vocation contained in its
name: a country of water, a country of life.
It is clear that one more refusal by Iraq to comply
with the Security Council’s requirements would be one
refusal too many, because the Council would then have
to take appropriate measures to ensure compliance with
its decisions, in accordance with the provisions of
Article 42.
I appeal to Council members to remain united,
given the grave circumstances, and to show confidence
in our body to resolve this issue, this crisis, and to do
so in a consensual fashion.
I am pleased to note that during the consultations,
all Council members, bar none, clearly assured me that
they would undertake nothing against Iraq without the
Council’s explicit approval. Therefore, I have good
reason to remain particularly optimistic.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The Permanent Observer of Palestine has asked to
make another statement. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic):
Thank you, Mr. President, for giving us a second
opportunity to address the Council.

Demonstrating the consensus of the large United
Nations family, this resolution must be a message of
support for the inspectors, but also and especially a
message of firmness to Iraq.

A few moments ago, the representative of Israel
gave a lengthy and rather strange intervention,
discussing, in the first place, essential matters
unrelated to the issue at hand. Secondly, he gave false
legal arguments, false interpretations of the provisions
of the United Nations Charter and of Security Council
resolutions. Thirdly, he attempted to falsify Israel’s
record in non-compliance with the Council’s
resolutions, accusing many speakers and launching
unjustified accusations. This is why we find ourselves
obliged to reply to his intervention.

On behalf of Cameroon, I would like to invite the
Iraqi authorities, as they have already committed to do,
to cooperate fully with the inspectors who will soon be

The representative of Israel tried to say that there
is a difference in the nature of the resolutions pursuant
to Chapter VII and those pursuant to Chapter VI of the

28

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 3)

Charter. He went so far as to say that the resolutions
adopted pursuant to Chapter VI are mere
recommendations. Of course, we do admit that there is
a difference in the fact that there is an enforcement
mechanism pursuant to Chapter VII. But to attempt to
give the impression that some resolutions are binding
and others are not is legally false and should be
condemned, because this is an attempt to falsify one of
the Charter’s principles. Article 25 is extremely clear,
and all Security Council resolutions are binding.
Israel is the only State in the United Nations that
has been recognized by the Security Council as an
occupation Power. It is the only State within the United
Nations that continues an active colonialist process in
the twenty-first century, now that the entire world has
practically eliminated colonialism — or most of it.
The record is quite clear. Since the beginning of
Israeli occupation in 1967, the Council has adopted 37
resolutions related to Israeli practices in the occupied
territories. Thirty-seven resolutions, Mr. President, that
deal only with Israeli practices in the occupied
territories. They do not include resolutions 242 (1967),
338 (1973), or Israeli practices in southern Lebanon;
nor do they include the peacekeeping operations. These
37 resolutions deal only with Israeli practices in the
occupied territories.
Among the resolutions in question, there are 27
that reaffirm the Fourth Geneva Convention and call on
occupation forces to respect the Convention. What has
happened? Israel continues to violate the terms of the
Geneva Convention, one serious violation after the
other, including collective punishment and, recently,
war crimes.
Among the resolutions in question, some relate to
the displaced Palestinian people, not the refugees, but
the displaced people of the 1967 war. What was the
result? Israel refused to implement the resolutions, and
there are now 700,000 displaced Palestinians. Israel
has not allowed a single one back.
Among the resolutions in question are those
concerning the illegal Israeli practices and the attempt
to change the legal and demographic nature of AlQuds, resolutions which considered the law concerning
Al-Quds null and void and asked Israel to put a stop to
such practices. What was the result? Israel continued
violating the resolutions and pursued the Judaization of
the city, insisting on referring to it as the capital of
Israel.

Among the resolutions in questions are those
concerning the illegal Israeli settlements in the
occupied territories that called upon Israel to put a stop
to these settlements, and even to dismantle them. What
was the result? Israel pursued its settlers’ colonialism
and over the years transferred 400,000 Israelis into the
occupied territories. The settlements now dominate and
occupy 40 per cent of our occupied territories.
Among the resolutions in question are those
concerning the extradition of certain Palestinians,
asking Israel to put a stop to this practice, but Israel
has continued this practice until very recently. There
are resolutions calling for the protection of Palestinian
civilians and resolutions calling for investigations by
the Council itself. The Council set up a committee for
this purpose, but Israel refused to receive it.
The latest Security Council resolution, 1405
(2002), was to develop accurate information regarding
recent events perpetrated by Israel in the Jenin refugee
camp through a fact-finding team. What was the result?
Again, the answer is very clear.
So, as we can see, it is a matter not only of what
took place in recent months, but also of systematic
policies that Israel has carried out for the past 35 years,
in blatant violation of 37 Security Council resolutions,
not to mention international law and the Charter of the
United Nations. Thus, the entire life of the Palestinian
people has been destroyed: their land has been stolen
and their houses have been demolished; they have been
deprived of their fundamental rights, of their State and
of the right to return to their land.
There is no other example of this kind in the
world today. It is unprecedented in the history of the
United Nations, and yet the Israeli representative says
that there are no double standards. Why did the
Security Council not try to enforce compliance with its
resolutions? Why did the Council accept Israel’s
blatant defiance of the Council and even its disrespect
for that body? Why were no measures undertaken,
pursuant to Chapter VII of the Charter, to enforce
compliance with and respect for Council resolutions?
We know the reason, and I shall not dwell on it now.
But it undoubtedly constitutes a double standard. I do
not believe that there is anyone in the Arab region, or
perhaps in the entire world, who does not know that.
I shall reiterate what I said this morning. What we
need today from the Security Council is a more serious
attitude, in conformity with the Charter, that will

29

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 3)

convey the right message: that there is only one
standard, based on international law and the provisions
of the Charter. Then, and only then, will the entire
Arab region be prepared to fully heed the Security
Council and to implement its resolutions in all areas.
The President (spoke in French): The
representative of Iraq has requested the opportunity to
make a second statement.
Mr. Aldouri (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like to thank everyone who has participated in this
debate. It has certainly further developed discussion on
the issue of Iraq, and I believe that it has been very
useful to the Council, to the rest of the United Nations
and to the world.
This important and serious debate has been held
to offset significant efforts that have sought to mislead
public opinion. I should like to thank all those who
have made statements that have faithfully described
reality, because before now reality had been revealed
only in part. The time called for the debate was fairly
short, and it was quite difficult to acquire all the
necessary data from the period since 1999 so that
everyone could participate fully in this debate.
I should like to begin my statement where the
President left off in his statement, when he spoke about
the Sumerian, Babylonian and Akkadian civilizations
in Iraq — Iraq, the land of water, oil and minds, the
Iraq of the Abbassid civilization. Even without oil or
water, would we have experienced the situation that we
are now experiencing? I shall not dwell on a political
analysis of this issue. The Council is fully aware that
the only objectives of the approaching war are oil,
wealth and hegemony — control over the wealth in the
region and the world. I shall not go into detail. I shall
say only that the world is now split into two and that
the larger part favours peace, negotiations and
diplomacy under the Charter of the United Nations,
unity in the United Nations and the very future of the
Organization.
I am definitely in that camp. I fervently desire
peace, understanding and conciliation, and I care about
the future of this international Organization. It was
recently jeopardized by the statement of one major
Power that, if the United Nations failed to take into
account the interests of that State, it would go its own
way. It was not Iraq that made that statement, it was
another major Power that feels it has immense power in
the world. It was the National Security Adviser who

30

made that statement. It seemed that we had nearly
written the Organization’s epitaph.
We ourselves support those who believe in peace,
diplomacy, understanding, the implementation of
resolutions adopted by the United Nations and the
provisions of the Charter. I should like to thank and
pay tribute to all those who have spoken to that effect.
But while we were engaged in this debate, we
witnessed a major event that nearly amounted to a
declaration of war, aimed at striking Iraq, although a
debate was being held here. It was a virtual declaration
of war. War legislation was adopted and celebrated
with great pomp and ceremony by the President and the
leaders of a certain country, and it was against Iraq, a
small country thousands of kilometres away from that
superpower, which is the primary Power in the world
today. It is my hope that that country’s President and
his colleagues, who celebrated that declaration of war
in the form of legislation, have all heard what has been
said in this debate by those who favour peace and
security.
I said earlier that the world has been split into
two, one part favouring peace and the other part —
which is actually a very small minority, but an
extremely active minority, made up of virtually two
States — favouring war. But I wonder: how can a State
go along with the warlike approach of another State?
The representative of one State said here that if the
Council does not take a decision, then his State will act
as it sees fit. The text of his statement has been
photocopied and is available to Council members. Its
message is clear: if the Council refuses to declare war
on Iraq, then that State will do it for the Council. That
was one voice in this debate.
I am, however, happy to see that the majority of
the members of the United Nations are still anxious to
preserve peace, the rights of peoples and the Charter of
the United Nations, as well as principles that I myself
have advocated, and have in fact taught for 30 years in
this very country. Those principles are nevertheless
being trampled underfoot on a daily basis in our world.
Like others who have spoken in the Security
Council today, and indeed like the overwhelming
majority of the Members of the United Nations, I
believe that it is necessary to preserve the credibility of
the United Nations in order to guarantee its future. I
can assure the Council that it will certainly not be Iraq
that will undermine or weaken the Organization.

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 3)

Rather, we will work tirelessly to restore the credibility
of the United Nations, which has been called into
question, not by small countries like my own but by
some major Powers.
Many speakers, members and non-members of
the Council alike, have expressed their trust in Mr. Blix
and Mr. ElBaradei. Indeed, the Government of Iraq
also has full confidence in those two gentlemen. Our
doors are wide open to them and to their inspectors.
Let them come as soon as possible; they will be quite
welcome in Iraq. Our doors are widen open, as are our
palaces, houses, hospitals and schools. Let them come
and go where they wish. As I say, our doors are wide
open to them. We are not afraid. We are open to
Mr. Blix, Mr. ElBaradei and their inspectors. They are
welcome to send the inspectors on 19 October, which is
just a couple of days away. Let them come to Iraq,
where they will be welcomed and where they and their
teams will be able to go where they wish. That is our
position regarding Mr. Blix. We have trust in him.
Actually, though, why do we have to reconfirm
our trust in Mr. Blix? When has there ever been any
question about our confidence in him? Who raised the
issue of their being any doubt about him? I do not think
anyone has questioned him. In order to be able to
explain the evolution of events we therefore have to
look back to the United Nations Special Commission
(UNSCOM) and Mr. Butler, who was entrusted with
the task of leading UNSCOM. There had been some
rumours here and there about Mr. Butler in the past, but
we are now talking about Mr. Blix and the need to have
confidence in him. However, let me reassure the
Council that Iraq has full trust in Mr. Blix and that he
and his team will be welcomed in Iraq.
Some speakers have said that Iraq has violated all
of the Security Council’s resolutions. That assertion is
perhaps due to the rather frightening lack of familiarity
with UNSCOM documents. It has also been said that
Iraq expelled UNSCOM and the inspectors in 1998.
However, as everyone in fact knows, Mr. Butler was
receiving his orders directly from the United States and
the United Kingdom, which were constantly urging him
to leave Iraq. Those calls were in fact sufficient to get
him to leave Iraq. As the representative of the Russian
Federation pointed out, Iraq was bombed 24 hours after
Mr. Butler’s departure. I would invite everyone who is
not familiar with those events to look into the dossier
on this case and to familiarize themselves with its
contents.

I have spoken about the number of meetings held
and about the amount of time spent on inspections and
in Iraqi airspace, so I need not repeat that now. Neither
Mr. Ikeus nor Mr. Butler nor the inspection teams were
able to point to a single element that could indicate the
presence of weapons of mass destruction in Iraq —
apart, of course, from the information provided by Iraq.
Iraq destroyed the weapons it had, opened up its doors
and provided copious documentation. Iraq was
therefore acting in good faith and with good will. Iraq
itself took the decision to reject weapons of mass
destruction. I think that the fact that we have welcomed
the return of inspectors is further evidence of that
rejection. We fully and forever turned our back on
weapons of mass destruction and we destroyed them.
The representative of Norway has expressed some
apprehension about Iraqi weapons reaching his country.
I do not know the distance between Iraq and Norway,
but I would like to reassure him that our hands are now
clean and that there are no weapons of mass destruction
in Iraq.
Everything that has been said about the issue of
weapons of mass destruction has been part of a
disinformation campaign. We hope that inspectors will
return soon so that they themselves can tell the
international community that Iraq’s hands are now
clean and that it has no weapons of mass destruction.
Iraq has no such materials. I just wanted to reassure
anyone who still has any doubts about this as a result
of that disinformation campaign.
I would like to thank some of my colleagues,
including members of the Council, and especially the
representative of Singapore, who have said that
sanctions will be lifted once the inspectors return to
Iraq and they report to the Security Council that there
are no weapons of mass destruction in my country. The
Iraqi people would then get some relief. I fear that they
are being too optimistic, however. American and
British individuals have made clear statements to the
effect that sanctions and the embargo will never be
lifted until there has been “regime change” in Iraq. In
fact, those statements are documented and are available
to the Council and the Secretary-General. Everyone
knows about documents containing such statements.
This is a domestic political issue pertaining to the
interests of the United States and the United Kingdom.
We have said that we are willing to welcome
inspectors. But there is also the question of lifting the

31

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 3)

embargo, which, as I have also said, is a political
matter for those two countries.
Several speakers have also referred to the
memorandum of understanding to say that Iraq had not
facilitated its implementation. However, although we
had billions or tens of billions of dollars in a trust fund,
about 2,000 contracts for medicines and medical
supplies were pending due to a hold by the United
States. Those contracts also included equipment
necessary to provide drinking water and to produce
food for the people of Iraq. We have lost untold
thousands of people as a result of the lack of drinking
water and foodstuffs. In fact, the United States even
banned the export of chlorine to Iraq, which is essential
to treating drinking water. There are many other
examples, but I shall not go into them.
The representative of the United Kingdom said
that he was really distressed about the situation of the
Iraqi people. They can well say that they have nothing
against our people, only against the Iraqi Government.
There were four billion dollars available in the fund
that could have been used had it not been for the veto
by the United States and the United Kingdom.
In respect to contractors, 2,000 contracts were
stopped. I heard a colleague mention the lack of money
in the fund. There are really four reasons for that, but
the central one is that the United States and the United
Kingdom imposed a retroactive pricing mechanism for
our oil. In other words, if I want to buy Iraqi oil today,
I sign a contract, then the United States and the United
Kingdom say that I have to wait for a month before a
price can be quoted. Naturally, one does not want to
conclude such a contract, because oil prices are so
volatile. That was a deliberate policy of these two
countries to thwart the memorandum of understanding
and make sure that it could not work. In the past, the
mechanism worked. Hopefully things will soon
improve again, and so will the situation of the fund.
Those who are shedding crocodile tears for the
Iraqi people have also made statements relating to war
and destruction, as has been reported widely in the
Western and United States media.
There was another point made by several
speakers. I am not sure whether I should mention it, but
I would like to make one point in connection with it.
That is the question of some Kuwaiti property — some,
I stress — that is about to be returned to the owners as
per Iraqi-Kuwaiti arrangements. I recognize what was

32

said about the Kuwaitis and their wish to get their
property back without any problems whatsoever, a
matter that I appreciate. Another representative spoke
of the matter and tried to politicize the issue.
Before concluding, I would like to mention the
agreement between Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei on the
one hand, and Iraqi authorities on the other. We have
heard a lot in the media about this. Both yesterday and
today, here at this meeting, some supporters of the
American position said that the agreement between
Iraq and Mr. Blix had only just been signed and Iraq
was already looking for another margin or space as
delaying tactics, seeking other interpretations in order
to deprive the agreement of any significant meaning or
content whatsoever.
Iraq approved and signed the agreement in
Vienna and is bound by all its provisions. We even
issued an official communiqué inviting the inspectors
to return to Iraq and undertook to fully cooperate with
them. We are willing to work and resolve any problems
that occur. We are confident that the inspectors will
face no impediments in carrying out their work. I
would like to give assurances that any doubt cast on
this agreement is inaccurate. In an exchange of letters
it is quite natural that there be some misunderstanding
about the actual meaning of words, but that is all there
is.
On the substance of what was agreed on in
Vienna, I affirm that there is no misunderstanding as to
what was agreed there, and we will not in any way
hinder the work of the weapons inspectors. I believe
that we are all civilized persons, as you all said. We
have a history that covers several civilizations and
millennia.
Many who participated in this debate noted that
goodwill is present and that we will cooperate with
UNMOVIC. So I would like to say that the new
resolution being spoken of in the media and in
negotiations about its text — the contents of which we
do not know — will not be about ensuring that
UNMOVIC and the inspectors do their work, but rather
will prevent the inspectors from doing their work. We
urge the inspectors to come tomorrow or the day after
to do their work. We will create no problems.
Of course some say that this is just rhetoric, but I
say that I am not an experienced diplomat familiar with
all these rhetorical flourishes. I speak as an Iraqi who
is sincere in my intention. The United Nations does not

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 3)

need another resolution. That is my view, though I
know that it will not change the views of the
superpower. But I want to ensure all the peace-loving
countries that reject war that the new text is geared
towards preventing the inspectors from returning to
Iraq. We want them to come and do their work, and we
are resolved to implement the resolution in spirit and in
letter.
I thank you very much, Mr. President, for giving
me this right of reply to comment on what has been
said by other speakers in this debate.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker is the representative of Lebanon, who has
asked to speak again. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Diab (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): Thank
you, Mr. President, for giving me the floor once again
and for giving me the opportunity to respond to what
was mentioned in the statement by Israel, containing
lies and false claims.
The Israeli representative claimed that his
Government has implemented resolution 425 (1978) in
compliance with international legitimacy. Everyone
knows that Israel has continued to occupy southern
Lebanon for 22 years in flagrant defiance of that
resolution and would not have withdrawn had it not
been for the heroic Lebanese resistance and the
complete support of the Government of Lebanon.
Lebanese resistance of Israel would never have
arisen had it not been for Israel’s refusal to implement
resolution 425 (1978) throughout the 22 years of its
occupation of southern Lebanon. On the basis of the
narrow political interests of one member of the
Security Council, the Security Council failed to compel
Israel to implement a single one of its resolutions
through those 22 years, leading to the death of
thousands of Lebanese civilians and to widespread
destruction of our infrastructure, from which we
continue to suffer to this day.
We should like to remind the representative of
Israel that his Government continues to hold many
Lebanese in Israeli prisons. Some have been detained
for over 25 years without trial, in contravention of all
the
fundamental
principles
of
international
humanitarian law, particularly the 1949 Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Times of War. We also wish to remind him

that his Government remains in contravention of
resolution 425 (1978) through the daily violations by
the occupying Israeli forces of Lebanon’s sovereign
airspace and waters. These violations have been
described by the Secretary-General as provocations
that have become a routine fact of life. In any case, the
Security Council still considers Israel to be the only
occupying Power in the world. Israel also continues to
occupy Arab territories, including the Lebanese
Sheba’a Farms, destabilizing the entire region.
The Arab peoples are peace-loving peoples, as
amply demonstrated by the peace initiative of the
Beirut Summit, which offered Israel total peace in
return for its implementation of the resolutions of
international legitimacy and its withdrawal from all
occupied Arab territories. Israel’s response to that
initiative was its reoccupation of the West Bank. If
Israel truly desires peace, it must now implement the
scores of resolutions of international legitimacy
adopted by the General Assembly and the Security
Council. The Security Council must also shoulder its
responsibilities, in accordance with the United Nations
Charter, by compelling Israel to implement its
resolutions in the interests of peace and security in the
region and to eschew any double standards in the
implementation of its resolutions that allow Israel to
shirk its obligations.
The President (spoke in French): The
representative of Israel has asked to speak. I invite him
to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Lancry (Israel) (spoke in French): If Israel
has felt it useful to speak in this discussion, it is
basically to resist the thoughtless intermingling of
ideas that lumps Iraq and Israel in the same category of
offender with respect to the implementation of Security
Council resolutions.
We wish to express our disagreement with regard
to Iraq by retracing a very evocative illustration of
Security Council resolutions on peace between Israel
and its Arab and Palestinians neighbours. It will be
said, as was done a few moments ago by the Permanent
Observer of Palestine, that beyond the principal
resolutions — resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973) — there is a series of other resolutions,
touching on various aspects of the Israeli-Palestinian
dialogue, that require implementation. Undoubtedly,
such resolutions exist, but their existence is so bound

33

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 3)

up in the context of earnest and responsible
implementation that they are at the very heart of
negotiations with the Palestinians. The final status of
Jerusalem, along with the question of refugees, the
issue of settlements and the definitive shape of the
borders of the Palestinian State are inscribed in the
framework of the final status stipulated in the Oslo
accords.
It should be noted once again that the Permanent
Observer of Palestine continues to be obsessed, in
defending and elaborating his argument, with forcing a
one-dimensional reading of the resolutions of the
Security Council that he cited earlier. For the
Permanent Observer of Palestine, those resolutions
concern Israel alone, while the Palestinians may ignore
them with impunity. Have we heard the Permanent
Observer of Palestine say a single word about the need,
as stipulated in those resolutions, to end the suicide
attacks and Palestinian terrorism in all its forms, or to
declare a genuine ceasefire between Israelis and
Palestinians? This is a slew of Palestinian obligations
with which the most recent series of Security Council
resolutions is replete and which the Palestinians seem
to ignore with easy disdain.
It is essential that we differentiate between
resolutions adopted, on the one hand, under Chapter VI
with respect to Israel and its partners in peace, and
those adopted under Chapter VII with respect to Iraq,
on the other. We must declare null and void indictments
based on false linkages. Neither the Arab party
concerned — I refer to Syria — nor the Palestinian side
can set itself up as sole and selective master decoder of
resolutions whose inconvenient provisions they trample
underfoot, only to play the role of inspector of works
undertaken and completed by Israel.
Negotiations
and
reciprocity
in
the
implementation of Security Council resolutions are the
cornerstone of the Israeli-Arab-Palestinian dialogue.
Thus, the offhand association of Israel with Iraq is
nothing more than a dangerous distraction that plays
into the hands of an unscrupulous dictatorship.
I know that reference to Israel as a democracy,
howsoever imperfect its need to survive and its
dedication to peace, occasionally stirs up emotions in
certain quarters. The representative of Syria engaged
with vigour in the ritual denigration of Israeli
democracy, no doubt because he himself is steeped in a
staunch Syrian democracy. His republic is run in

34

flawless republican order, including the transmission of
power from father to son, or, more precisely, from one
generation to the next.
The representative of Syria is revolted by Israel
as a democracy of occupation. I would remind that
revolted democrat that the Israeli occupation, a result
of Arab aggression, is at least, negotiable. I would
recall that it was negotiated with Egypt and Jordan, to
the satisfaction of all parties.
But can the same be said of the Syrian occupation
of Lebanon? Is it pursued on behalf of Syrian
democracy? What hope is there for Lebanon? Is there
going to be a day when the Syrian democrats,
professional enslavers, will restore the Lebanese
people their freedom? Where is, then, the lost
resolution of the Security Council that will one day
invite one of its members — I would say the most
unusual one, in his dual guise as occupier and member
of this Council — to finally negotiate its withdrawal
from Lebanon.
That is the question that Syria must respond to
before this Council.
The President (spoke in French): The
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic has asked to
make another statement. I give the floor to him.
Mr. Mekdad (Syria) (spoke in Arabic): I believe
that the Council and the speakers who have spoken
during the past two days — and, if I am right, more
than 90 per cent of them — have spoken very clearly.
This Council should not in any way deal in double
standards.
Everyone who spoke at this meeting referred in
one way or another to Israel. Israel has not only spoiled
the situation in the Middle East, but has also
undermined the legal framework of collective
endeavours on the international scene. I believe that the
logic used by the representative of Israel condemns
him first and foremost. Occupation is rejected under
any pretext. It is a shame that someone comes to this
Council to defend occupation.
I can hardly believe that I am at the Security
Council in the midst of international legitimacy, the
edifice of international legitimacy. When I listen to
such false claims, lies, misrepresentations and
ridiculous statements, I remember how the world has
judged Israel as an aggressor, an occupier of other

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 3)

peoples territories and as an outlaw, an international
outlaw.

lie that was uttered by the representative of Israel is the
one regarding Lebanon.

When we speak of democracy, and we spoke a
while ago about the real Israeli democracy, which is a
democracy of killing, occupation, destruction, and the
oppression of all the States of the region with weapons
of mass destruction that everyone has said should be
destroyed as well.

There is no other country in the world that speaks
more about Lebanese-Syrian ties than Israel. This
Council is the world. Is there a single representative in
this Council or outside that speaks more about
Lebanon-Syria than the Israeli representative? The
country that is most concerned about the unity,
integrity and independence of Lebanon and the
liberation of its territory that is still under occupation is
Syria. The country that is most concerned with the best
Lebanese Government that controls the situation in its
own country is Syria. But the reason why the Syrian
forces went into Lebanon is another issue. Lebanon
went through an extremely destructive civil war, such
as the wars that took place in the Balkans and in many
African countries. The international community
deployed tremendous efforts before Syria got involved
in Lebanon in order to solve the situation, but those
efforts were all futile.

The other issue that I would like to mention is
that the Israeli regime is a blood-thirsty regime by any
standard. It exercises State terrorism. Today, it directed
its tanks to bombard Rafah and killed 8 Palestinians.
Last week, they bombed Gaza and killed almost 18
innocent civilians, including many innocent children.
After all that, the representative of Israel dares to speak
of democracy. What kind of democracy is that? The
statement by the representative of Israel is a danger to
democracy and an affront to Israel. Democracy for
some and not everyone has been condemned by the
entire world.
The racist regime in South Africa pretended that
it was a democratic regime. It held elections. But this
Council attacked the racist regime in South Africa for
many years until it was eliminated. Incidentally, one of
the very few countries in the world that cooperated
with the racist regime in South Africa, as well as those
in Namibia and Zimbabwe, was Israel, whose
representative speaks about democracy. Israel ceased
cooperation with the racist regime in South Africa only
after that regime was totally eliminated. This is a fact
that everyone knows. And I do not need to recall it here
now. This is Israeli democracy.
What exactly are we talking about in this
Council? When we say that we want peace, we are
faced with tanks and jet fighters and artillery fire that
kill our people. When we ask for a comprehensive and
just peace, we are told that it will not be achieved
unless Israel annexes all the occupied Arab territories.
Democracy should come from within. It should
be the main feature of relations among nations and at
the international level as well. The State farthest from
democracy is Israel.
My country has its own democracy. We have
elections at all levels. During the next few days we will
witness the holding of elections of the Syrian
Parliament, free and democratic elections, such as
those held in any country in the world. But the biggest

One million Lebanese were forced to go to Syria
during the escalation of the Lebanese civil war. When
all the Lebanese forces and all the political parties in
Lebanon appealed to Syria to intervene, when Syria
received a formal request from the Lebanese
Government, to save the people and Government of
Lebanon, Syria intervened. There are agreements
between Syria and Lebanon on this Syrian military
presence in Lebanon that protects national
reconciliation and preserves the unity and integrity of
Lebanon at the request of the legitimate Lebanese
Government. Syria is prepared, as agreed with the
Lebanese Government, to consider its presence in
Lebanon in accordance with the wishes of the
legitimate Government in Lebanon. And it is a
legitimate Government, as we know. Israel has not
recognized that Government, but that is Israel’s
problem.
I would also like to ask, is there a single
Government in the entire world that does not recognize
the present Lebanese Government? It seems that this is
only an Israeli problem. It shows the dissatisfaction of
Israel with what has been accomplished through
cooperation between brothers in Syria and Lebanon.
The Syrian youth who died in Lebanon number in the
thousands and all the Lebanese in all strata of Lebanese
society are grateful to Syria for the role it has played.

35

S/PV.4625 (Resumption 3)

As I just stated, the Syrian presence in Lebanon is
governed
by
agreements
between
the
two
Governments, and Syria is prepared to fulfil all
requests made by the Lebanese Government, but it is
clear that Israel is not pleased when there are such
brotherly ties between two Arab countries. That is a
problem for Israel. The ties between Lebanon and Syria
are those of brotherhood and cooperation and are based
on equality and friendly relations among nations. They
are based on the wishes of all the different sectors of
the Lebanese people.
Israel also has no right to interfere in Lebanese
affairs, or to claim to be concerned about Lebanon,
because it has killed thousands, I don’t want to
exaggerate, but Israel has killed at least thousands, if

36

not tens of thousands of Lebanese citizens in the course
of three or four invasions of Lebanon that sometimes
reached the capital, Beirut. Israel destroyed everything
on the ground. This fact is well known to everyone.
I realize that everyone knows the facts, but I only
want to make it absolutely clear that the representative
of Israel cannot get away with false claims and lies
such as these. My colleagues tell me I have spoken at
length. I believe that is so and I will stop here.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
further speakers on my list. The Security Council has
thus concluded the present stage of its consideration of
the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 7.15 p.m.
