UNITED

NATIONS

TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR
th
MEETING: 9 AUGUST 1968

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1437) . . . . , . . . . . , . . , . , . . . . . . , . . , . . . .

I

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 5 June 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/861 6);
(bl Letter dated 5 June 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Israel
addressedto the President of the Security Council (S/8617);
(c) Letter dated 5 August 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8721);
.(d) Letter dated 5 August 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Israel
addressed to the President of the Security C’ouncil (S/8724) . . . . . . . . , . .

,
1

SlPV.1437

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Sent@ Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN

HUNDRED

Held in New York

AND THIRTY-SEVENTH

MEETING

on Friday, 9 August 1968, at 10.30 a.m.

President: Mr. JoBo August0 DE ARAUJO CASTRO

(Brazil).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1437)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in the Middle East:

(al Letter dated 5 June 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/861 6);
lb) Letter dated 5 June 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/861 7);
(c) Letter dated 5 August 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/8721);
Id) Letter dated 5 August 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/8724).
Adoption of the agenda
Theagenda was adopted.
Thesituation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 5 June 1968 from the Permanent Fiepresentative of Jordan addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/861 6);
(f~j Letter dated 5 June 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Israel addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/8617);
(cl Letter dated 5 August 1968 *from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/872l’);
b/ Letter dated 5 August 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/8724)

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with decisions previously taken by the Council, I shall invite the representatives of Jordan, Israel, the United Arab Republic, Iraq,
Syria and Saudi Arabia to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. El-Fan-a
(Jordan) and Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) took places at the
Security Council table, and Mr. M. El Kony (United Arab
Republic), Mr. A. Pachachi (Iraq), Mr. G. Tomeh (Syria)
and Mr. J. Baroody (Saudi Arabia) took the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber.

2. Mr. SOLANO LOPEZ (Paraguay) (translated from
Spanish): Mr. President, before expressing my delegation’s
views on the items on the agenda for today, allow me to
perform the pleasant duty of congratulating you again most
cordially, first on the honour devolving upon you as
Permanent Representative of your great country, Brazil,
which is attached to my own country by strong bonds of
friendship, and secondly, on your assumption of the
difficult responsibilities of President of this Council for the
month of August. Knowing and admiring as we do your
brilliant personal gifts, we are certain that you will lead our
deliberations to a successfuloutcome.
3. At the same time, I should like to pay tribute to
Ambassador Bouattoura of Algeria, who presided over the
Council during the past month of July with the talent and
ability we all know, which were particularly apparent
during his consultations with members of the Council on
the establishment and composition of the Committee on
Rhodesia.
4. I also wish to welcome here the new Permanent
Representative of the United States, Mr. Ball, whose wellknown and respected personality already assuresus that he
will make a valuable contribution to our common endeavours in the Council.
5. Lastly, we offer our best wishes to the new UnderSecretary-General for Political and Security Council Affairs,
Mr. Kutakov, for successin the delicate tasks which have
been entrusted to his well-known talents.
6. When on 22 November 1967 the Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution 242 (1967) which laid the
foundations for a possible just and lasting solution of the
acute problems of the Middle East, which in the brief space
of less than two decades have led to three major military
conflicts, my delegation welcomed this decision; it
appeared to represent the soundest, and under present
circumstances perhaps the only, hope for putting an end to
an era of conflict in that region and for beginning a new
one in which the States concerned could at last be certain
of their mutual security and could devote their entire
efforts and national resourcesto the constructive tasks of
peace.

242 (1967) of 22 November 1967, the objectives and
provisions of which we must all bear constantly in mind,

7. This marked the beginning of the grave and arduous
task which was entrusted to the Secretary-General and is
now being executed by his Special Representative,
Mr. Jarring. We hardly need stress the magnitude of the
mission which the Council entrusted to the patience, talent,
dedication and devotion to peace of the Secretary-General,
who in turn placed it in the hands of Mr. Jarring. In a
region so recently convulsed by war the situation was
inevitably tense and unstable. The first and indispensable
condition for the successful accomplishment of this mission
has been and continues to be the scrupulous observance of
the cease-fire by all States involved in the conflict. The
situation, by its very nature, has been and is precarious and
temporary, but might at least permit the minimum favourable conditions for the development of the Secretary
General’s and Mr. Jarring’s activities in their persevering
attempts at conciliation and their search for just solutions
based on resolution 242 (1967).

13. Secondly, scrupulous observance of the cease-fire
order is an indispensable condition for the eventual success
of the task entrusted to the Secretary-Generd and to
Mr. Jarring.
14. Thirdly, it has often been said in this Council that
violence only breeds violence and cannot ‘therefore solve
any problems. My delegation has not been, and is not now,
prepared to condone acts of violence. With this considera.
tion in mind, it has voted for the adoption of the Council’s
previous resolutions in similar cases when the cease-fire has
been violated. Our views have not changed, nor is there any
reason why they should change.
15. Fourthly, all efforts should be made to prevent the
recurrence of each and every act of violence in violation of
the cease-fire, regardless of its nature.

8. My Government and delegation deeply regret that the
cease-fire has been broken and violated so often. They
strongly and sincerely deplore the numerous losses, particularly the loss of human lives, because these are totally
irreparable. They regret the damage caused and the new
sufferings added to the many which have for so long
afflicted the population of this region. They also find this
situation regrettable because each and every one of these
violations creates new obstacles to the endeavours, difficult
enough in themselves, on which we all set our highest
hopes.

16. Fifthly, we know that, even if the States involved in
the conflict strictly observe the cease-fire, the situation in
the region will be temporary, and only temporary, No
peace can be built on a foundation of the use, or the threat
of the use, of force; and the acquisition of territory by
these means must not and cannot be accepted.
17. I must add that, now as in the past, we deeply regret
that in the area where the breaches of the cease-fire have
been and still are most frequent, the United Nations is not
present in any form. Its presencewould offer a twofold
advantage:first, it would help to preventthe recurrenceof
new acts of violence; secondly, it would afford the benefit
of impartial information in all cases.

9. My delegation has only been a member of this Council
for the last seven months. This is a very short time. Yet this
period has been marked by a constant and disturbing series
of breaches and violations of the cease-fire, particularly in
the Israel-Jordanian sector.

18. These are my delegation’s preliminary reactions.I
should be failing in my duty if, quite apart from any
decisionadopted by this Council, I did not add a fraternal
appealto the conflicting partiesto makeall possibleefforts
to avoid new violations of the cease-fire,thereby hastening
the hour when peace-a just, true peace-may reign in the
region.

10. As a result of this and because of the many meetings
the Council has been obliged to hold since we have
participated in its work, practically everything we might say
has been said. I need only refer to my own statements on
previous occasions. Nevertheless, we feel it is our duty to
express once again our growing concern at the intensity and
frequency of these violations and especially to demand,
first and foremost, that the parties should strictly comply
with the cease-fire order issued by this Council in its
resolutions of 1967, which were agreed to and accepted by
these parties themselves. This compliance, I repeat, is the
minimum condition for the ultimate success of the mission
of the Secretary-General and Mr. Jarring, and the authority
of this Council requires that its orders be observed.

19. Mr. LJU (China): First, Sir, let me on behalf of my
delegation offer our warm welcome to you both as
representativeof your great country and asPresidentof the
Council. I should also like to take this opportunity to
associatemy delegation with the words of welcomeyou
addressedto the new Permanent Representativeof the
United Stateson behalf of all membersof the Council,I do
not think these sentimentsneed further elaboration,for I
know very well that you, Mr. President,would rather have
the Council proceed with the businessat hand asexpedi.
tiously aspossible.

11. We are now confronted by new and grave violations of
the cease-fire. After repeating our sincere and sympathetic
regret for the loss of life and the damage caused by each of
these acts of violence, I shall briefly express our views as
they have already been set forth previously. Since they are
only our preliminary reactions, I reserve my delegation’s
right to enlarge upon them at a later stage in the discussion.

20. The substanceof Jordan’scomplaintisnot newin the
history of the Middle East. With varying details,sucha
conflict has happenedmany times during the pasttwenty
years. The present case involves the bombing by Israel
aircraft of Jordanianterritory around Salt City, only fifteen
milesfrom the Jordaniancapital of Amman.My delegation
deploresthe violence and wishesto expressits symPatllY
foi the civilian population which hassuffereda heavyloss
of life andproperty.

12. First, it is our primary and constant concern that WC
should combine all our efforts to achieve a just and lasting
peace in the region. We believe that under the present
circumstances the only real possibilities for achieving this
goal lie in the complete implementation of resolution
2

21. The Council has been told that the latest attack
launched by Israel was in the nature of retaliatory action
provoked by terrorist raids of varying seriousness. It is
evident, however, that the action involving the deployment
of heavy artillery and aircraft has assumed a magnitude
uncalled for by the nature of the provocation.

27. The office you occupy has always called for a high
sense of justice and duty, tireless patience, wisdom and
tact. Your predecessor,Ambassador Tewfik Bouattoura of
Algeria, possessesthese qualities in ample measure and
displayed them to the utmost during his presidency of the
Council last month.

22. On a number of occasions my delegation has in the
Security Council voiced its strong disapproval of the
doctrine of retaliation. We believe that no Government,
even under extreme provocation, should take the law into
its own hands. Such an exercise of force must be regarded
as contrary to the spirit of the Charter and has in the past
incurred the censure of the Security Council.

28. I should also like to take this opportunity to extend a
warm welcome to the new Permanent Representative of the
United States. Ambassador George Ball is a well-known
international personality, with vast and varied experience of
international affairs, and I am entirely confident that his
participation in our deliberations will greatly contribute to
the Council’s role in the discharge of its functions. My
delegation looks forward to close co-operation with him in
fulfilling our duties as members of this Council.

23. In saying this, we are not suggesting that other acts of
violence and terrorism may in any way be justified. We do
not, of course, underestimate the role played by frustrations and emotions. But it seems to us that such acts of
violence can only bring suffering on the civilian population
without achieving the desired objectives.

29. A similar welcome is extended to the new UnderSecretary-General, Mr. Kutakov, who is no stranger to us,
and whose excellent qualities are well known. Mr. Kutakov
has a difficult task to perform, but I am sure he can count
upon the co-operation of all members of this Council.

24. Obviously, the first order of business before the
Council is to put a stop to violence and counter-violence
which cannot but exacerbate a situation already fraught
with dangerous possibilities. The cease-fire must be scrupulously maintained. Steps should be taken to prevent the
recurrence of violence acrossthe border where exchangesof
fire seem to have become a daily routine.

30. Once again the Security Council has been called to
consider the grave situation in West Asia. Many representatives have already expressed their views on the large-scale
aerial operation undertaken by Israel against the Jordanian
city of Salt. As the representative of Jordan told us earlier
in the debate, this bombing operation has resulted in heavy
loss of life and considerable damage to property. My
delegation fully sharesthe anxiety and concern of members
of the Council over this severeaction by Israel.

25. At the meeting of the Security Council on 21 March
of this year [1403rd meeting] my delegation urged that
some form of United Nations presence, involving no more
than the dispatch of a number of observers, should be
established in the Israeli-Jordanian sector, as in the case of
other sectors in the affected area. Since Security Council
resolution 242 (1967) stressesthe “inadmissibility of the
acquisition of territory by war” and the eventual “withdrawal of Israel armed forces from territories occupied in
the recent conflict”, the United Nations presence should
not have the effect of freezing a temporary situation or
hardening the cease-fire lines. On the contrary, it seems to
my delegation that the absence of such United Nations
presence would make it difficult to enforce the cease-fire
and to bring about a climate conducive to a peaceful
settlement in conformity with the terms set forth in
resolution 242 (1967). That resolution has been accepted
by all parties as constituting a just and balanced basis for a
peaceful settlement of the Middle Eastern situation. This
calls for strict respect of the obligations that befall all the
parties concerned. Ambassador Jarring, whose unflagging
patience has earned widespread commendation, must be
given the opportunity to carry his mission to a successful
conclusion.
26. Mr. MISHRA (India): Mr. President, may I first of all
join our other colleagues around this table in welcoming
you as the new Permanent Representative of Brazil and as
President of the Council for the month of August. AS
previous speakers have pointed out, you have a wealth of
experience accumulated over a number of years in high
posts’ and in the service of your country in the United
Nations and in other international forums. We are sure that
under your wise and mature leadership the Security Council
will effectively discharge the duties assigned to it under the
Charter.

31. The precarious nature of ‘the cease-fire in the area is
only too familiar to the members of the Council. In June
last year the Council had to adopt unanimously four
resolutions to bring about a cessation of hostilities. Since
then we have met frequently specifically to consider serious
breaches of those cease-fire resolutions. On several occasions the Council condemned those violations and called
upon the parties to observe its resolutions strictly.
32. On 24 March this year, when it considered the
Karameh incident, the Security Council condemned Israel’s
reprisal action in its resolution 248 (1968) and warned
against the repetition of such acts in the future. That was
done because it was the view of the members of this
Council that cease-fire violations, irrespective of their
causesand circumstances, not only jeopardize the peace of
the area but also undermine the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in bringing about a
peaceful settlement of the conflict under the Security
Council resolution of 22 November 1967. The Council
cannot condone any violation of its resolutions on ceasefire. We must point out that the present incident is similar
to the Karameh incident, which took place in March this
year, and which wascondemned by the Security Council in
its resolution 248 (1968) of 24 March. Speaking on that
occasion, my delegation said:
“Suffice it to say that the latest action of the Israel
authorities is in utter defiance of resolution 236 (1967)
of 12 June 1967, which specifically prohibited any
forward military movement subsequent to the cease-fire.
In the context of this clear prohibition, the Israel attack
3

on Jordanian territory today cannot be justified on any
ground and must therefore be condemned as a grave
violation of the cease-tire imposed by the Security
Council.” [1#02nd meeting, para. 84.1
33. My delegation has had many occasionsto state before,
and would not hesitate to repeat, that there can be no
peace in West Asia without the withdrawal of Israeli armed
forces from occupied Arab territories. This is one of the
fundamental principles embodied in Security Council resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967. This and other
principles of that resolution were supported by all members
of this Council, as well as by an overwhelming majority of
Members States of the United Nations. That resolution has
yet to be implemented. This is the major task to which the
international community should pay particular attention,
and towards which it must bend all its energies and efforts.
The representatives of the United Arab Republic and
Jordan have already indicated more than once the willing
ness of their Governments to implement in full the
resolution of 22 November. The Council must expect Israel
to come forward with a similar statement.
34. In the light of what I have stated above, my delegation
believes that the Security Council should concentrate its
attention on ensuring the cease-fireand on bringing about
the full implementation of its resolution of 22 November
1967. The Council should therefore, first, condemn violations of the cease-firein terms of its resolutions 236 (1967)
and 248 (1968) particularly the aerial attack on Salt on
4 August. Secondly, it must demand a scrupulous observance of and respect for its cease-fire resolutions. Thirdly,
the Council should insist that all parties in the areaextend
their full and active co-operation to the mission of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in bringing
about the full implementation of the resolution of 22
November. While these efforts continue, my delegation
would urge the exercise of the greatest amount of restraint.
35. My delegation would like to take this opportunity to
pay a special tribute to the patient and tireless efforts of
Ambassador Jarring and would wish him speedy successin
his mission.

37. First of all, I should like to thank the representatives
of Paraguay, China and India for the kind and generous
words of welcome they have addressedto me.
38. The Brazilian delegation wishesto state, very briefly,
its position on the serious matter of which the Security
Council is seized. We view the recent incidents with the
utmost concern. Not only do they constitute clear and
undisguised violations of the cease-fire, not only do they
represent added disrespect for and utter disregard of the
authority of the Security Council, but also they tend to
confront us with renewed difficulties, with a new burst of
animosity and hatred along the path to a permanent peace
in the Middle East. If recent events appear serious at
present, they presage even more ominoUs,prospects for the
This

iS ~II issue which

compels

Us to think

head

40. If the principle of retaliation and the logic of terrorism
were accepted or tolerated, then, we fear, a tragic chain of
events would gradually and inescapably lead us to a new,
wide-spread conflagration in the Middle East. The moment
is not for passing judgement, but for creating history and
for establishing the conditions of peaceful history. The
important and urgent need is to save human lives-and all
too many have already been lost-not to condemn peoples
and nations.
41. This is why, without in any way rninimidng the
seriousness of the situation created by the military action
undertaken by Israel, we deem it necessary and perhaps
more constructive to analyse these incidents within a
broader framework, a framework of patient effort towards
understanding and conciliation, rather than of punishment
and repression.
42. The Security Council has not failed to discharge its
responsibilities under the Charter. Meetings have been held
by the Council whenever they have been requested by any
of the parties concerned, resolutions have been adopted
after strenuous consultations, with a remarkable degreeof
unanimity. Brazil firmly adheres to the view that Security
Council resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967, still
provides us, even at this critical stage, with the best, safest
and speediest approach to the settlement of the explosive
situation once again prevailing in the Middle East.
43. Brazil firmly adheres to the view that the Security
Council should place the full weight of its authority and
prestige behind the efforts so painstakingly undertaken by
Ambassador Gunnar Jarring for the full implementation of
this resolution, which should be accepted by all parties
concerned in compliance with the pledges they freely
assumed on joining this Organization. Besides, we see no
practical alternative to this course, which is the courseof
law, and, what may be more cogent still, the course of cold
political realism. Political circumstances on which it would
be futile and superfluous to dwell make it extremely
doubtful, precarious and disputable that we would be able
to secure any considerable measure of agreement on any
course other than that provided by the aforementioned
resolution, which, in spite of all the frustrations, unfilled
hopes and pledges not honoured in recent months, we still
view as one of the most positive actions of a normative
character yet attempted by the Security Council. Seldom
has the Council responded with such decisiveness and
statesmanship to the challenge of any given situation.

36. The PRESIDENT: I have no more speakerson my list
and, with the consent of the Security Council, I propose
now to address the Council in my capacity as representative
of BRAZIL.

future.

39. Over and over again we have been called to convene
here in these last fourteen months to hear charges and
countercharges, accusations of aggression and pleas of
innocence. Throughout this period of fourteen months a
merciless and virtual state of war is being pursued with an
appalling
sacrifice
of human lives and property, in flagrant
&regard of the decisions of the Security Council and
constant violations of the cease-fire by both sides in the
dispute,
as though hatred and retaliation were the sole
recourse available to them.

44. The experience gained since the war last June is not
very encouraging. Recrimination, terrorism and retaliation
have not been curbed and the arms race in that region

and

ponder the future.
4

remains unchecked. While the search for peace goes on, the
contending parties are looking for, and are being provided
with, new and more sophisticated defensive and offensive
weapons.
45. The parties to the dispute are certainly entitled to
guarantees of defence and security by their own means. But
they are also entitled to guarantees of security to be
mutually provided by the major Powers that have both
special obligations under the Charter, as permanent members of the Security Council, and a direct influence on the
level of armaments in that area. Short of taking enforcement action, we have gone as far as we can. We have laid
down the basis for a just and lasting peace, and we have
condemned all actions that might prevent or impair the
attainment of our aims.
46. I shall restate the position of my delegation, lest it be
misinterpreted. We certainly think that the situation in the
Middle East ought to be settled with the earnest co-operation of the States in the area, within the framework of
resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967. We are not
asking that the situation in the Middle East should be
settled by the major Powers. Yet we cannot escape the
conclusion that the atmosphere for such an effort would be
substantially cleared and alleviated if the major Powers
succeeded in harmonizing their actions and their interests in
the area, through an understanding on this question of
supply of armaments, either through the total cessation of
military assistance or through an accorded regulation and
balanced limitation of defensive equipment supplied. Such
an understanding between the major Powers would certainly have a sobering effect on belligerency and would
greatly
facilitate the implementation
of resolution
242 (1967).
47. The objectives we have proposed are complex by their
very nature and may require a reappraisal of many former
positions and attitudes, A problem of alliances and a
problem of allegiance may also be implied. But it is
imperative that an effort be undertaken to attain those
objectives.
48. These are the preliminary remarks my delegation
wished to make at this stage of our proceedings, with the
understanding that we shall return to the matter in the light
of any specific proposals or suggestions which may be
advanced on the item under consideration.
49. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): Mr. President, I should like to
amplify my first statement with some words of gratitude to
the distinguished representative of Algeria, Mr. Bouattoura,
who was President of the Security Council last month. Last
month was marked by the fact that, in regard to matters
falling within the terms of reference of the Security
Council, there were no urgent questions and the Council
did not meet. The members of the Security Council had a
chance to take a breathing spell, as it were. I think that to a
certain extent we should be grateful also to the President of
the Security Council for this, but it would be wrong to
mention this alone. During his Presidency, Mr. Bouattoura
kept all of us, all members of the Security Council, in
fighting trim; and, as a result of his efforts, the Committee

of seveni was established to deal with a very serious
problem, the problem of Southern Rhodesia. I thought I
ought to mention these features and to say that all of us
were conscious of the way in which Mr. Bouattoura
discharged his duties.
50. I should now like to dwell briefly on the problem we
are discussing here at present. The Security Council is, in
fact, now concluding its discussion of the question of the
new aggressive acts committed by Israel against Jordan in
violation of the Security Council’s cease-fire resolutions and
in spite of the Council’s frequent condemnations of Israel
for its previous acts of aggression.
51. What has emerged in the course of the discussion on
this question in the Security Council?
52. First of all, from the statements by representatives
both of States which are members of the Security Council
and of States which are not members, it is clear that these
representatives condemn the new acts of aggression by
Israel against Jordan and are aware that provocative acts of
this kind represent a danger for the cause of peace in the
Middle East, for the prospects of a political settlement in
that area and for the success of the mission of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in the Middle East,
Ambassador Janing. In most of the statements the condemnation of Israel’s aggression was direct, complete and
definite. In some individual statements the speakers merely
confined themselves to expressions of regret. It is perfectly
obvious, however-and this is an undeniable fact-that no
one, even among the sympathizers, dared to offer an
outright justification of this new crime.
53, Another important aspect of the discussion on this
question in the Council is that, with one or two possible
exceptions, the overwhelming majority of the statements
fully exposed and totally rejected the predatory “doctrine”
advanced by the Israel aggressors to the effect that the Arab
population of the occupied territories must reconcile
themselves to the loss of their freedom and independence,
betray the interests of their countries, submit to the whim
of the Israel occupiers, obey thelatter unconditionally, and
renounce their sacred right to fight .for their liberation.
Israel’s attempts to camouflage and justify its new acts of
aggression against Jordan, on the grounds that these
obviously aggressive acts were undertaken as retaliatory
measures, were also decisively condemned and rejected.
54, The recognition of the rights of peoples to wage a just
struggle for their freedom and independence against imperialist usurpers and aggressors is one of the outstanding
advances of our time., and no one today can successfulIy
question this right, no matter how the forces of imperialism
and aggression may try to turn back the wheel of history.
55. Those who ,attempt to deny this right are redly
striking a blow at the sacred rights of all peoples who are
selflessly fighting for the liquidation of racist and colonial
regimes and against imperialist aggression. The colonialists
and aggressors would prefer to call freedom fighters “terrorists and saboteurs”. It is these offensive labels which the
1 Committee established in pursuance of Security Council resolution 253 (1968).

defend the aggressor.They-and particularly the representa.
tive of the United States of America-made repeated use,
like the Israel representative, of terms such as “saboteurs”
and “terrorists”, terms which are offensive to the Arab
patriots, and tried to apply the same standard to the
aggressors and the victims of aggression and to place
individual acts of disobedience and resistance by the Arab
population in the occupied territories on the same level of
international political and military responsibility as the
premeditated and barbarous bombing of peaceful towns
and villages in Jordan by Israel air forces, resulting in death
and injury to countless peaceful inhabitants of that
country. It is easy to see that this sort of position 3sfraught
with serious consequences. In fact, this position can only be
considered an attempt to justify and camouflage the new
acts of aggression by Israel, to give the aggressormoral
protection and to mitigate his guilt for violating the
cease-fire and failing to comply with the Security Council
resolution. States which pursue this course assume full
responsibility for the future development of events in the
Middle East, in a direction quite contrary to the interests of
consolidating peace. Any attempt, even indirectly, to
justify and defend the aggressivenature of Israel’s policy
and action towards Jordan can only encourage the aggressor
to commit further criminal acts, thereby further complicating the problem of a peaceful settlement in the Middle East
and creating still more obstacles to the accomplishment of
the mission entrusted to Ambassador Jarring.

imperialists are trying to attach to all those who are
heroically fighting against colonial regimes in Angola,
Mozambique, so-called Portuguese Guinea and Southern
Rhodesia. The same terms were at one time used by fascist
propaganda to refer to the heroic partisans in the countries
of Europe, and to the French muquis and other resistance
fighters during the years of the Second World War. The
same slanderous terms are now being repeated by the Israel
aggressors with reference to the Arab patriots in the
territories occupied by Israel.
56. It is perfectly clear that this “Israel doctrine”, if it can
be so called, has been invented and is being spread to
disguise and justify new acts of aggressionagainst the Arab
countries, However, this will not help the present-day
aggressors and colonialists, any more than it helped the
fascist proponents of the “new order” in Europe.
57. The overwhelming majority of representatives speaking in the Council decisively rejected this “doctrine” of the
Israel extremists, and rejected their attempts to justify their
aggressiveacts against Jordan on the grounds that they were
retaliatory measures for specific, individual acts of disobedience by the Arab population in the occupied territories.
58. We cannot fail to note, either, that almost all the
speakers acknowledged, and many of them emphasized,
that the new premeditated acts of aggressioncommitted by
Israel against Jordan constitute a serious obstacle to the
mission of the Special Representative of the Secretary
General of the United Nations in the Middle East, Ambassador Jarring. Many of the speakersalso recalled that Israel
is a country which the Security Council has frequently
condemned as an aggressorcountry. It was stated almost
unanimously that Israel is still refusing to comply with the
resolution adopted by the Security Council on 22 November 1967.

62. Under these circumstances, it is the duty of the
Security Council to take resolute and effective measures
against the aggressor,and not to allow any direct or indirect
protectors and defenders of the aggressor to induce the
Security Council to leave the aggressorunpunished. Unconditional condemnation of the aggressorand the adoption of
decisive measures to prevent new aggressiveacts will also
contribute to the accomplishment of the mission entrusted
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General of
the United Nations in the Middle East, Ambassador Jarring.

59. In this connexion, we cannot fail to point out that the
representative of Israel, in his many statements and replies
63. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of Israel
at the Council’s meetings, has never once referred to this
who
as asked to be allowed to speak.
resolution which, as is well known; defines the principles
and conditions for a political settlement in the Middle East.
Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I beg the Council’s Indulgence
This is no accident. It is further proof that the Israel 2
to
make
a few brief observations. At the outset I should
Government is still unwilling to comply with the Security
Council’s resolution and is, by its aggressivepolicy towards like to say that it is difficult for me to conceal the
the Arab States, deliberately creating difficulties and admiration with which I listened to the Arab representatives deliver at the last meeting comprehensive exposesof
obstacles to the accomplishment of Ambassador Jarring’s
their views, confining themselves at all times to the subject
mission. The Security Council cannot disregard this important fact. It must take stricter and more resolute measures matter on the agenda, even when they found it inevifabIe to
expound on Tamerlane, problems of races and internal
against the aggressor; it must force him to respect the
politics of Member States, and all this without being
Council’s decision and comply with its resolution of 22
interrupted
even once by the faithful guardians of points of
November 1967.
order.
60. The fact that the majority of the speakers have
65. I admire most profoundly this achievement, and am in
condemned Israel for its new aggression gives us reason to
fact
encouraged to see in it a hopeful augury for the righf
hope that the Security Council will take appropriately strict
of
speech
of Israeli representatives as well.
measures in regard to Israel,

66. One after another, the Arab representatives came
before the Council and revealed in unequivocal terms what
the issue is from their point of view. The problem to them
is not any particular Israeli action but Israel’s very
existence. The Arab representatives have explained that the
people of Israel must “even inside their own country . I . be

61. In this connexion we must also mention that during
the debate in the Council there was a noticeable inconsistency in the statements of certain representatives who,
while expressing regret at the new aggressive acts corn
mitted by Israel, were at the same time really trying to
6

l--XT-

help guerrilla activities from basesoutside Israel. , . . It
borders on hypocrisy when Arabs now complain against
reprisals and when the highest United Nations body
overlooks provocations”.

“, that Palestine “has been occupied in its
entirety by an immigrant alien population”, that El-Fan&
which, as we know, aims at Israel’s liquidation, is “an
organization dedicated to peace based on justice.” The
word “El-Fatah” itself, by the way, means conquest; and
conquest is made up of the initials of “the movement for
the liberation of Palestine”, Palestine as a whole.

74. Another newspaper, the Aftenbladet, says about
Israel’saction :
“One can argue whether an action of this kind is
proportionate to the terror incursions, but it is entirely
clear that such incursionsare a violation of the cease-fire
arrangement and that Jordan is a party asthey are carried
out from its territoiy.”

67. There is no longer any doubt about it; nothing has
changed. As President Nasser declared on 28 May 1967,
“Israel’s very existence is aggression”. As Radio Cairo
repeated on 17 March 1968, “The real problem of Palestine
is Israel’s existence”.

75. The Rio de Janeiro Globo carries a big headline:
“Israelis repulseterrorists”,

68. Starting from this premise everything that Israel does
or does not do is automatically defined as wrong, unjust
and illegal. How very far the Arab Governments still seem
to be from readiness to work for a just and lasting peace as
provided for by Security Council resolution 242 (1967) of
22 November 1967 when they continue to embrace the
idea that Israel’s right to statehood must be denied.

76. The Oslo Dagbladet’sheadline is: “Israel’s attack on
Jordan in self-defence”.
77. In yesterday’s Figaro of Pariswe read:
“The endlessincidents are not causedby the consequencesof the six days’ war and by Israelioccupation of
certain territories. The provocations of Arab terrorists, as
the entire world knows, have occurred one after the
other, long before the six days’ war.

69. How difficult it is to move towards just and lasting
peace if the Arab Governments continue to claim that
warfare by terror is justified today, in the period of the
cease-fire, as it had been during the Armistice and during
the Truce that preceded it, simply because it is Israel that
this warfare is directed against. Where is this attitude going
to Iead us?

“One cannot ask one party to abide by a rule if one is
unable to demand that the other party respect it as
well , . .

70. This has been the tragedy of the Middle East for years.
Disregarding the Charter of the United Nations, disregarding United Nations resolutions and world opinion, the Arab
States became so intoxicated with their lust for Israel’s
destruction that the concepts of right and wrong lost all
meaning in their eyes, and the Middle East tumbled from
one catastrophe to another. Now again, in utter disregard
for their international obligations and world opinion, the
Arab Governments pursue their war against Israel by terror
and murder and refuse to see the criminality and dangerousness of their behaviour.

78. The WashingtonPost writes on 8 August:

71. World opinion has never been firmer in its rejection of
this Arab attitude,

79. The New York Timesof 6 August declares:

The Stockholm daily GoeteborgsHandelsTidiningen
of 7 Augustjustifies in an editorial Israel’sair action against
the basesof the raiders:

“There can be no peace in the Middle East until the
world organization moves to condemn with equal vigor
militant acts on both sides. . .“,

“It therefore seemsunjust to blame Israel for having
meted out justice , . .
“This is a simplequestionof equity and reason,”

“The Israeli policy has its own reason. Israel . . . is
determined to protect its citizenry. No international
rebuke, not even a one-sided one leaving Jordanian
responsibility unscored,is likely to pushit off this path”.

72.

“How convenient it is for Arab States to shirk
responsibility. . . . They believethat they haveinvented a
method of war that creates no danger for themselves,
However, these tactics are folly. When Israel strikes a
blow the attacker should not be surprised,nor should
Jordan that protects him. The only trouble is that in the
world there are too many who hastento blameIsrael.Is
there no state that could convey to the Arabs that the
idea of a oneway war without any risk is an ideawithout
foundation whatsoever?”
73. The OsloAftenposten writes on the sameday:
“The Security Council becauseof its compositionhas
not yet addresseda sharp warning to Arab countries,
which despitethe cease-fireagreementwith Israelactively

80. The United Nations has repeatedly rejected the Arab
claim that incursions, terror and sabotageare acceptabIe.
The 19 August 1948 resolution was specificin ruling out
suchacts of violence.
81. Allow me to read from the verbatim record of the
meeting of the Security Council of 19 August 1948 and to
quote a distinguishedrepresentativewho said:
“ . * 9each party shouldbe responsiblefor the actionsof
the individuals or groups on its territory or under its
authority to ensurethat their actions do not violate the
truce or lead to a situation that would result in a
resumption of military operations , . .
“ . . . the Security Council should adopt a suitable
resolution or issuea warning to the parties . . , sothat the

7

occupied Arab territory were the result of confrontations
between Palestinian individuals-over whom no government
has power-and Israeli armed forces.

Government and the authorities concerned may establish
the necessary supervision over individuals or groups
whose actions might contribute to a violation of the truce
and a resumption of military operations.

87. Therefore, on the one hand we have more than 185
incidents carried out by Israeli armed forces against Jordan,
and on the other hand around 120 alleged by the Israelis
for which the Government of Jordan has no responsibility
whatsoever.

I‘ . . . the States which have undertaken to fulfil the
Security Council’s decision on the cessation of military
operations . . . will certainly be able to find ways and
means to punish and call to order or bring to justice the
individuals or groups whose actions might contribute to
violate the obligations imposed upon the various States
involved . . .“. [354th meeting, pp. 45 and 46.J

88. I shall not dwell on this at this stage. I should’like to
turn to another, more important aspect of what is before
the Council.

This was stated by Ambassador Malik of the Soviet Union,
the President of the Security Council, which adopted
resolution 56 (1948) of 19 August 1948.

89. I have come before the Council with a complaint
embodying a clear case of aggression: one act committed
against the people of Irbid, one committed against the
civilian population of Salt. Both acts, both attacks, both
aggressionswere admitted by the authorities in Israel, and
openly admitted here in the Security Council by
Mr. Tekoah. Mr. Tekoah attempted to say that they were
attacking terrorist bases. He said: “The terrorist bases in
this area were destroyed in yesterday’s action.” [1434th
meeting, para. 112.J I should like to say, as I have said in
the past, that this is not true; that when Mr. Tekoah says
that his army confined its attack to the basesfor terrorism,
he was not telling the truth. Today 1 would say that that
wasa he. I am sorry to use this term, but I have the pictures
here which expose this lie.

82. The Qibya resolution of 24 November 1953, to which
the Jordanian representative referred at the last meeting in
a selective manner, called on the Government of Jordan to
take measures to prevent incursions. A similar reference is
found in the Security Council resolution of 28 March 1955
regarding the Israel-Egyptian border.
83. NOW, tenets of law do not change simply by virtue of
the lapse of time or by the change of political viewsin the
capital of a particular Member State. In his press communique of 11 May 1967 the Secretary-General states:
“I say that in the last few days El-Fatah type of
incidents have increased unfortunately. . . . That type of
activity is insidious. . . . All Governments concerned have
an obligation under the Charter of the United Nations
and in the interest of peace to take every measure within
their means to put an end to such activities.”

90. I present this picture of a child less than a year old, in
the lap of his mother, bombed by the Israelis. This wasnot
a terrorist, nor was he living in a base for terrorism. To
mislead the Security Council is in itself an act which
deserves condemnation. I have therefore requested the
circulation of these pictures as a document of the Security
Council-Mr. Chai has said they will be available sometime
today-for every member to ponder and examine.

84. I do not think we would accusethe Secretary-General
of imperialism or colonialism, as the Soviet representative
has accused those who hold views such as those expressed
in the Secretary-General’s report. Surely the Security
Council cannot ignore such violations of the cease-firesuch activities. For the sake of peace in the area, it must
call for their definite cessation.
d

91. Mr. Tekoah said the other day that they did not bum
or bomb the crops of the Jordanian civilians and farmers.
That statement is belied by this picture, which you will
have later today, showing the crops and the trucks and the
people bombed by the Israelis.
92. Mr. Tekoah said that they had confined everything to
the bases for terrorism. This again is a lie, because this
picture shows a Red Crescent bus carrying the victims of
the Israelis, the Red Crescent bus bombed by the Israelis,
destroyed by the Israelis.

85. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of
Jordan, who has asked to be allowed to speak.
86. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): I did not ask to be allowed
to speak to answerthe repeated chargespresented by Israel,
which
have been answered time and again in the past.
Suffice it to say that during this very period to which he
referred 185 incidents took place. They wereall committed
by regular Israeli forces. I have referred to them in my
letters of 8 April 1968 [S/8533], 6 May 1968 [S/8578 and
S/85791 and 21 June 1968 [S/8649] and one which will be
presented soon. These show clearly how frequent and how
deliberate the Israeli attacks are. More than 18.5 were
described in these letters. On the other hand, even
according to the Israeli representative’s letters of 8 April
IS/85351, 24 June (S/8651/ and 2 August 1968 [S/8716],
only about 120 incidents were reported. It is of the utmost
importance that, while the Israeli attacks are planned and
executed by the regular Israeli army, with the authorization
of the Israeli Government, the incidents which occured in

93. I also have here a sample of the means used to kill and
murder my people. I have here a picture of a bomb. Its
weight is 500 pounds. It is highly explosive. The extent of
the damage done by such a bomb will be verified by the
experts, and I hope the experts, who are quite familiar with
this kind of bomb and with its production, will help us
know exactly the extent of the damage caused by every
single bomb of this type. This one was not exploded by
Chance.
94. I have other pictures. They are all going to be before
you some time this afternoon.
9.5. So when Mr. Tekoah comes here with a straight face
to say that they were bombing only-only-bases in isolated
8

areas, not civilians, he is misleading the Council and the
Council should be aware of such deceit.

knockout blow against the guerrilla camps-an air raid,
perhaps-and get away with it”. The article concluded-and
this is very important for the Security Council to ponder“No doubt a lot of dust would be kicked up in the United
Nations, but would anyone actually do anything about
it? “. “A lot of dust would be kicked up”-after South
Africa attacks neighbouring African States Members of the
United Nations. “A lot of dust would be kicked up in the
United Nations, but would anyone actually do anything
about it? “.

96. I now turn to the substance. I have presented my
complaint. I have shown the extent of the damage caused to
Irbid, with the scores of casualties, with the dead and the
injured; the crops which were burned; the forests which
were burned; the napalm which was used to burn the
banana fields and the orange groves; the destruction of the
irrigation project in Ghor, which is an area feeding a
substantial part of Jordan; and, above all, I have shown in
detail the crime which was committed last Sunday against
Salt. Both crimes were admitted by Mr. Tekoah, right here,
and by his authorities in Tel Aviv. Now I am coming before
the Council for a remedy,

101. An action by the Security Council would save the
prestige of this great body, not only the security of Jordan.
102. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated fionz Russian): I shall be brief and shall merely
offer some information. The representative of Israel quoted
the words of the President of the Security Council, but the
essence of that quotation is that each country and
Government is responsible for everything that occurs in its
territory and those it controls. The occupied territories of
the Arab countries are controlled by the Government of
Israel, and the entire responsibility for everything which
occurs in those territories rests wholly and completely on
the Government of Israel. Accordingly, the Government of
Israel has no right whatever to shift onto other Govemments the blame for everything which happens in these
territories, and even less to take any measures of reprisal
against the Governments of other countries and their
peaceful populations. This is the essence of the Israel
aggressors’ crime. The responsibility for the territories
under their control is theirs, not that of the Governments
of neighbouring States.

97. You have given us seven resolutions and we are
grateful to you for every one of those resolutions. You have
condemned Israel time and again. The sixth time, you
emphasized to Israel, on the occasion of the Es-Samu’
attack, that if Israel repeated such attacks, you, the
Security Council, would take further measures as envisaged
in the Charter. Then Israel again committed the same
crime-1 would say a more serious crime-against Irbid.
While you were considering the crime against Irbid and
before the termination of that debate on Irbid, another
crime was committed against Salt; and while you were
considering both of these crimes, against Irbid and Salt, a
third one was committed, the day before yesterday. And
you have emphatically warned Israel.
98. I now come here to ask: are we, the people of Jordan,
a small Member of the United Nations, entitled to expect
that you will now, at this stage, take action as promised,
take serious action, since Israel continues to defy you? Is
the Security Council now going to invoke Chapter VII, or is
the Council, because of certain considerations-and this is
not the time for exposing other considerations-going to be
crippled, going to remain inactive?

103. Therefore, no quotations or verbal jugglery here will
help the representative of Israel to relieve his Government
of responsibility for its continuing acts of aggression against
its neighbours +
104. The PRESIDENT:
Israel.

99. Perhaps you do not want to help Jordan. This is your
privilege. Jordan is a small Member. But I think you cannot
afford-you,
the Security Council-to cause an end to be
put to the great hope placed in the United Nations. I need
not remind you of what happened to the League of Nations
after the Ethiopian affair, and you all know what happened
to Ethiopia as a result of the inaction of the League of
Nations vis-&vis the Ethiopian affair. Is the Council going
to show the same lack of action? I hope it does not, for I
shall be worrying not only about Jordan, but about the
destiny of every single small Member of the United Nations.

I call upon the representative of

105. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I would not like to pursue our
exchange of views with the representative of the Soviet
Union. At the last meeting I made an observation concerning geography and facts, I should like to refer him to that
observation again,
106. I think it is not new that the respect by the
representative of Jordan for the borderline between fact
and fantasy is not much greater than his Government’s
respect for the cease-fire line. I should like to reject
categorically the malicious allegations made here by the
representative of Jordan. It is not the first time that he
comes before the Security Council, refers to prefabricated
documents, or photo montage pictures, in an attempt to
prove his point. I reiterate in all firmness: Israel forces did
not bomb the town of Salt. They did not bomb civilian
installations. They did not even bomb the military camps of
the Jordanian and Iraqi forces situated in the area. The
Israeli air action was taken against the terrorist bases and
only against the terrorist bases. It is not enough to come
here and to make accusations of the kind which we have
just heard without any foundation in fact.

100. Last Saturday, I think, 3 August, there was an article
in the Economist. This article is worth pondering by every
single member here. It is an article which shows that Israel
is now exporting destructive ideas. I am referring to the
article which is entitled “In Dayan’s Steps” in which the
correspondent, writing from South Africa, said that the
Defence Minister of South Africa, Mr. Botha, Dayan’s
counterpart, stated that he would do what Israel did. The
correspondent said, “Significantly, .the Defence Minister
drew the analogy of Israel’s raid against El-Fatah bases
across the Jordan”. He said, “South Africa was deeply
impressed by the Israeli example and the feeling is growing
that the forces of the white South could deliver a great
9

Amman-28 of them. Baghdad Radio on the same day,
5 August, reports an officer of El-Fatah, an Iraqi officer of
El-Fatah, killed in Salt, would be buried in Iraq. That brings
us up to 29 casualties of the 34 reported by the
representative of Jordan. The voice of El-Asefa broadcast.
ing on behalf of El-Fatah reports on 4 August that
1 Jordanian officer and 4 Jordanian soldiers were killed as a
result of the air raid. The total number of casualties as
reported by Amman, by Radio Baghdad, by the radio of
the El-Fatah organization is 34.

107. Here is a description of an Arab eyewitness, a Press
correspondent, reporting from Jordan and quoted in the
Christian Science Monitor of 6 August:
“For nearly four hours on 4 August Israeli jets bombed,
strafed, rocketed two large advance training areas of Arab
fedayeen [guerrillas] south and west of the town of Salt,
eighteen miles north-west of Amman.
“ .a *
“Touma Hezzou, a Jordanian correspondent of an
American television network, drove into the thick of the
battle near Salt. He was slightly injured by a bomb
explosion.
“Mr. Hezzou”-he was a civilian-“telephoned to this
correspondent that the guerrilla areas were those hardest
hit.
“Iraqi troops and anti-aircraft units stationed considerably to the north of Salt apparently [were not] involved.
The fedayeen dispersed and took up defensive positions
in caves and behind rocks. But some, probably about
twenty-five”-about
twenty-five feduyeen-“were
caught
under a bridge that was hit by a bomb”.
If there were any civilian casualties they cannot but be
regretted.
108. Those who insist on pursuing war must realize that
responsibility for civilian casualties rests on them, not on
those who defend themselves and call for peace and act in
self-defence.
109. What are the facts about the casualties as a result of
the Israeli air action? The Jordanian representative mentioned before the Council 34 Jordanians killed. Now, the
Associated Press from Amman reports, on 5 August, the
funerals of 28 Jordanian feduyeen, members of the terrorist
organization, killed in the Israeli air strike, being buried in

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

110. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representativeof
Jordan who hasaskedto be allowed to speakin exerciseof
his right of reply.
111. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): I was hoping, before
taking the floor, to have in my handsdocumentsfromthe
Israeli authorities. They were boastingon 5, 6 and 7 August
about what they did. I shall be quoting this, I hope,at our
forthcomingmeeting.
112. But I shouldlike to say, Mr. President,thesearenot
fabricated things. We did not kilI a child to prove a case,
nor did we murder a woman to convince the CounciIor
Mr. Tekoah, nor did we bum the fieldsto makea showout
of it, nor did we causethe destruction of the Red Crescent
busto come and tell Mr. Tekoah: “This is it, we aredoing
this”.
113. Mr. Tekoah knows the facts. I am sure the Council
also, by now, knows all the facts. I did not say that we
bombed military positions in August. No, Sir, But on
5 August, they camewith the warning,saying: “This time
civilians, next time military positions”. And thesearethe
wordsof the Israelis,not of Jordan.
114. Again, I will be bringing this to the Councilin the
next meeting.

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

The meetingroseat 12.40 p.m.

in other currencies)

35641-October

1972~2,050
