S/2014/341

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
13 May 2014
Original: English

Report of the Security Council mission to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Uganda and Ethiopia
(including the African Union)
I. Introduction
1.
In his letter dated 27 September 2013 (S/2013/579), the President of the
Security Council informed the Secretary-General that the Council had decided to
send a mission to the Great Lakes region of Africa and the African Union from 3 to
9 October 2013. The segment of the mission to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo was jointly led by the Permanent Representative of Morocco to the United
Nations, Mohammed Loulichki, and the Deputy Permanent Representative of
France, Alexis Lamek. The Permanent Representative of the United States to the
United Nations, Samantha Power, led the segment to Rwanda, while the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom, Mark Lyall Grant, led the segment to
Uganda. The segment of the mission to Ethiopia (including the African Union) was
jointly led by the Permanent Representative of Azerbaijan to the United Nations,
Agshin Mehdiyev, and the Permanent Representative of Rwanda, Eugène-Richard
Gasana. The composition of the mission and its terms of reference are set out in
annex I.

II. Democratic Republic of the Congo
Meeting in Brussels
2.
On their way to Kinshasa, the members of the Security Council met with
members of the European Union Political and Security Committee in Brussels. The
European Union reiterated its commitment to continue supporting the reconstruction
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo while pursuing stabilization efforts in the
eastern part of the country. The European Union identified as a priority the
conclusion of the talks in Kampala between the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the 23 March Movement (M23) in order to create the
space necessary to address the root causes of the conflict in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. There was agreement that the reform of the
security sector was a precondition for establishing peace and stability in the country
and eventually allowing the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) to draw down. The European

14-53444 (E)

280514

*1453444*

S/2014/341

Union emphasized that this should go hand in hand with economic development.
Decentralization and elections were identified as important processes, while the
European Union stated that its support in this regard would depend on the credibility
of those processes. There was also agreement that the management of natural
resources was critical in order for the Government to generate revenues.
3.
With regard to the reform of the security sector, the European Union
confirmed that its police mission and its Advisory and Assistance Mission for
Security Reform in the Democratic Republic of the Congo would conclude by
September 2014. The European Union would, however, remain committed to
continuing its support for security sector reform with a focus on further streamlining
the payment chain, providing strategic advice and training. At the same time, it
stressed the need for MONUSCO to step up its efforts and play a more important
role in supporting security sector reform, including with regard to the coordination
of international support.

Meetings in Kinshasa
4.
On 5 October in Kinshasa, the mission met with the President, Joseph Kabila
Kabange, the Prime Minister, Augustin Matata Ponyo Mapon, and key Government
ministers, including the Ministers of Defence, Foreign Affairs, Interior and Justice.
The Head of the Independent National Electoral Commission, Abbé Malu Malu, and
the head of the national Peace and Security Framework follow-up mechanism
participated in the meeting with the Minister for Foreign Affairs. The mission met
with the President of the Senate, Leon Kengo wa Dongo, and the Speaker of the
National Assembly, Aubin Minaku, as well as members of both chambers. The
members of the Security Council also attended the closing ceremony of the national
consultations, co-chaired by the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the
National Assembly, with President Kabila also present. In addition, the members of
the Council received detailed briefings by MONUSCO on the implementation of
resolution 2098 (2013), including the planned transfer of tasks to the United Nations
country team.

Key issues raised during the meetings with the President, Prime
Minister, cabinet ministers and Parliament
Implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region
5.
In their meeting with President Kabila, the members of the Security Council
reiterated their support for the implementation of the commitment under the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the region, which is essential for achieving lasting peace and security in the eastern
part of the country and in the region. The members of the Council called upon
President Kabila to implement the national commitments made under the
Framework and to intensify efforts to reform the security sector, consolidate State
authority, make progress on decentralization and further the agenda of
reconciliation, tolerance and democratization.

2/23

14-53444

S/2014/341

6.
President Kabila emphasized the progress made by his Government in
implementing the national commitments under the Framework, signed on
24 February 2013 in Addis Ababa. He noted that reforms were being carried out and
that the national oversight mechanism would be in charge of assessing the progress
made. The President noted that the conclusion of the national consultations was an
important milestone, which provided the Congolese people with an opportunity to
discuss the problems the country was facing and develop recommendations for a
road map for the way forward. He informed the members of the Security Council
that, as a next step, he would present the recommendations to both chambers of
Parliament.
7.
The Prime Minister, cabinet ministers, the President of the Senate and the
Speaker of the National Assembly emphasized the progress made by the
Government under the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. The Prime
Minister noted that economic reforms had begun to yield results and that, the
conflict in the eastern part of the country notwithstanding, economic growth had
been preserved. He noted that civil servants would now be paid regularly and that
infrastructure, including schools and hospitals, were being built in many parts of the
country, except in the east, where violence and instability would impede
development. Recognizing that natural resources would continue to fuel conflict in
the east, the Prime Minister told the members of the Security Council that efforts
were under way to put in place a legislative framework to improve resource
management in the country.
8.
The members of the Security Council recognized the steps taken by the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to implement its national commitments and
commended its conduct of the national consultations resulting in a comprehensive
set of recommendations. They emphasized the need to ensure the swift
implementation of those recommendations, while taking measures to include in the
implementation process the political opposition parties that had not participated in
the consultations. Council members reiterated the need to address the root causes of
the conflict through meaningful reforms and the restoration of State authority
throughout the country.
Reform of the security sector
9.
Recognizing the importance of the reform of the security sector, the Prime
Minister identified the restoration of peace and stability throughout the country, as
well as the necessary financial means, as preconditions to moving the reform
process forward.
10. During a working session with the Ministers of Defence, Interior and Justice,
the members of the Security Council called for concrete progress in the reform of
the security sector to ensure that the Democratic Republic of the Congo would have
the capacities needed to exercise its sovereignty, ensure the security of its country
and protect its people.
11. The Minister of Defence outlined a number of priorities on which the
Government would focus in order to create a professional and republican army,
including streamlining human resources management and recruitment, creating
better social and professional conditions, modernizing equipment, restructuring
command and control, redefining doctrine, creating a rapid reaction force,
rehabilitating infrastructure and mobilizing resources. He noted that some measures

14-53444

3/23

S/2014/341

had already been taken, including the reorganization of the command zones and the
retirement of some 450 officers, while efforts were under way to train new officers
and deploy them across the country. The Minister noted that the Congolese rapid
reaction force should be operational by 2020, while by 2025 the Armed Forces of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo should be in a position to ensure the security
of the country and its people independently.
12. With regard to the police, the Minister of the Interior noted that reform efforts
continued to restructure the national police and make it a professional and
transparent service comprising some 200,000 police personnel. He noted that the
training efforts had achieved results and that the change in the behaviour of the
police personnel had improved their relations with the local population. He
underscored the importance of training, adding that plans for the construction of a
national police academy were advancing, while each of the provinces would now
have its own training centre.
13. The Minister of Justice identified the conflict in the eastern part of the country
as the main obstacle to the exercise of the rule of law and the reason for human
rights violations, in particular in occupied areas. She identified the need to
strengthen the institutional framework to enhance the fight against impunity,
including through establishing the Constitutional Court as envisaged in the
Constitution, as well as the remaining 95 (out of 157) peace tribunals. She also
mentioned plans to take steps to fight corruption, including by setting up an
anti-corruption agency and capacity-building measures.
Fighting impunity
14. The members of the Security Council highlighted its continuing concerns
about the protection of civilians, the situation in the eastern part of the country, the
situation of internally displaced persons and the issue of sexual violence,
emphasizing the need to strengthen child protection and encourage the Government
to ensure that those responsible for serious violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law are brought to justice.
15. President Kabila highlighted progress made since 2003 in fighting impunity.
He stated that, while the military justice system was working to ensure justice for
violations committed by national security forces, some challenges remained. He also
noted efforts that were under way to hold perpetrators of sexual violence
accountable, adding, however, that ending the scourge of sexual violence would
require resolving the conflict in the eastern area.
16. Cabinet ministers and the representatives of Parliament agreed that fighting
impunity was essential in addressing the scourge of sexual violence and violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law. The Minister of Justice told the
members of the Security Council that under national jurisdiction, sexual violence
was now considered a crime against humanity. Both the President of the Senate and
the Speaker of the National Assembly indicated the willingness of Parliament to
favourably consider the proposal to establish a mixed court comprising national and
international magistrates to bring perpetrators of serious violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law to justice.

4/23

14-53444

S/2014/341

Elections
17. With regard to democratization, the Security Council members mentioned the
need for free, fair and transparent national and provincial elections to be
accomplished within the constitutional time frame.
18. Noting that the results of the elections in 2011 had been challenged, the
President stressed the need for the next elections to be held under excellent
conditions. To this end, a number of measures were envisaged, including the
organization of an administrative census and the delimitation of administrative
boundaries.
19. The Prime Minister agreed that elections were an essential foundation of
democracy, although in his view elections should not slow down development. The
President of the National Assembly stressed that local elections would go hand in
hand with decentralization. The President of the National Electoral Commission
informed the members of the Security Council that the Commission had developed a
timeline for the conduct of local elections by the end of 2014, to be followed by
national elections in 2016, adding that national stakeholders would be consulted on
options with regard to the sequencing of the various polls.
Situation in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
20. The members of the Security Council reiterated their deep concern regarding
the fragile security situation and the humanitarian crisis in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo owing to ongoing destabilizing activities of
M23, the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda (FDLR) and other
Congolese and foreign armed groups. The Council members expressed support for
MONUSCO, recognizing that the Force Intervention Brigade was an effective tool
that was already yielding tangible results. Noting that there was no purely military
solution to the conflict in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the members of the Council stressed the need to find a political solution and address
the root causes of the conflict. The Council members also highlighted that the
management of national resources was key to stabilizing the economy and
addressing the conflict in the eastern area.
21. The President, the Prime Minister, cabinet ministers and representatives of
Parliament agreed that the conflict in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo was the single largest challenge facing the country. Cabinet ministers
expressed their gratitude for the support provided by the international community, in
particular the adoption of resolution 2098 (2013), providing MONUSCO with the
mandate to neutralize all armed groups operating in the east. The Prime Minister
and some cabinet ministers underscored the need for the Force Intervention Brigade
to robustly implement its mandate to end the violence in the east and create the
conditions for development and reform.
22. President Kabila noted that despite the military gains, the situation in the east
remained volatile, with a massive displacement of populations as a result of the
fighting. The President noted that the parties in the talks in Kampala between the
Government and M23 were close to reaching agreement, indicating that a successful
conclusion would depend on the good faith of partners and the effectiveness of the
mediation. The Prime Minister reiterated the determination of the President and his
Government to negotiate an agreement with M23, although the public sentiment was

14-53444

5/23

S/2014/341

against any such negotiations, given past experience. The Minister for Foreign
Affairs agreed that there was no purely military solution to the problem of M23,
while other cabinet members emphasized the need for military pressure to resolve
the issue, including on the part of MONUSCO, which was now mandated to
neutralize all armed groups.
23. The President reiterated that the Government’s position on amnesty was clear:
there would be no impunity for those who committed serious violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law. He stressed that the Government did not
want to repeat mistakes of the past by granting blanket amnesty and subsequent
integration into the security forces. The President noted that the conditions for
integration in the army should be restrictive and based on a vetting process, while
mentioning the possibility of a provisional amnesty for those willing to make a
commitment with regard to their conduct. Concerning members of M23 who would
not be integrated into the national army, the President mentioned that discussions to
find a solution for them were under way and that concrete suggestions would be
welcome.
24. The President of the National Assembly recognized that the situation in the
eastern area was also a result of the absence of State authority and the weakness of
State institutions over many years, stressing the need for a consensual approach to
addressing the root causes of conflict. He underscored the need for reforms, most
importantly decentralization, in order to strengthen State authority and justice and
improve the lives of the Congolese people after what he termed as three decades of
excessive centralism.
Regional relations
25. The members of the Security Council reiterated their commitment to continue
to call upon all countries of the region to respect the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and not to interfere in their
internal affairs.
26. President Kabila stated that, in his view, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo was the only signatory of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
agreement that had taken action to implement its commitments. He urged the
regional actors and the international community to make equal progress in
implementing their respective commitments. Identifying the interference of
neighbouring countries as the main reason for the continued conflict in the eastern
area, the Prime Minister, cabinet ministers, the President of the Senate and the
Speaker of the National Assembly echoed the need for the international community
to work with neighbouring countries, in particular Rwanda, to ensure that they
honoured their commitments under the Framework and end destabilizing acts.
Transfer of tasks of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo
27. The members of the Security Council held a working lunch with
representatives of MONUSCO and the United Nations country team in which the
planned transfer of tasks from MONUSCO to the country team and the Government
were discussed. A MONUSCO representative said that consultations had been
initiated to inform the Government about the process while an assessment of the
capacities of the country team was under way. A representative of the country team

6/23

14-53444

S/2014/341

identified securing sufficient resources once tasks were transferred as the major
challenge, stressing the need for a resource mobilization strategy. On demining, a
MONUSCO representative noted that it was important to keep some capacity to
ensure that unexploded ordnance was cleared after offensive military operations by
the Force Intervention Brigade. The Security Council members reiterated the need
for MONUSCO to concentrate on key priority tasks, while transferring as many
tasks as possible to the country team or the Government.

Meetings in Goma
28. In Goma on 6 October, the members of the Security Council met separately
with the Governor of North Kivu, Julien Paluku, and members of civil society. They
also visited Kibati towers, from which M23 had shelled Goma in August, and
received briefings by MONUSCO on the joint operations with the armed forces
against M23 and other groups and on how the Mission intended to implement its
mandate of neutralizing all armed groups in keeping with resolution 2098 (2013).
The members of the Security Council also travelled to the Muningi camp, where
they met internally displaced persons and humanitarian workers.
29. The visit of the members of the Security Council to Kibati towers provided a
first-hand opportunity to see the location from which M23 shelled civilians in Goma
and to discuss the practical application of the mandate of MONUSCO to protect
civilians. The members of the Council were briefed in detail about the operational
environment and the threat posed by armed groups, in particular M23, which
continue to commit serious violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law and recruit combatants while receiving arms and ammunition. The
briefings also covered activities of the MONUSCO force, including the deployment
of the Force Intervention Brigade, military operations that were planned to
neutralize armed groups and activities aimed at helping to restore State authority in
areas cleared of armed groups. MONUSCO clarified that while the Force
Intervention Brigade was an important tool, there was one Mission and one force
and that the main mandated task would remain the protection of civilians.
30. The Governor noted that in spite of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework and a number of previous agreements, as well as the new mandate of
MONUSCO, including the deployment of the Force Intervention Brigade, the people
in North Kivu were still waiting for peace to return. He identified the armed groups
operating in North Kivu, including FDLR, M23 and Allied Democratic Forces —
National Army for the Liberation of Uganda (ADF-NALU) as the main threat to the
civilian population. He emphasized that the population continued to be exposed to
the threat of M23, which occupied parts of the province in Rutshuru and Nyiragongo
and continued to attack civilians and recruit children.
31. The Governor underscored the need for a military solution to eliminate all
armed groups in order to establish lasting peace and stability in North Kivu. With
regard to the causes of the conflict, the Governor expressed the view that the
involvement of the neighbouring States, particularly Rwanda and Uganda, not the
divisions between communities or ethnic groups or the lack of governance, were the
main cause of the conflict in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

14-53444

7/23

S/2014/341

32. Civil society representatives echoed concerns that the population in North
Kivu continued to live in a warlike situation constantly targeted by armed groups.
They noted that M23 continued to commit serious violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law with impunity, including sexual violence, arbitrary
killings and lootings, while in Beni the population was subjected to kidnappings and
killings by ADF-NALU. They reiterated concerns that Rwanda and Uganda
continued to support armed groups by providing arms and ammunition to M23,
ADF-NALU and other armed groups. They also accused Rwanda of supporting the
recruitment of children to fight on the side of M23, while accommodating the M23
leadership in their country instead of extraditing them to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
33. Representatives of Congolese humanitarian non-governmental organizations
stated that they deplored the continued violence against civilians by armed groups,
with the resulting dramatic humanitarian situation and the massive displacement of
the population. They identified the absence of State authority and the lack of
protection as the main challenge. They reiterated their concern about the continued
interference by neighbouring States, calling upon the Security Council to impose
sanctions on such actions, and the need to neutralize all armed groups operating in
the eastern area and to end impunity. According to humanitarian actors, only
25 per cent of the territory of North Kivu was under the control of the Government,
which made humanitarian access difficult.
34. Internally displaced persons in the Munigi camp cited the prevailing
insecurity, the relentless targeting by armed groups, sexual violence, the loss of their
homes and the absence of schooling opportunities for their children as main factors
preventing them from returning to their places of origin.

III. Rwanda
Background
35. The Security Council’s goals for the mission to Rwanda were to discuss the
Government’s concerns about the region and how they could be resolved while
respecting the territorial integrity and sovereignty of all States in the region; to
reiterate the Council’s support for the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
and call upon all parties to implement their commitments under the Framework in
good faith; to examine the plight of refugees from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo caused by armed groups; to encourage Rwandan and Congolese authorities to
work together to ensure the full neutralization, disarmament, demobilization and
cessation of sources of support to armed groups in the region; to explore the
strengthening of regional cooperation, including through the creation of peace
dividends and development; and to discuss with the Government of Rwanda the
modalities of how the Government, the United Nations and international
organizations can work together to urgently address the situation of the former M23
combatants.

8/23

14-53444

S/2014/341

Visit to Rwanda
36. In Rwanda, the members of the Security Council, led by Ambassador Power,
met with the President, Paul Kagame, as well as Louise Mushikiwabo, Minister for
Foreign Affairs; James Kabarebe, Minister of Defence; and Karenzi Karake,
Director of the National Intelligence and Security Services. The members of the
Council also travelled to the Mutobo demobilization centre to talk with former
FDLR combatants who had voluntarily entered the process of demobilization and
reintegration, after which they visited the genocide memorial in Kigali.
37. In Mutobo, several of the FDLR ex-combatants offered testimonials about
their experiences, including what prompted their decision to leave FDLR and the
challenges faced by members who want to leave but feel they cannot do so because
of threats against their families. The Council members welcomed the Rwandan
demobilization and reintegration programme and the cooperation between
MONUSCO and the Government of Rwanda in demobilizing and reintegrating
FDLR members.
Meeting with the President
38. The meeting with President Kagame, on 7 October, covered such issues as the
presence of armed groups in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the need for all regional actors to respect the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and other States in the region,
the Kampala process and the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework and to
improve relations among States in the region.
Armed groups in the region
39. President Kagame explained to the visiting members of the Council that FDLR
remained a threat to Rwanda because of the ideology the group continued to
espouse.
40. He sought the Council’s support in pressing for MONUSCO to enact concrete
measures to address the FDLR issue. In the view of President Kagame, one of the
root causes was the weakness of the institutions in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which had contributed to the perpetuation of violence in the region.
41. The leadership of Rwanda was of the view that the problem of armed groups
could be resolved only through a genuine partnership among States in the region and
the international community. He assured the Council members that Rwanda was
genuinely committed to working towards peace in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the broader region and wanted to create conditions conducive to
development.
42. The members of the Security Council agreed with the President that the
MONUSCO Force Intervention Brigade should pursue all armed groups that posed a
threat to the region. They reiterated their call upon all countries in the region not to
tolerate or provide assistance to armed groups, urging the President to use his
influence with M23 in the service of peace and to help bring the Kampala talks to a
close. They noted that for the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework to work,
all armed groups must be neutralized, preferably through political solutions and by

14-53444

9/23

S/2014/341

being starved of arms and financing, which would require the commitment of all
States in the region.
Kampala process
43. In discussing the Kampala process between the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and M23, more specifically the issues of integration and
amnesty, President Kagame expressed his view that a balance must be struck
between amnesty and peace. He agreed with the Council members that the
perpetrators of atrocities should be held accountable, adding that accountability
should focus on individual perpetrators rather than entire groups. He urged that the
pursuit of justice in the region not be pursued selectively and that all perpetrators of
atrocities be identified and prosecuted. He noted the challenges faced by the judicial
system in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and encouraged the international
community to assist in strengthening the system within that country. He shared his
view that Africa should have its own regional criminal court.
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
44. Regarding the commitment of Rwanda to the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework, President Kagame and the government officials with whom the Council
met earlier emphasized that the Framework should move from rhetoric to action.
45. Looking forward to the implementation of the Framework, Rwandan officials
indicated that they were keen to move forward on the socioeconomic pillar, with a
strong focus on infrastructure development and energy production on both sides of
the border. The Minister for Foreign Affairs advocated for the development of
technical projects to facilitate the disbursement of funds pledged by the World Bank,
while acknowledging cooperation with the new leadership of MONUSCO and the
proactive initiative of the Secretary-General and the President of the World Bank in
helping to promote peace dividends on the ground.
46. The Security Council mission reiterated its support for the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework and called upon countries and leaders in the region to use
their influence to promote peace and stability. The Council members encouraged the
signatories to pursue cooperation and strengthen local-level collaboration. They
further encouraged regional partnerships through the Economic Community for the
Great Lakes Region for greater peace dividends on the ground. The role of the
Office of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General to the Great Lakes Region in
coordinating international support in collaboration with regional organizations was
equally underlined.
Rapport of Rwanda with the Democratic Republic of the Congo
47. In discussing the relationship of Rwanda with the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, President Kagame indicated that both countries, including their leadership,
were in direct and regular contact. He informed the Council members of the plans to
include the Democratic Republic of the Congo in the East African Community.
48. The Minister for Foreign Affairs expressed the readiness of the Government of
Rwanda to work alongside the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region to
pacify the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and reiterated the
commitment of her country to remaining a true partner in the search for stability.

10/23

14-53444

S/2014/341

She called for greater coordinated efforts between the United Nations and the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region.
49. The members of the Security Council stressed that President Kagame had
paved the way for a tremendous legacy in the region based on his vision and
execution in lifting Rwanda out of poverty and towards a considerable level of
development. They stressed that his legacy would be strengthened by helping to
bring the same degree of peace to the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and creating conditions for the enjoyment of the Congolese people to the
same level of peace and prosperity.

IV. Uganda
50. The Security Council mission, led by the Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom to the United Nations, Ambassador Grant, arrived in Uganda on
7 October. The purpose of the visit was to reiterate the support of the Council for the
improvement of relations among the countries in the region, to encourage them to
strengthen cooperation in all fields, to discuss regional efforts and the concerns of
Uganda in the region, including the Allied Democratic Forces, and how they could
be addressed while respecting the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States in
the Great Lakes region and to emphasize the support of the Council for action
against armed groups in the region, including the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA).
51. Upon their arrival at Entebbe airport, the Council members received an update
on the Kampala process and on the support provided to the Facilitator by the Special
Envoys to speed up the process. The visit to Uganda coincided with the time when
M23 and the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo had reached a
consensus on 8 of the 11 points contained in the draft agreement. Issues such as
amnesty and integration were still under discussion.

Meeting with the President
52. The meeting with the President of Uganda, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, focused
mainly on the Kampala process and on negative forces in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the role of the United Nations there.
53. At the start of their meeting with President Museveni, the Council members
expressed their appreciation of the President’s positive contribution to peace and
stability on the continent, including in Somalia, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the Sudan and South Sudan, and called for his continuing leadership in those
processes.

Kampala process
54. The President invited Cyrus Kiyonga, in his capacity as the senior
representative of the Facilitator of the Kampala process, to brief the Security
Council members on the status of the peace talks, which had gained momentum
despite some persistent issues. He reported that such issues as transforming M23
into a political structure, integration and amnesty, refugees and internally displaced
persons, lost property, the rebuilding of the national reconciliation system and

14-53444

11/23

S/2014/341

allegations about the killing of M23 elements had been addressed. A proper enquiry
would be put in place to investigate the killings.
55. The remaining issue was disarmament, and as soon as signatures were
obtained, M23 would start a process of disengagement so that the troops would not
be close to affected civilian populations. Disarmament needed to be coordinated
with other parallel processes by the Government. Once M23 had disengaged, the
Government would take the amnesty bill to Parliament. Cantonment would follow
suit and combatants would be disarmed accordingly. Before the process was
concluded, amnesty should be agreed upon.
56. With regard to the Kampala process, of which President Museveni served as
mediator in his capacity as Chairperson for the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region, he apprised the Council members of the facilitation
methodology, in which problems were addressed in a holistic manner. The Kampala
process had created an opportunity to look at the minimum demands to help the
process move forward, notably on the issues of national reconciliation and security.
Yet, to ensure the integrity of the country, special attention should be given to the
eastern region of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
57. The Security Council mission wanted to know what had changed between the
deal that Kampala was currently trying to reach and the 2009 agreement under the
leadership of President Olusegun Obasanjo. Uganda observed that one key
difference was that the regional players in the Great Lakes region had not been
involved in the 2009 process, whereas they were leading the current process.
President Museveni assured the Council members that if the neighbours acted
together step by step, a lot of impairment could be avoided. He referred to the
regional initiative for Burundi and the crucial role of regional players in the peace
process. Furthermore, for President Museveni, the 2009 oversight mechanism was
very weak, while the current oversight mechanism under the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework was much more credible and more likely to succeed. The
2009 process had achieved about 65 per cent of the provisions of the Framework.
The rest failed, in part because of the inability of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to protect some members of the other party, who were killed during the
integration process. Trust was, therefore, broken.
58. Another issue of concern to the Security Council was amnesty, which was
being debated in the Kampala talks. Uganda shared its view that amnesty should be
proposed to all except those who have committed crimes against humanity. They
noted that this approach had worked for Uganda and had proved a lasting solution in
other African conflicts. The goal should be to first achieve peace and then to address
justice issues. According to President Museveni, amnesty was a centrepiece for
reconciliation. In 2009, amnesty was given in accordance with international law.
Amnesty would now be conditional on good behaviour.
59. The President was of the view that the players were all ideologically
inadequate. He cited as an example the formula used in Burundi to first build trust
and then enable the parties to engage in non-controversial discussions. According to
President Museveni, integration was first and foremost about security. If people
were not part of the armed forces, they would feel in jeopardy; being part of the
armed forces was part of peacebuilding. In his view true power in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo was held by the army, as other power structures, including

12/23

14-53444

S/2014/341

those for exercising judicial and administrative authority, did not exist. Integration
was also a matter of securing employment.
60. President Museveni saw provisional amnesty as one response to the amnesty
issue. He went further, saying that the root causes of unrest in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo had not been resolved. If the root causes were not dealt with,
repeated actions should be expected, he stressed.
61. The issue of integration into the army was also raised, and Uganda was of the
view that it remained unresolved, as the list of those whom Congolese officials were
not prepared to admit into the armed forces was long. The approach being
considered was for some of the individuals on that list to be offered a relocation
option, and a search was ongoing for countries that would be willing to take them.
The President opposed this approach and expressed the desire that the Democratic
Republic of the Congo work instead on the basis of reconciliation and integration.
62. President Museveni also provided his own perspectives on the overall political
and military situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, advising the
Security Council not to focus on M23 as the only problem and to recognize that the
problem was much bigger and historical. According to him, the M23 combatants
could be controlled. They had entered Goma and agreed to move out when urged by
officials in the region to do so.

Negative forces in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the role of the United Nations
63. Along the same line, President Museveni noted that there were other negative
forces in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in control of a large amount of
territory that needed to be addressed. President Museveni blamed the source of the
problem on the past failure of President Mobutu to manage the country and
cooperate with its neighbours. In his view, this had been exacerbated by a sustained
level of violence and the use of the territory of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo by armed groups, who continued to destabilize neighbouring countries.
64. President Museveni urged the Security Council members to help President
Kabila to establish a disciplined security force, without which the Democratic
Republic of the Congo would continue to be fertile ground for terrorists who were
under United Nations watch. He likened the Council’s past engagement in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Somalia as a “terrorism conservation
project”. He noted there were other negative forces in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo in control of a large amount of territory and left to repeatedly terrorize
civilians. These were as bad, if not worse, than M23, and needed to be addressed.
65. Regarding ADF and LRA, the Democratic Republic of the Congo had to
ensure that its territory was not used by negative forces to destabilize the
neighbouring countries. President Museveni suggested that if the Congolese leaders
could not handle the negative forces on their soil, they should call upon the region
for assistance.
66. President Museveni referred to what he perceived as a “terrorism conservation
project” under the mandate of the United Nations. He questioned the concept of
sovereignty and emphasized the challenges faced by the neighbours of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, who were forced to divert some of their

14-53444

13/23

S/2014/341

resources from development projects to securing their borders. He was of the view
that the international community had not been sending the right message to the
Congolese Government. He highlighted the issue of discipline and conduct in the
Congolese army and cautioned the country’s leaders against playing any
opportunistic games, which would be likely to hamper regional efforts and
contradict the spirit of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework.
67. President Museveni argued that resolving the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo was simpler than dealing with the situation in the Sudan or
Somalia. According to him, there was need for national reconciliation and an
effective and disciplined State machinery. He invited the Security Council to look
into the best practices of Uganda in mending its situation without resorting to
United Nations forces.
68. He cautioned the Security Council members against taking sides in Africa’s
conflicts, maintaining that, by taking sides, they had been part of the problem of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. He also invited them to study the situation more
closely before reacting and to rely on the knowledge and experience of regional
leaders like himself, who lived close to the situation and had relationships in the
countries concerned. He noted that a solution would be reached only if a “holy
trinity” approach were adopted — a tripartite alliance that included national,
regional and international actors. As such, the Framework agreement was on the
right track.
69. Finally, the head of the Security Council delegation requested President
Museveni to pressure President Kagame to play a more constructive role in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. President Museveni informed the delegation
that if Rwanda was meddling in the Congolese crisis he would be the first to know it
and to stop it.

V. Ethiopia
70. The Security Council’s visit to Ethiopia was co-led by the Permanent
Representative of Azerbaijan to the United Nations, Ambassador Mehdiyev
(President of the Council for the month of October 2013), and the Permanent
Representative of Rwanda to the United Nations, Ambassador Gasana. In addition to
participating in the seventh annual joint consultative meeting with the African
Union Peace and Security Council (see annex II), the members of the Security
Council met with the Chairperson of the African Union Commission and with the
Prime Minister of Ethiopia.

14/23

14-53444

S/2014/341

Annex I
Composition and terms of reference of the Security Council
mission to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda,
Uganda and Ethiopia (including the African Union)
Composition
Ambassador Maria Cristina Perceval (Argentina)
Ambassador Gary Francis Quinlan (Australia)
Ambassador Agshin Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan) co-head of mission
Counsellor Zhao Yong (China)
Counsellor Alexis Lamek (France) co-head of mission
Ambassador Gert Rosenthal (Guatemala)
Ambassador Sylvie Lucas (Luxembourg)
Ambassador Mohammed Loulichki (Morocco) co-head of mission
Minister Asim Iftikhar Ahmad (Pakistan)
Ambassador Kyung-hoon Sul (Republic of Korea)
Minister Petr Iliichev (Russian Federation)
Ambassador Eugène-Richard Gasana (Rwanda) co-head of mission
Ambassador Kodjo Menan (Togo)
Ambassador Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland) co-head of mission
Ambassador Samantha Power (United States of America) co-head of mission

Terms of reference
A.

Great Lakes regional elements
• To recall the commitment of the Security Council to the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of all States in the region and to
emphasize the need to respect fully the principle of non-interference, goodneighbourliness and regional cooperation
• To call upon all countries of the region to respect the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of neighbouring countries, to not interfere in the internal
affairs of neighbouring countries, to not harbour persons accused of violations
of international humanitarian law and human rights law or persons listed by
United Nations sanctions regimes and to promote accountability, and to call
upon all countries of the region to neither tolerate nor provide assistance or
support of any kind to armed groups
• To express the strong support of the Security Council for the improvement of
relations among the countries of the region and to encourage them to continue

14-53444

15/23

S/2014/341

to reinforce cooperation in all fields, especially on political, economic and
security issues, in order to guarantee the long-term stabilization of the Great
Lakes region
• To reiterate its support for the implementation of the commitments under the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the region, which is essential for the achievement of lasting
peace and security in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and in the region, and to call upon all signatories to implement promptly, fully
and in good faith their respective commitments
• To reiterate that all parties should contribute to stabilizing the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to encourage all countries of the region
to work together and to recall the importance of the full implementation of
relevant Security Council resolutions, including resolution 2098 (2013), as a
means of stabilizing the situation
• To reiterate support for the strengthening of the regional dynamic, including
through the development, where appropriate, of economic projects of common
interest and the implementation of appropriate steps to facilitate legal trade
and put an end to the illegal trafficking of natural resources, as means of
consolidating peace and security
• To emphasize the continuing concerns of the Council about the protection of
civilians, to address the situation of internally displaced persons and to
advocate for respect for human rights and international humanitarian law, to
address the issue of sexual violence and to strengthen child protection and to
encourage the parties and Governments concerned to ensure that those
responsible for serious violations of human rights and humanitarian law are
brought to justice
• To affirm that sexual violence, when used or commissioned as a method or
tactic of war or as a part of a widespread or systematic attack against civilian
populations, can significantly exacerbate and prolong situations of armed
conflict and may impede the restoration of international peace and security, to
emphasize in this regard that effective steps to prevent and respond to such
acts contribute significantly to the maintenance of international peace and
security and to stress the participation of women as essential for any
prevention and protection response
Additional elements for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Led by Morocco and France
• To acknowledge the primary responsibility of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to consolidate peace and stability, to
promote recovery and development in the country, to protect civilians and to
express the continued support of the Council in this regard
• To reiterate its deep concern regarding the fragile security and humanitarian
crisis in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo due to the
ongoing destabilizing activities of the 23 March Movement (M23), the Forces
démocratiques de libération du Rwanda (FDLR) and other Congolese and
foreign armed groups and to demand that they immediately cease all forms of

16/23

14-53444

S/2014/341

violence and destabilizing activities and that their members immediately and
permanently disband and lay down their arms
• To call upon all Congolese authorities to implement fully and in good faith
their commitments under the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework and
especially to intensify their efforts to reform the security sector, to consolidate
State authority, to make progress on decentralization and to further the agenda
of reconciliation, tolerance and democratization
• To express its support for the establishment of a national oversight mechanism
by the President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as requested in the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework and in resolution 2098 (2013),
and to call upon the Congolese authorities to ensure transparency and
effectiveness in this mechanism
• To reaffirm the support of the Security Council for the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) and to receive a briefing on the implementation of resolution
2098 (2013), in particular on the reconfiguration of MONUSCO and the
deployment of the intervention brigade, and on the delivery of a road map
outlining the transfer of tasks to the fullest extent possible to the United
Nations country team, and to receive a briefing on the threat posed to regional
stability by armed groups, including M23, FDLR and the Allied Democratic
Forces — National Army for the Liberation of Uganda
• To get updates on the joint military operations of the Armed Forces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and MONUSCO against M23 and other
armed groups, to request further updates on how MONUSCO intends to
implement its mandate of neutralizing all armed groups according to resolution
2098 (2013) and on how MONUSCO intends to conduct future disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation, reintegration and resettlement efforts, to reaffirm
that all military operations should be carried out in accordance with
international humanitarian, human rights and refugee law and to take
appropriate measures to protect civilians, and to draw insights from the
experience of MONUSCO that can inform the Council members of current and
future peacekeeping operations
• To reiterate the continuing concerns of the Council about the protection of
civilians, to discuss the implementation of Security Council resolution 2098
(2013), to address the situation of internally displaced persons and to promote
and protect human rights and international humanitarian law and to address
sexual violence and child protection issues, including through the
implementation of the action plan on children in armed conflict signed by the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in 2012
• To ensure the full participation of women in conflict resolution and peace
processes and to reiterate its recognition of the interrelated nature of the
effective protection of civilians, the reduction and removal of the threat of
armed groups and comprehensive security sector reform, in particular with
regard to the screening and vetting of troops integrated into the Congolese
armed forces

14-53444

17/23

S/2014/341

• To recall the utmost importance of the fight against impunity, notably in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, by bringing to justice
those who have committed crimes and atrocities
Additional elements for Rwanda
Led by the United States of America
• To discuss the concerns of Rwanda in the region, including FDLR, and how
they can be addressed while respecting sovereignty and territorial integrity of
all States in the Great Lakes region
• To reiterate support for the implementation of the commitments under the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the region, and to call upon all signatories to fulfil their
commitments in good faith
• To examine the plight of refugees from the Democratic Republic of the Congo
forced to flee by armed groups
• To reiterate that all parties should contribute to stabilizing the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to encourage Rwandan and Congolese
authorities to work together, in collaboration with the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General to the Great Lakes Region and MONUSCO, to ensure the
full neutralization, disarmament, demobilization and cessation of sources of
support to armed groups in the region, in the framework of a multidimensional
approach aligned with the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework, and to
recall the importance of the full implementation of relevant Security Council
resolutions as a means of stabilizing the situation
• To explore the strengthening of the regional dynamic, including through the
creation of peace dividends and the development, where appropriate, of
economic projects of common interest
• To discuss with the Government of Rwanda the modalities for how the
Government, the United Nations and other international organizations can
work together to urgently address the situation of the former M23 combatants
interned in eastern Rwanda since March 2013, including individuals
designated by the Security Council, and to ensure that they are permanently
demobilized and dealt with in accordance with relevant international law, with
special attention given to children and women among them
Additional elements for Uganda
Led by the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
• To reiterate the support of the Security Council for the improvement of
relations among the countries of the region, to encourage them to strengthen
cooperation in all fields and to discuss regional efforts in that regard
• To discuss Ugandan concerns in the region, including the Allied Democratic
Forces, and how they can be addressed while respecting the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of all States in the Great Lakes region
• To emphasize the support of the Security Council for action against armed
groups in the region, including the Lord’s Resistance Army

18/23

14-53444

S/2014/341

B.

African Union
Led by Azerbaijan and Rwanda
• To strengthen partnership and enhance cooperation between the African Union
and the United Nations through an exchange of views on issues of interest to
both the United Nations Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council, in accordance with resolution 2033 (2012)
• To exchange views and explore ways of reinforcing and supporting the conflict
prevention tools of the African Union
• To exchange views on situations of interest to both the United Nations
Security Council and the African Union Peace and Security Council, namely:
– The situation in the Great Lakes region
– The situation in the Sudan and South Sudan
– The situation in Somalia
– The situation in the Central African Republic
– The situation in the Sahel region

14-53444

19/23

S/2014/341

Annex II
Report on the seventh annual joint consultative meeting
between the Peace and Security Council of the African Union
and the United Nations Security Council
Addis Ababa, 8 October 2013

A.

Introduction
1.
Each year since 2007, the Peace and Security Council of the African Union
and the members of the United Nations Security Council have held an annual joint
consultative meeting. In odd-numbered years, the joint consultative meetings have
been held at the headquarters of the African Union, in Addis Ababa, and in evennumbered years the meetings have been held at United Nations Headquarters, in
New York. On 8 October, the seventh joint consultative meeting was held in Addis
Ababa. The meeting was co-chaired by Agshin Mehdiyev, the Permanent
Representative of Azerbaijan to the United Nations and President of the Security
Council for the month of October 2013, and the representative of Equatorial Guinea,
acting President of the African Union Peace and Security Council for the month of
October.

B.

Objectives of the meeting
2.
The general objective of the annual joint consultative meeting between the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union and the United Nations Security
Council is to strengthen partnership and enhance cooperation between the African
Union and the United Nations through an exchange of views on issues of interest to
both bodies in the areas of maintenance of international peace and security,
especially in Africa.
3.
The specific objective of the meeting in 2013 was for the two Councils to
share experiences and find ways to harmonize their interventions in specific conflict
situations, including the situation in the Great Lakes region, the situation between
the Sudan and South Sudan, the situation in Somalia, the situation in the Central
African Republic and the situation in the Sahel region.

C.

Format and discussions on the agenda items
4.
Each organization chose a lead member State, whose representative would
introduce each topic or respond to the introduction made by the representative of a
member State of the other organ as follows: France and the Gambia on the situation
in the Great Lakes region; the United States of America and Lesotho on the situation
between the Sudan and South Sudan; Nigeria and the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland on the situation in Somalia; Mozambique and France
on the situation in the Central African Republic; Morocco and Uganda on the
situation in the Sahel region; and Algeria and Rwanda on the enhancement of the
partnership between the African Union and the United Nations.

20/23

14-53444

S/2014/341

5.
Generally, the presentations by the representatives of both Councils agreed in
principle regarding the topics mentioned above.
6.
On the Great Lakes region, France and the Gambia agreed that a durable
solution for the issues in the Democratic Republic of the Congo could be achieved
only through political dialogue. They called upon parties to the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region to
continue to work towards the effective implementation of the Framework.
7.
On relations between the Sudan and South Sudan, the statement of the United
States and Lesotho carried similar messages. There was optimism, based on the
recent visit of the President of South Sudan, Salva Kiir, to Khartoum and the
agreement between President Kiir and the President of the Sudan, Omer Al-Bashir,
especially on the implementation of the Agreement on Temporary Administrative
and Security Arrangements for the Abyei Area. In this regard, all delegations were
in support of the African Union High-level Implementation Panel’s proposal for the
resolution of the final status of Abyei.
8.
Regarding Somalia, the presenters (Nigeria and the United Kingdom)
acknowledged the tentative progress achieved in Somalia, praised the role of the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and welcomed the new deal on
Somalia. They appreciated the collaborative efforts of the two organs, including the
recently concluded joint mission review, and looked forward to the results of the
review. The United Kingdom thanked the AMISOM forces for their bravery and
sacrifice and stated that it was due to their efforts that there was now hope for the
future of Somalia. The United Kingdom noted the progress that had been made in
Somalia, but stated that three priorities had been identified for consolidating the
gains made: (a) improving the security situation and the ability of the Somali forces
to ensure security; (b) supporting the Federal Government of Somalia, including in
its national reconciliation efforts and in coordinated support; and (c) strengthening
the relationship between the United Nations and the African Union so as to avoid
competing priorities.
9.
Regarding the Central African Republic, the presenters (France and
Mozambique) noted the precarious situation in the country and expressed their
appreciation for the role played by regional organizations, including the African
Union, in the restoration of peace, including the recent establishment of the
African-led International Support Mission in the Central African Republic. France
informed the members that it would soon introduce a draft Security Council
resolution on the Central African Republic that would provide support to the
Mission.
10. On the situation in the Sahel, the presenters (Morocco and Uganda) welcomed
the restoration of normalcy in Mali. Uganda called for the Security Council’s
attention to and support for the Nouakchott Process, the African Union’s ongoing
initiative aimed at strengthening security cooperation and operationalizing the
African Peace and Security Architecture in the Sahelo-Saharan region. Both Uganda
and Morocco welcomed the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel.
11. On the enhancement of the partnership between the African Union and the
United Nations, Rwanda and Algeria agreed in principle that both the United
Nations Security Council and the African Union Peace and Security Council had a
vested interest in having a solid and effective partnership. All speakers underlined

14-53444

21/23

S/2014/341

the importance of the relationship between the two Councils in addressing peace and
security needs in Africa. The speakers highlighted the advances made in the
relationship, including the benefits of regular meetings, noting, however, that the
relationship needed to be strengthened. Suggestions for improvement included:
increasing the number of joint meetings, including joint field missions; regular
briefings of each Council by envoys and representatives of the other organization;
improving the timeliness of Peace and Security Council decisions so that they could
be taken into consideration by the Security Council; and the improvement of
modalities by which the United Nations could support the African Union and its
peace support operations. The Great Lakes region, the Sudan and South Sudan,
Somalia, the Central African Republic and the Sahel were identified as strong
examples of areas in which the two Councils had worked together. The need to forge
a common vision and harmonize competing priorities was cited as important, as was
the need to more fully integrate economic development efforts so as to address
peace and security.
12. Algeria presented the principles that should underpin the United NationsAfrican Union partnership, namely, respect for African ownership and prioritysetting; the flexible and innovative application of the principle of subsidiarity;
mutual respect for and adherence to the principles of comparative advantage; and
division of labour underpinned by complementarity.
13. After the presentations, the floor was opened to other members for comments.
The representative of Uganda asked the Security Council to listen to Africa; he said
that the African Union Peace and Security Council was present on the ground and
that the United Nations Security Council had never solved any problems in Africa
alone. He suggested that instead of the Security Council sending “experts on
lightning missions”, they should encourage joint verifications between the two
organs. Nigeria suggested that there should be collaborative field visits between the
two Councils and asserted that if the two bodies listened carefully to one another,
then the discordant voices would disappear.
14. The representative of Australia agreed with the need for strong partnerships
between the two organs. A strong African Union and a strong United Nations would
enhance the strategic partnership for peace. He also called for better coordination of
recommendations. In response to the call of Uganda to the Security Council to listen
to Africa, the representative of the United Kingdom said that there was indeed a
need to listen to Africa, but in order to listen it was necessary for a voice to come
early. He mentioned instances in which the African Union had delayed taking a
decision, such as in the cases of Libya and Côte d’Ivoire. He said that when voices
in the region and subregion were divergent, as in those two examples, the Security
Council would have to choose whom to listen to.
15. Commenting on the Great Lakes region, the representatives of the United
States, Togo, Argentina and the Republic of Korea reiterated the importance of the
Framework agreement in addressing the root causes of the conflict and underscored
the importance of economic development. The Ugandan representative stated that
the Force Intervention Brigade should not focus only on M23 and FDLR, but also
on the Allied Democratic Forces. The representative of Uganda stated that
verification mechanisms needed to be reviewed so that they relied less on the
sending of groups of experts. The representative of the United States reiterated the

22/23

14-53444

S/2014/341

importance of accountability and emphasized that the Framework should contribute
to a process of dispute resolution among countries of the region.

D.

Outcome of the meeting
16. The meeting adopted a communiqué, which was circulated as an annex to
document S/2013/611.
Meeting with the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
17. Nkosazana Dlamini Zuma, the Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
convened a meeting to discuss the relationship between the International Criminal
Court and the African continent, with a special focus on the cases of Kenyan leaders
before the Court. All those who took the floor acknowledged the current controversy
of the Court on the African continent. Most of them stated that a dialogue was long
overdue.
Meeting with the Prime Minister of Ethiopia
18. A meeting with Hailemariam Dessalegn, the Prime Minister of Ethiopia and
the Chairperson of the African Union, was the last programme of the Security
Council mission to Africa. The representative of Rwanda, as co-leader for the Addis
Ababa segment, explained that the Council had requested a meeting with him
because it recognized the leadership that Ethiopia had always had in the integration
of Africa, on peace and security on the continent and on the development of African
countries. He continued by saying that the Council had had a very dense and
productive mission to Africa, describing every stage of the trip.
19. Taking the floor, the Prime Minister said that the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo was not a security problem but a political one. He went on to
say that the conflict was an internal issue, but that countries of the region had a role
to play in contributing to the solution. He thanked the Security Council for
supporting the Kampala talks, adding that it was also important to support the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework in order to achieve lasting peace in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
20. The Prime Minister also commented on the cooperation between the African
Union Peace and Security Council and the United Nations Security Council, the
Sudan and South Sudan, Somalia, the Central African Republic and Mali. On the
situation in Abyei, the Prime Minister called for political commitment from the
Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan aimed at holding a referendum on the
final status of that region. Although he discouraged any unilateral decision by South
Sudan to convene a referendum, preferring a consensual decision, he stated that
there should be a time limit for the holding of the referendum.

14-53444

23/23
