Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

3286 (XXIX). Question of Gibraltar

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Gibraltar,
Having e.xamined the relevant chapter of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, T
Having heard the relevant statements made in the
Fourth Committee, 8
1. Regrets that the negotiations referred to in paragraph 2 below have not yet been effectively started;
2. Urges the Governments of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and of Spain
to begin without delay the negotiations envisaged under
the terms of the consensus adopted by the General
Assembly on 14 December 1973;9
3. Requests the two Governments to inform the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
and the General Assembly at its thirtieth session of the
outcome of their negotiations.
2318th plenary meeting
13 December 1974
3287 (XXIX). Question of the Seychelles

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the Seychelles,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 10
Having heard the statement of the administering
Power, 11
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration, as well as other resolutions and decisions of the United Nations relating to
the Territory,
Noting the expres.sed desire of the Government of
the Seychelles that the Territory should attain independence as soon as possible and the continued readiness of the administering Power to grant independence
to the people of the Seychelles in accordance with their
wishes,
Further noting that a constitutional conference with
the full participation of both political parties in the
Territory is to be held shortly in order to determine
the modalities whereby the Seychelles are to proceed
to independence,
7 Ibid.,

chap. XIII.
Twenty-ninth Session, Fourth Committee, 2117th
and 2124th meetings.
9 Ibid., Twenty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 30 (A/9030),
8 Ibid.,

99

Bearing in mind the statement made by the Chief
Minister of the Government of the Seychelles to the
effect that every effort will be made to work as closely
as possible with the opposition towards the task of
national unification, 12
Mindful also of the position of the Government of
the Seychellt:s with regard to the territorial integrity
of the Seychelles,
1. Approves the chapters of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
relating to the Seychelles;
2. Notes with satisfaction the expressed wish of the
people of the Seychelles to achieve independence in
accordance with the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
3. Requests the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to take all
the necessary steps to facilitate the Territory's accession to independence as soon as possible in accordance
with the expressed wish of the people of the Territory;
4. Requests the Government of the United Kingdom to continue to keep the United Nations fully
apprised of developments relating to the Seychelles;
5. Stresses the responsibility of the United Nations
to render all possible assistance to the people of the
Seychelles in their efforts to achieve independence and,
to that end, invites the specialized agencies and the
institutions associated with the United Nations to work
out concrete programmes of assistance to the Seychelles;
6. Requests the Special Committee to continue its
examination of the question, including the dispatch, as
appropriate and in consultation with the administering
Power, of a United Nations visiting mission to the
Territory in connexion with the processes leading to
the Territory's accession to independence, and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirtieth
session.
2318th plenary meeting
13 December 1974

3288 (XXIX). Question of the Gilbert
and Ellice Islands

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the Gilbert and
Ellice Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial CountriP.s and
Peoples, 13
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 D1.',·~'.11,ber
1960, containing the Declaration on the Gra111i:1g of
Independence to Colonial Countries :,•,d Peoplei;, :rnd
its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October J97~J. l'nT'taining the programme of action for the full imniementation of the Declaration,
'

p. 111.
10 Ibid.,

Twenty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/9623/

Rev. I), chaps. III and X.
11 Ibid.,

meetinf

Twenty-ninth Session, Fourth Committee, 21 I 6th

12See A/AC.109/PV.974.
13 Official Records of the

General Assembly, Twenty-ni,.th
Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/9623/Rcv.l ), chaps. Ill and
XXI.
