A/56/PV.72

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-sixth session

72nd plenary meeting
Monday, 3 December 2001, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Han Seung-soo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 42 (continued)
The situation in the Middle East
Mr. Rodríguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): We are witnessing the deterioration of the
situation in the Middle East with the most serious crisis
experienced in the area in recent years. The spiral of
violence and State terrorism, with the death of innocent
civilians and the desperation of millions of Palestinians
and Arabs, systematically destroy the hope that serious
and constructive dialogue can open the long path to
peace.
Occupied Arab Palestinian, Syrian and Lebanese
territories continue to be occupied in flagrant violation
of a broad range of General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions. The inalienable right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination and to the
creation of its own independent and sovereign State,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, continues to be
denied. Illegal Israeli colonialist settlement continues
in occupied Arab territories, whose legitimate
inhabitants are expelled from their lands. Grave
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights of the Palestinian people and other Arab peoples
under Israeli occupation are committed daily.
Thousands of dead and tens of thousands wounded by
the use of heavy and high-technology weapons testify
to the fact that not even the right to life is respected.

(Republic of Korea)

We awakened this morning to terrible images of
missile attacks by the Israeli army. Extrajudicial
killings, selective assassinations, torture and brutal
repression, including the destruction of homes, are
carried out before our very eyes.
Economic pressure against the most vulnerable
population is strengthened through embargoes,
closures, taxes, the withholding of financial transfers
and the flagrant daily violation of the agreements
between the parties. To the physical and psychological
blows one must add the flagrant violations of the right
to food, education, health and development of millions
of people in this part of the world. The coarse
manipulation by the media that control information
globally habitually conceals and distorts the facts and
deceives public opinion, serving in a disciplined way
the political interests of their Governments.
Innocent Israeli civilians, unfortunately, are also
victims of the spiral of violence and terror caused by
the policy of their Government. Cuba emphatically
condemns the terrorist suicide bombings that took
place over the weekend in Jerusalem and Haifa. There
are many forces within Israel that are opposed to the
continuation of the war and that share with
neighbouring peoples the desire for peaceful
coexistence and mutual respect.
There will not be a just and lasting peace if Israel
does not denounce its occupation policy. There will be
no peace if the legitimate interests of all the peoples of
the region are not taken into consideration. There will
be no peace if the Security Council does not implement

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

01-67246 (E)
*0167246*

A/56/PV.72

its many resolutions or if it does not use its broad
powers. There will be no peace if one of the permanent
members of the Council continues to use the veto to
impede the implementation of those resolutions.
There also will be no real progress in the global
campaign against terrorism if those who claim to be the
leaders of this campaign protect in the Security
Council the exercise of State terrorism against the
Palestinian and Arab peoples under occupation.
Security Council reform that will eliminate, or at least
temporarily curb, use of the veto and put an end to the
double standard typical of that organ is urgent.
The recent history of the Middle East and of
Palestine might have been different had the United
States not vetoed 36 draft Security Council resolutions
since 1972. It is a tragic paradox that a permanent
member of the Security Council and the world superPower should also be the Power that pays for and
supplies the aeroplanes, helicopters and state-of-the-art
missiles that are used to murder innocent civilians with
impunity in that tumultuous region.
It is necessary to put an end to Israel’s usurpation
and occupation of the Palestinian territories in the West
Bank and Gaza, of the Syrian Golan and of areas in
southern Lebanon that are under Israeli army control. It
is necessary to find a lasting and satisfactory solution
for the millions of refugees and displaced persons. All
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council and the
General Assembly should be fully implemented,
particularly Security Council resolutions 242 (1967),
338 (1973) and 425 (1978). It is urgent to deploy an
international force to protect Palestinian civilians. It is
essential that the United Nations play a genuine,
effective role that would guarantee impartiality in the
negotiations.
A solution to the Palestinian problem remains the
core of a settlement of the Middle East conflict. There
can be no peace or security unless the just demands of
the Palestinian are met and unless the usurped Syrian
and Lebanese territories are returned.
Nobody denies Israel’s right to exist, and the
occupying Power must not deny the right of its
neighbours to live on their own lands and to engage in
peaceful development in independent, sovereign,
prosperous nations and States. The Cuban delegation
supports the urgent convening of the Conference of
High Contracting Parties to the Fourth Geneva

2

Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War of 12 August 1949.
The community of nations bears a major
responsibility and must face it decisively and
courageously no matter how difficult it may be. In that
effort, the international community can always count
on the constructive contribution and the traditional
firm support and solidarity of Cuba.
Mr. Pamir (Turkey): I would like at the outset to
express, on behalf of my Government and of the
Turkish nation, our profound sympathy and deepest
condolences to the bereaved families of the victims of
the outrageous terrorist attacks which took place last
weekend at Jerusalem and Haifa. This morning’s news
from the region clearly confirms once again the risks
involved in a vicious circle of violence.
Turkey has already aligned itself with the
statements made on 29 and 30 November on behalf of
the European Union on the agenda items entitled “The
question of Palestine” and “The situation in the Middle
East”. That being said, I would like to further address
those agenda items and to expound our views on both.
Only four days ago, we commemorated the
International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People, when the Secretary-General reminded us of the
growing mistrust and animosity between the Israelis
and the Palestinians, which has sadly come to the fore
as a result of recurrent violence. The fact is that the
escalation of violence has greatly undermined all the
noble efforts directed at building bridges of
reconciliation and feelings of partnership between
those two ancient peoples. Nobody can be proud of the
current standstill, which has been inflicted by violence,
robbing the region and its peoples of the assurance of
healthy prospects for a secure and enlightened future.
More than six months has passed since the Sharm
el-Sheikh Fact-Finding Committee — in whose work
the former President of my country, His Excellency
Mr. Süleyman Demirel, participated actively — issued
its ground-breaking report. And each precious day that
has elapsed and every ominous development that has
taken place since then has vindicated the basic wisdom
and understanding that shaped the Mitchell report.
Today, the implementation of the recommendations
contained in that report remains the only viable path
towards breaking the circle of violence at long last and
reviving the Middle East peace process.

A/56/PV.72

Therefore, and as a corollary, without waiting for
any specified period and irrespective of the reason for
it, the fighting should stop. Each side should do its
utmost to prevent any such occurrence, show restraint
and limit its reactions so that the process we all long
for — founded on the art of rebuilding confidence and
trust instead of cowardice and mistrust — between
Israel and the Palestinian Authority can start in earnest.
In the same vein, and at the same time, terrorism in all
its forms should be renounced unequivocally.
It is high time indeed that all of us fully
understood that searching for degrees of sense and
reason in acts of terrorism is futile, not to mention selfdefeating, anti-humanitarian and downright dangerous.
We would like to hope that the international coalition
against terrorism forged in the aftermath of the
horrendous attacks of 11 September will encourage
both parties to seek lasting peace. It was in that spirit
that we welcomed the agreement between President
Arafat and Foreign Minister Peres in late September,
which was unfortunately marred once again by the
continuation of wanton violence.
We really cannot lose our hope for peace. None
who have the prosperity and well-being of future
generations in mind and in sight can allow themselves
to lose their hope for peace. That is why we have been
reminding the parties of their responsibility before the
flow of history to curb and then eradicate violence and
to de-escalate tension on the ground, so that they can
meet each other’s fundamental needs: security in word
and reality for Israel, and viable political prospects for
the Palestinians. Their request to gain their inalienable
rights, including the right to self-determination and to a
State of their own, is a just cause.
It is only through the resumption of peace talks
that the international community can expect to see a
lasting and comprehensive agreement that will enable
Israel and Palestine to live side by side within mutually
recognized borders. The realistic and well-balanced
Mitchell report and the Tenet plan, with its clearly
defined parameters, constitute the pillars of a genuine
road map that will lead the region to peace to be
achieved on the basis of Security Council resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the principle of land for
peace.
While Turkey supports all international efforts
directed at finding a solution to this problem, we deem
the active involvement of the United States to be

necessary in this sphere as well. We welcome heartily
the commitment of the United States to a just peace in
the Middle East, as expressed by President Bush and
Secretary of State Powell on 10 and 19 November
respectively. It is worthwhile to repeat the prospect put
forward by the Secretary of State, as it describes a
positive vision. He foresees the establishment of a
State of Palestine which will live side by side with its
neighbour Israel in peace, security and dignity. That
State should assure the security of Israel and recognize
its legitimacy.
We very much hope that this will be the point of
departure for enduring peace, and a station at which to
leave behind once and for all the tragedy of the past,
and from which to depart towards a secure and
enlightened future for the Middle East. It is in that
spirit that we call upon the parties to show leadership
of historic proportions and to exercise maximum
restraint in order not to let themselves be derailed from
the track towards this noble vision. Turkey, for its part,
stands ready to contribute to these efforts and to
continue to act as a facilitator.
While the Palestinian-Israeli conflict lies at the
core of the Middle East problem, we must not lose
sight of the other tracks. We are concerned that the
process on the Syrian track has come to a standstill. We
hope that peace talks on this track will soon resume. In
this context, we welcomed the Israeli withdrawal from
southern Lebanon in accordance with Security Council
resolution 425 (1978) and consider it to be a crucial
step in the right direction.
Mr. Al-Hussein (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): The
question of the Middle East, the core of which is the
question of Palestine, remains an important item on
this Assembly’s agenda, especially as the discussion of
this item is taking place at a time when the Palestinian
people is a target of acts of military aggression by the
Israeli occupation authorities and of their use of
unjustified force. This will only result in more
bloodshed, throw the Middle East peace process into
an even deeper crisis and cause further deterioration in
the situation between the two parties, as well as in the
entire region.
How can we be convinced that peace is the
ultimate goal when Israel continues to impose
blockades against the Palestinian people, to implement
assassination schemes, to make incursions into the
territories under the control of the Palestinian National

3

A/56/PV.72

Authority and to build settlements, all of which are
contrary to the principle of land for peace. Israel denies
the rights of the Palestinians; yet, justice is the basis
for peace, and peace is the framework for security.
Jordan firmly believes that the resolution of this
conflict will not be possible through the use of force or
by coercive or security measures. In this regard, we
strongly condemn the targeting and killing of civilian
populations on both sides. Indeed, there is no
alternative but the return of the two parties to the
negotiating table as equal partners seeking a settlement
that would ensure their legitimate rights and their
future. This will not be achieved unless reciprocal,
parallel steps are taken on the basis of the accords and
obligations concluded between the Palestinian and
Israeli sides. First and foremost, the use of the Israeli
military machine against the Palestinian people must
end.
Taking these steps would constitute the right
approach towards implementing the Mitchell
commission’s recommendations, which aim primarily
at creating conditions conducive to a return to the
negotiating table. Starting the final status negotiations
would symbolize the urgent priority to achieve the
primary objective of the peace process — namely, the
fulfilment of national Palestinian rights, the
establishment of a viable Palestinian State on
Palestinian territory and the provision of security for
Israel.
Jordan’s concept of peace, as we have repeatedly
stated in this Assembly, is that it must be just, lasting
and comprehensive. This concept has been underlined
by the international parties directly involved in the
Middle East question. Our firm commitment to peace
within this concept is based on Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). These two
resolutions, as well as other relevant General Assembly
resolutions, have not yet been implemented, despite the
passage of several decades since their adoption.
At this point, we must once again emphasize the
United Nations role and responsibility towards the
question of the Middle East, the peace process and the
need for the revival of this role. We further underscore
the responsibility to support the efforts and endeavours
to push the peace process forward towards its desired
objectives. The United Nations, its Charter, resolutions
and provisions are the basic norms for the resolution of

4

disputes, and they govern the basic rule of international
law.
The peace process has been based on recognized
and firm principles, primarily the principle of land for
peace. We cannot understand how justice can be
fulfilled without full Israeli withdrawal from all
Palestinian and other Arab occupied territories.
Jordan welcomes the announcement by President
George W. Bush regarding sponsoring a United States
solution that would ensure the existence of two States,
including a Palestinian State on occupied Palestinian
territory on the basis of the relevant Security Council
resolutions. This would complete the international
consensus on the basic requirement for achieving peace
in the region.
It is our hope that the United States efforts will
continue, with the support of the European Union
countries, Russia and the international community as a
whole. We also welcome the thrust of United States
Secretary of State Colin Powell’s statement on the need
to end Israeli occupation, in line with Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
Comprehensive peace must include Israel’s
withdrawal from occupied Syrian territory back to the
4 June 1967 lines and a complete withdrawal from the
remaining occupied Lebanese territory on the basis of
the relevant Security Council resolutions.
There is an international juridical consensus that
East Jerusalem is part of the West Bank territory that
was occupied in 1967. As such, it is subject to Security
Council resolutions. Indeed, the Council has treated the
City of Jerusalem as a special case since the beginning
of the Israeli occupation, and all along it has adopted a
series of resolutions that reject annexation by Israel of
East Jerusalem. Those resolutions also reject all Israeli
measures and legislation aimed at changing the
character of the Holy City and the works undertaken in
order to transform its demographic and topographic
character.
Therefore, all the announcements made
repeatedly by Israeli officials regarding Jerusalem as
the eternal capital of Israel are contrary to all
foundations of the peace process. East Jerusalem is an
occupied territory under international resolutions, and
it is the spiritual centre of the three divine religions.
Also, we would like to see Jerusalem as an ideal, noble
symbol of peace and cooperation. This will not be

A/56/PV.72

achieved unless and until Israel withdraws from the
territories occupied in 1967, including East Jerusalem,
and a return of those territories to their legitimate
owners, with Jerusalem as the capital of the Palestinian
State.
The question of the Palestinian refugees who
were forced out of their homeland in 1947, 1948 and
1967, and those who were deported over the many and
long years of occupation is still waiting for a just
solution under international law and United Nations
resolutions, especially General Assembly resolution
194 (III), which called for the rights of the Palestinian
people to return or to receive compensation for their
suffering during years of deportation, exile and
occupation. The solution of the question of refugees
remains one of the most important cornerstones of
peace and security in the region.
In closing, my delegation would like to affirm
categorically our full support for a comprehensive
peace and the need to focus our efforts on stopping the
deterioration of conditions in the occupied Arab
territories.
Mr. Chaudhary (Nepal): The situation in the
Middle East is still volatile. Numerous lives have been
lost since September 2000. Both sides — the
Palestinians and the Israelis — have suffered a great
deal due to the continuing violence in the region,
which, unfortunately, has not seen peace for the last
five decades, from the time of the United Nations
partition plan in 1947.
The establishment of a just, durable and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East will be
possible only with the full implementation of Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). Nepal
has always placed emphasis on the full implementation
of those resolutions. We believe that both sides need to
exercise the utmost restraint in order to create an
environment conducive to giving peace a chance.
Nepal is deeply concerned at the outbreak of
violence in the Middle East, which has resulted in the
loss of precious human lives and in the destruction of
property. We very much look forward to seeing the
adoption of some practical measures before serious
negotiations are brought back on track with a view to
restoring lasting peace.
In this regard, we believe that implementation of
the recommendations contained in the report of the

Mitchell committee, released last April, and the Tenet
ceasefire plan can, even under the present
circumstances, play a very positive role in reducing
tensions, which are running so high.
We believe that the international community’s
attention should be drawn to the need to ensure the
exercise of the inalienable right of the Palestinians to
self-determination, with the creation of an independent
state. The recent announcement by the United States
Government of its intention to become more closely
involved in efforts to bring about peace in the Middle
East has also encouraged many of us who would like to
see a lasting peace established in the region sooner
rather than later.
The violent acts in the region of the Middle East
must cease. Only a return to negotiations involving all
of the parties concerned can lead to the promotion of
peace and prosperity in the Middle East. The need of
the hour is urgently to reverse the situation and to try
to build on the achievements recorded so far with a
view to establishing stability in the region.
The President: I have just received a request to
suspend the meeting for half an hour for consultations.
If there is no objection, I will suspend the meeting
now.
The meeting was suspended at 10.35 a.m. and
resumed at 11.40 a.m.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolutions A/56/L.23 and A/56/L.24.
We turn first to draft resolution A/56/L.23,
entitled “Jerusalem”.
Before proceeding to take action on the draft
resolution, I should like to announce that, since its
introduction, Pakistan has become a sponsor of draft
resolution A/56/L.23.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burundi, Cambodia,
Canada, Cape Verde, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of

5

A/56/PV.72

Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guyana,
Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden,
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Yugoslavia, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, Nauru
Abstaining:
Australia, Haiti, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Nicaragua, Papua New
Guinea, Solomon Islands, Tuvalu, United States
of America, Vanuatu
Draft resolution A/56/L.23 was adopted by 130
votes to 2, with 10 abstentions (resolution 56/31).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Afghanistan,
Australia, Brunei Darussalam, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Gabon, Guinea, Haiti, Hungary, Lithuania,
Malawi, New Zealand the Republic of Moldova
and South Africa informed the Secretariat that
they had intended to vote in favour.]
The President: Draft resolution A/56/L.24 is
entitled “The Syrian Golan”.
Before proceeding to take action on the draft
resolution, I should like to announce that, since its
introduction, Pakistan has become a sponsor of draft
resolution A/56/L.24.

6

A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Argentina, Armenia,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Bolivia, Botswana, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cape Verde, Chad,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador,
Egypt,
El
Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Ghana,
Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kuwait, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Libyan
Arab
Jamahiriya,
Madagascar,
Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan,
Panama,
Papua
New
Guinea,
Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint
Lucia, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela, Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Tuvalu, United States of America
Abstaining:
Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Benin,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Haiti, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Monaco,
Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Norway, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Romania, San Marino,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South
Africa, Spain, Sweden, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Tonga, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Uruguay, Vanuatu, Yugoslavia
Draft resolution A/56/L.24 was adopted by 90
votes to 5, with 54 abstentions (resolution 56/32).

A/56/PV.72

[Subsequently, the delegations of Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire, Gabon,
Guinea, Malawi, and South Africa informed the
Secretariat that they had intended to vote in
favour; the delegations of Hungary and the
Republic of Moldova had intended to abstain.]
The President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
vote on the resolution just adopted. May I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Mr. Estremé (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): The
Argentine Republic has voted in favour of draft
resolution A/56/L.24, on the Syrian Golan, because we
consider that its essential aspect is linked to the
unlawfulness of the acquisition of territories by force.
Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter of the United
Nations prohibits the use or threat of use of force
against the territorial integrity of a State. This
constitutes an imperative norm of international law.
At the same time, I would like to clarify the
position of the delegation of Argentina with respect to
operative paragraph 6 of the draft resolution. My
country’s vote does not necessarily prejudge the
reference to the line contained in this paragraph.
Mr. De Ruyt (Belgium) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to take the floor to explain the vote by the
European Union on the draft resolution on the Syrian
Golan.
The European Union is firmly committed to a
just, sustainable and comprehensive settlement of the
Middle East situation on the basis of Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and also on the
principles of the Madrid Conference, particularly that
of land for peace, and the Oslo accords.
It is with great concern that we view the
deterioration of the situation in the Middle East and the
escalation of violence to a level unknown for years. We
call upon the Israeli and Palestinian sides immediately
to return, without preconditions, to the negotiating
table on the basis of the recommendations of the
Mitchell report and the Tenet plan, which must be
implemented fully and without delay.
The
European
Union
believes
that
a
comprehensive, just and sustainable peace in the region
will not be complete without the Israeli-Syrian and

Israeli-Lebanese tracks. These negotiations must be
undertaken as soon as possible in order to reach an
agreement in conformity with the same principles.
We think that this draft resolution on the Syrian
Golan contains geographic references which could
prejudge the outcome of bilateral negotiations. For that
reason, as in previous years, the European Union has
abstained from the vote.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote after the vote.
We have thus concluded this stage of our
consideration of agenda item 42.
Agenda item 41 (continued)
Question of Palestine
Report of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People
(A/56/35)
Report of the Secretary-General (A/56/642)
Draft resolutions (A/56/L.19, A/56/L.20,
A/56/L.21, A/56/L.22)
The President: Members will recall that the
General Assembly held a debate on agenda item 41 at
its 69th and 70th plenary meetings, on 29 and 30
November 2001.
We shall now proceed to consider draft
resolutions A/56/L.19, A/56/L.20, A/56/L.21 and
A/56/L.22, as orally revised.
I shall now call on those representatives who
wish to explain their votes before the voting. May I
remind delegations that explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seat.
Mr. Lancry (Israel) (spoke in French): I am
grateful for the opportunity to express my views on the
voting on the draft resolutions on the question of
Palestine.
Normally, this kind of voting hardly inspires us to
offer an explanation, given how accustomed Israel has
become to the unfailing ritual whereby it invariably
finds itself, year after year, in splendid yet scarcely
enviable isolation. Today, however, following the surge

7

A/56/PV.72

of Palestinian terrorism and the carnage of the last 48
hours in Jerusalem and Haifa, we are compelled to
break with the traditional silent objection adopted by
my delegation in previous years.
Indeed, we must tell the General Assembly today
that, in the face of the Palestinian terrorist furor, we
cannot remain indifferent. We cannot accept an
endorsement — based on a reflex conditioned by the
shackles of automatic majorities and the burden of
prejudice forged in the arbitrary nature of alliances and
inalienable alignments — of Palestinian terrorist
attacks that corrupt any possibility of resuming
negotiations.
Peace, according to the Palestinians, is a matter
of strategic choice. And yet, their strategy for peace is
heavily dependent on terrorist tactics, the devastating
effects of which obscure the visibility and credibility of
the peace process. Unless it considers Palestinian
terrorism in its most abject and perverse form to be a
kind of national resistance — and thus ultimately
acceptable — the General Assembly must make a
moral choice today and distance itself from certain
Palestinian terrorist practices, the barbarism of which
has no equal but in the suicidal and fanatical impulse
that underlies it.
I urgently appeal here and now to my colleagues
in many delegations to disengage themselves from
draft resolutions that would endow Palestinian
terrorism with international legitimacy, in flagrant
contradiction to acts that no national aspiration, no
matter how noble, can justify. I appeal here to those of
my colleagues who are people of conscience. I appeal
to colleagues whose alignment is not inevitably
equivalent to blind partisanship. I appeal to colleagues
who, in recent weeks and months, have courageously
asserted their rejection of terrorism in all its forms and
who should be able to demonstrate their independence,
here and now, as they face a decisive and crucial
choice.
In the voting on issues connected to the question
of Palestine, Israel usually entertains hopes of rather
modest support. The importance of the voting today
lies in the quality of the message to be sent by the
General Assembly to the Palestinians. That is up to the
General Assembly to determine in its soul and
conscience.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): As in previous years, the Russian Federation

8

will vote in favour of the draft resolution on the
peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine,
contained in draft resolution A/56/L.22.
At the same time, I wish to report that, yesterday,
the Foreign Ministry of the Russian Federation issued a
statement in which it strongly condemned the bloody
terrorist act carried out in Jerusalem on 1 December
and described that act as cruel provocation aimed at
undermining attempts to find a solution to the IsraeliPalestinian confrontation. We express our condolences
to the families of the victims of that monstrous crime
and once again call most categorically on the
leadership of the Palestinian Authority to take effective
measures to curb the extremists.
We are convinced that it is now more necessary
than ever to intensify efforts to implement the Mitchell
and Tenet plans for the normalization of the situation
and a resumption of the negotiating process.
Accommodating steps must be taken by the
Palestinians and Israelis to break the senseless cycle of
violence, in which every act of bloodshed, regardless
of who may perpetrate it, only leads to an escalation of
the crisis and claims more victims.
The Russian Federation, along with its American
co-sponsors, the European Union, the United Nations
and other parties, will continue to work for the easing
of tensions and for returning the situation to the
political track.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolutions A/56/L.19, A/56/L.20,
A/56/L.21 and A/56/L.22, as orally revised.
We turn first to draft resolution A/56/L.19,
entitled “Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People”. I should like to
announce that, since the introduction of the draft
resolution, the following countries have become
sponsors: Brunei Darussalam, Namibia, Niger, Togo
and Zimbabwe.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan,
Algeria,
Angola,
Armenia,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde,

A/56/PV.72

Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa
Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Ghana,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Mongolia,
Morocco,
Mozambique,
Myanmar,
Namibia,
Nepal,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Tuvalu, United States of America
Abstaining:
Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Monaco,
Nauru,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, San Marino, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tonga,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, Vanuatu, Yugoslavia
Draft resolution A/56/L.19 was adopted by 106
votes to 5, with 48 abstentions (resolution 56/33).
[Subsequently the delegations of Côte d’Ivoire,
Gabon and South Africa informed the Secretariat
that they had intended to vote in favour.]
The President: We turn next to draft resolution
A/56/L.20, entitled “Division for Palestinian Rights of
the Secretariat”. I should like to announce that, since

the introduction of the draft resolution, the following
countries have become sponsors: Brunei Darussalam,
Namibia, the Niger and Zimbabwe.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan,
Algeria,
Angola,
Armenia,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Ghana,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Tuvalu, United States of America
Abstaining:
Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Monaco,
Nauru,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, San Marino, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tonga,

9

A/56/PV.72

United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, Vanuatu, Yugoslavia
Draft resolution A/56/L.20 was adopted by 107
votes to 5, with 47 abstentions (resolution 56/34).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Côte d’Ivoire,
Gabon and South Africa informed the Secretariat
that they had intended to vote in favour.]
The President: We turn next to draft resolution
A/56/L.21, entitled “Special information programme
on the question of Palestine of the Department of
Public Information of the Secretariat”.
Before proceeding to take action on the draft
resolution, I should like to announce that since its
introduction, the following countries have become
sponsors of draft resolution A/56/L.21: Brunei
Darussalam, Namibia, the Niger and Zimbabwe.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan,
Algeria,
Andorra,
Angola,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Cape Verde, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Mongolia,
Morocco,
Mozambique,
Myanmar,
Namibia,
Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of

10

Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Lucia, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Yugoslavia, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), United States of America
Abstaining:
Nauru, Tuvalu, Vanuatu
Draft resolution A/56/L.21 was adopted by 153
votes to 4, with 3 abstentions (resolution 56/35).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Côte d’Ivoire
and Gabon informed the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote in favour.]
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/56/L.22, entitled
“Peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine”, as
orally revised.
Before proceeding to take action on the draft
resolution, I should like to announce that since its
publication, the following countries have become
sponsors of draft resolution A/56/L.22: Brunei
Darussalam, Namibia, the Niger, Togo and Zimbabwe.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan,
Algeria,
Andorra,
Angola,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh,
Barbados,
Belarus,
Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape
Verde, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros,
Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,

A/56/PV.72

Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
India, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, New Zealand, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Peru, Philippines, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam,
Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zambia, Zimbabwe

New Guinea’s affirmative vote on draft resolutions on
this subject in the past. However, Papua New Guinea
has abstained in the voting this time.

Against:
Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Nauru, Tuvalu, United States of
America

Papua New Guinea also believes in the purposes
of the United Nations as outlined in its Charter. Unless
the United Nations is taking action under Chapter VII
of the Charter, it must be seen as impartial at all times
when dealing with parties to a conflict. It must not be
seen as taking a position that could be interpreted to be
pre-empting the outcome of any negotiations.

Abstaining:
Australia, Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Georgia, Germany, Hungary, Iceland,
Latvia, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Norway, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Poland, Romania,
Rwanda, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland
Draft resolution A/56/L.22 was adopted by 131
votes to 6, with 20 abstentions (resolution 56/36).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Côte d’Ivoire
and Gabon informed the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote in favour.]
The President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to make statements in
explanation of vote after the voting. May I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Mr. Ovia (Papua New Guinea): Papua New
Guinea’s position on the question of the right to selfdetermination is well known in the Assembly, and I do
not need to repeat it. It has been reflected in Papua

We believe that peace cannot be achieved through
continued violence, such as that occurring in the last
several months in the Middle East region. As a
Melanesian country and, for that matter, a Pacific
island country, we believe that peace can be achieved
only through negotiations and discussions with our
adversaries to resolve differences and bring about the
common peace we all desire.
Papua New Guinea continues to believe that
Israel must recognize the right of the Palestinian
people to exercise their right to self-determination and,
as a result, to have a State. We also believe that Israel
has a right to coexist in a safe and secure environment
with its neighbours, and the State of Israel must
therefore be assured of its right to coexist within safe
and secure boundaries.

Papua New Guinea believes in the sanctity of life,
whether Israeli or Palestinian. It is wrong to commit
suicide or to use one’s own body as a weapon of
destruction. Extrajudicial killings also have no place in
a civil society that is founded on the rule of law. By the
same token, we are concerned about the
implementation of the rule of law, and about
governance generally, inside Palestinian-controlled
areas. Peaceful coexistence is an uncertain outcome
when there are elements in conflict that do not
recognize the right of Israel to exist within secure
borders.
In our view, these matters are not properly
reflected in the draft resolution contained in document
A/55/L.22. We have therefore abstained in the voting
on the draft resolution.
Mr. Duval (Canada): Canada stresses the need
for a peaceful resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. Indeed, there is no way to resolve the dispute
but through diplomatic channels. Violence must end,
and negotiation must resume. Both Palestinians and

11

A/56/PV.72

Israelis continue to suffer, and both must take the
necessary steps to end the suffering.
Canada abstained in the voting on draft resolution
A/56/L.22 because the text does not sufficiently
recognize the violence inflicted against civilians on
both sides of the conflict. The horrific events of the
past 48 hours demonstrate the tragic scale of civilian
suffering. We urge the parties to take the necessary
steps to end these senseless cycles of violence.
Mr. Cockx (Belgium) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to explain the vote of the European Union
on the draft resolutions entitled “Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People” and “Division for Palestinian Rights of the
Secretariat”.
The European Union is convinced that the
framework of the peace process, as it was constructed
through negotiations and agreements between the
parties, represents the only reasonable hope of ending a
conflict that, if it continues, can only aggravate the
sufferings of the peoples involved. This process has
produced a gain that must be preserved, and, more
importantly, brought to fruition.
In spite of our deep concern at the everdeteriorating situation in the Middle East, we continue
to call on Israelis and Palestinians to return without
preconditions to the path of negotiation on the basis of
the recommendations of the Mitchell report and the
Tenet plan.
The European Union regrets that the mandates of
the two United Nations bodies on the question of
Palestine do not sufficiently reflect the spirit of the
peace process, which, necessarily and urgently, must be
revived. For that reason, the European Union, as in the
past, abstained in the voting on the two relevant
resolutions.
Mr. Macedo (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation voted in favour of draft resolution
A/56/L.22 because we feel that the peaceful settlement
of the question of Palestine is one of the indispensable
elements in the settlement of the conflict in the Middle
East.
Nonetheless, we would like to repeat the
following observations in relation to the content of the
draft resolution’s operative paragraph 3.

12

Mexico observes that one of the postulates of the
peace process in the Middle East is the return of land
in exchange for peace. The formula of land for peace
has demonstrated its usefulness on the path towards the
resolution of this specific conflict. However, it would
be hazardous to convert it into a universal legal
principle and a norm applicable to all conflicts.
Behind that formula is the general principle of
international law that military conquest does not confer
territorial rights. We all recognize the fundamental
norm that the acquisition of territories by means of
force is inadmissible. As a corollary to this universal
principle, it should be concluded that the totality of any
territory occupied in an armed conflict should be
returned unconditionally to its legitimate owners. That
is why the delegation of Mexico repeats that even
though we recognize the political value of that formula,
we consider that it is not a very rigorous step to elevate
it to the status of a general principle of international
law.
Mexico would like once again to appeal for
greater precision in the language used to describe a
political understanding that is not, nor can be, a
universal legal principle. In fact, in the eighth
preambular paragraph of draft resolution A/56/L.24, on
the Syrian Golan, which the Assembly also adopted at
this meeting, reference is made to “the formula of land
for peace”. That is an expression that we feel much
more correctly describes that understanding. The word
“formula” is what we would prefer to see in all draft
resolutions related to this issue. For Mexico, this is a
matter of legal purity of terminology and does not have
to do with the substance of the political understanding.
Mr. Harrison (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom fully associates itself with the statement in
the debate and the explanation of vote made by the
representatives of Belgium on behalf of the European
Union.
The United Kingdom also fully supports the
peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine. My
Government believes that to find such a peaceful
settlement, both sides in the conflict must make
difficult decisions in the cause of peace. Both sides
have responsibilities and obligations. Both sides must
make courageous compromises.
Draft resolution A/56/L.22, on which we have
just voted, is clear about the responsibilities on the
Israeli side; we support what the resolution says about

A/56/PV.72

them. But the resolution does not reflect our belief that
the Palestinian side must also implement its obligations
in particular by making every effort to prevent violence
against Israeli civilians, including suicide bomb
attacks. The horrific attacks over the weekend lend
urgency and weight to this requirement.
More generally, at a time of concern throughout
the United Nations about the protection of civilians,
the General Assembly has missed an opportunity to
register concern in this specific case with balanced
language on violence against civilians. For these
reasons, the United Kingdom abstained in today’s
voting on the draft resolution entitled “Peaceful
settlement of the question of Palestine” (A/56/L.22).
Mr. van den Berg (Netherlands): The
Netherlands fully supports the peaceful settlement of
the question of Palestine. For that to come about, both
sides will have to face difficult and far-reaching
choices. The Netherlands feels that the text of draft
resolution A/56/L.22 does not reflect in an evenhanded way the obligations and responsibilities of both
parties. More specifically, the Netherlands deplores
that the current text does not refer to the killing and
wounding of civilians, including by means of suicide
bomb attacks such as we have witnessed this weekend.
For this reason, the Netherlands abstained in the voting
on this draft resolution.
Mr. Blazey (Australia): Australia abstained in the
voting on draft resolution A/56/L.22, even though we
strongly believe that there must be a peaceful
settlement of the differences which separate the
Palestinian and Israeli peoples. Australia has great
sympathy for the losses suffered by both Palestinians
and Israelis, and while we acknowledge that the
Palestinian
civilian
population
has
suffered
significantly, we regret that the resolution has not
adequately recognized the losses on both sides.
Australia continues to reject the use of violence.
We believe there can be no military solution to the
present conflict. We urge both sides to seek an early
resumption of negotiations for peace based on Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the
principle of land for peace.
Mr. Hughes (New Zealand): New Zealand voted
in favour of draft resolution A/56/L.22 today, but not
without considerable reservations. We would greatly
have wished to have seen a more balanced text,
particularly in the sixteenth preambular paragraph,

which might have acknowledged the high number of
deaths and injuries among civilians on both the
Palestinian and the Israeli sides, not least in view of the
horrific suicide attacks in Haifa and Jerusalem over
this last weekend, which New Zealand strongly
condemns. We urge the Israeli and Palestinian sides to
return urgently and without preconditions to the peace
process on the basis of the Mitchell report and the
Tenet plan and in accordance with Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
Mr. Kolby (Norway): Norway continues to reject
the use of violence, not least when directed against
civilians. The horrific acts over the weekend have
reinforced the need for the international community to
speak out against indiscriminate acts of violence
directed against innocent civilians.
The conflict in the Middle East can never be
resolved by the use of violence, and a heavy
responsibility lies on both parties to prevent the
violence from spinning out of control. The situation
demands firm leadership and control, and we were
reminded of the need for that by the horrific acts this
weekend.
In our view, the need to fully protect all civilians
against violent attacks was not sufficiently reflected in
the resolution on the peaceful settlement of the
question of Palestine. The responsibilities on the Israeli
side are reflected in the resolution, but the same cannot
be said for the responsibilities on the Palestinian side.
Norway therefore abstained in the voting.
Ms. Løj (Denmark): Denmark strongly supports
the peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine.
The draft resolution on this issue contained in
document A/56/L.22, just adopted, contains many
useful elements to be pursued in order to reach this
goal. They are fully supported by Denmark.
In order to fully reflect the situation in the region,
not least after the tragic events in recent days,
Denmark supported the inclusion in the text of wording
regarding the prevention of all indiscriminate acts of
terror and violence directed at civilians — Palestinians
as well as Israelis. Since this was not reflected in the
text, Denmark abstained in the voting on the draft
resolution contained in document A/56/L.22.
Mr. Loizaga (Paraguay) (spoke in Spanish): As
regards draft resolution A/56/L.22, “Peaceful
settlement of the question of Palestine”, the delegation

13

A/56/PV.72

of Paraguay abstained in the voting, because we would
have liked to see in the resolution an appeal in relation
to the most recent events that we have witnessed in
Israel and in the Palestinian zone. We feel that it is
necessary to indicate to both parties the need to
provide guarantees of security to the civilian
population. That is why we urge both parties to arrive
at a peaceful and lasting solution as soon as possible.
Mr. Schumacher (Germany): Belgium, as
Presidency of the European Union, has voiced our
position as regards the peace process in the Middle
East, and we fully associate ourselves with the
statement made by our Belgian colleague. However,
Germany found it necessary, together with other
European Union partners, to abstain in the voting on
draft resolution A/56/L.22, “Peaceful settlement of the
question of Palestine”. We urge both parties to end the
senseless cycle of violence. The urgency and necessity
of this, in our opinion, is not reflected in a balanced
and even-handed manner in this resolution with regard
to the parties concerned. The terrifying attacks on the
weekend lent urgency to this requirement. The conflict
in the Middle East cannot be resolved by military
means or indiscriminate acts of violence against
civilians on both sides.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote after the voting.
I now call on the observer of Palestine.
Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): The
observer delegation of Palestine is pleased with the
outcome of voting on the draft resolution discussed
today. We are deeply grateful to the General Assembly
for this clear stance towards the Holy City of Jerusalem
and rejection of the actions taken by Israel. No
delegation voted against that resolution, except for
Israel and, unfortunately, Nauru, for reasons that we
cannot understand or know.
The results of the voting show the refusal of the
international community to accept Israel’s position on
Jerusalem; a clear position regarding the State of
Palestine, whose establishment is a sine qua non for
achieving overall peace in the region; and a clear
position of appreciation for the role of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People, the Division for Palestinian Rights
and the United Nations special information
programme.

14

Our deep thanks go to the Chairman of the
aforementioned Committee, Ambassador Papa Louis
Fall, the members of the Bureau and the other members
of the Committee, as well as all those who supported
and voted in favour of these important resolutions
today, especially the sponsors.
The Palestinian leadership has condemned the
attacks that took place in Israel over the past few days.
The Palestinian leadership expressed its outrage over
these terrorist attacks not only because of the human
losses they caused on the Israeli side but also because
of the damage they inflict on our national cause, on the
efforts to resume the peace talks and, last but not least,
on the very unity of the Palestinian people.
Yesterday, the Palestinian leadership adopted a
series of extraordinary decisions in this regard,
including declaring a temporary state of emergency and
making it illegal for any Palestinian faction not to
comply with a ceasefire.
Today, Israeli helicopter gunships fired many
missiles in the area of the offices of Chairman Yasser
Arafat and attacked and destroyed two non-military
helicopters belonging to the Palestinian Authority.
Yesterday, the Israeli occupation forces shot to death
five Palestinian martyrs. The day before, they killed
two children after sweeping into the outskirts of the
city of Jenin. Before that, the occupation forces were
continually killing Palestinians, including by
extrajudicial executions and planting a time bomb in a
civilian neighbourhood, resulting in the deaths of five
Palestinian schoolchildren. I wish to note that it was an
army that undertook these attacks, and not an unofficial
group or even Israeli settlers. Israel, the occupying
Power, continues to violate the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War of 12 August 1949 with deliberate killings, war
crimes and State-sponsored terrorism.
The General Assembly has discussed in depth the
question of international terrorism, which dominated
the Assembly’s agenda this year. During that debate,
we expressed our position clearly as part of the
international consensus. At the same time, we warned
against imposing an illegitimate agenda on the
international agenda, and most specifically the Israeli
agenda.
Israel continues its attempts to impose its own
particular agenda. This time it is waging a fight,
through its friends in the United States of America, to

A/56/PV.72

take control of the battle against terrorism, to have it
work in its favour by linking the campaign of the
United States and the international community in
Afghanistan to what Israel is doing, trying to project
itself as if it were in the same fight. As far as we know,
the United States is not an occupying Power in
Afghanistan. It has never been that. It has not denied
any people its right to self-determination for over 35
years. It did not wage a protracted, oppressive, bloody
war against that people. What Israel is doing is lowly;
it will not improve its status as an occupying Power,
but it will do great damage to the international
campaign against terrorism and to the international
coalition against terrorism.
Yes, there have been terrorist attacks carried out
inside Israel, but this phenomenon started recently,
only a few years ago. This is an outcome, and not the
reason for the current situation. The reason is the
uprooting of the Palestinian people from their
homeland and their denial of their own State for more
than 50 years. The reason is the Israeli occupation of
those Palestinians who remained in Palestine after
more than 35 years. The reason is colonialist
settlement, taking control of land and water resources,
bringing Israeli settlers to the occupied territories and
isolating our people in their towns and villages. The
reason is suppression, deportation, detentions and
assassinations throughout so many years. The reason is
war crimes and State-sponsored terrorism.
Despite all that, there is no justification for
directing terror against civilians. It does not justify
terrorism despite all the pain and suffering. But this
explains it and places it in a clear context. More
importantly, it prevents Israel from using that as a
pretext for completing its efforts to destroy peace in
the region and perhaps to demolish the Palestinian
Authority and restore the occupation of all Palestinian
territory.
The retreat by a limited number of friendly States
from voting in favour of the resolution on the peaceful
settlement of the question of Palestine was a step in the
wrong direction. It is not a position against terrorism,
because we all stand united against terrorism. It is a
position, deliberate or not, of making the fight against
terrorism the single most important task in the region.
We cannot accept this line of argument. The main task
is to put an end to the occupation and to build peace,
and in the course of doing that, to resist oppression,
violence and terrorism. That position provides a

convenient pretext for the Government of Israel to
maintain its brutal, bloody campaign against our
people, to continue circumventing the implementation
of the Mitchell recommendations and, more
importantly, to avoid ending its occupation of the
Palestinian territory, which is the core issue. We regret
that this position is not in line with the statements
made by some of those countries and their lip service
to establishing a Palestinian State.
However, more important than all that is what I
said at the beginning. The strong and clear
international position once again sends the message —
primarily to Israel, the occupying Power, and to all
peoples of the region, including the Palestinian
people — that the international community continues
to favour the observance of international law, on the
side of right and justice, and to favour peace-building
efforts in the Middle East region, including the
establishment of an independent Palestinian State with
Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital.
I wish to thank all Members. We hope that we
will meet again next year under better conditions than
those prevailing today.
Mr. Lancry (Israel) (spoke in French): I wish to
thank the representatives of many delegations for their
expressions of condolence and their condemnation and
denunciation of Palestinian terrorism and for their
appeals for the resumption of negotiations. We have
noted with satisfaction that our appeal in the course of
our explanation of vote before the vote seems to have
been heeded by a number of delegations and that a
certain message, be it muffled, appears to have been
transmitted today to the Palestinian side. Fourteen
months of violence and Palestinian terrorism have done
nothing to advance their cause. The results of the vote
today testify to that.
Even within an organization in which, at times, a
certain majority forms a kind of wall, we saw today
some cracks in that wall: openings towards a fairer,
more independent vote. Some other delegations too
have noted the glaring inadequacies of draft resolution
A/56/L.22, entitled “Peaceful settlement of the
question of Palestine”. In their statements in
explanation of vote, the Permanent Representatives of
those delegations worked to bridge the deepening gulf
the Palestinian delegation is digging with that draft
resolution.

15

A/56/PV.72

In our view, this terrorism should be understood
in its terrorist dimension: to describe it in terms of a
cycle of violence is incomplete. We are convinced that
the international community is duty-bound to denounce
Palestinian terrorist practices without ambiguity,
without understatement, without lexical subtleties. It is
by recalling the true nature of Palestinian terrorism,
unmasking it and denouncing it for what it is that we
can truly help the Palestinians become committed to
dialogue, coexistence and peace.
The Palestinians mention Israel’s “excessive use
of force” and “extrajudicial killings”. Perhaps one day
the Palestinians can explain to us how the Palestinians,
in their commitment to suicide terrorism and to
mowing down Israelis by the dozen, are not engaging
in the excessive use of force. Can our Palestinian
partners tell us whether, with their implacable suicide
attacks, they are departing from certain legal norms? In
the Jerusalem and Haifa attacks there was no moderate
use of force or, unfortunately, any act of justice. Justice
will be restored to the Palestinian and Israeli peoples
when peace is established through dialogue, through
education for peace, through an end to hatred and
incitement, and through absolute and total renunciation
of the weapon of terrorism. Here I recall the 9
September 1993 letter from Yasser Arafat, dated four
days before the signing of the Oslo accord, in which
Chairman Arafat, in order to attain his strategic
political ends, undertook to renounce all forms of
terrorism. It is to those words of that letter that we
should return.
In conclusion, I associate myself with the hope
expressed by the Permanent Observer of Palestine, His
Excellency Mr. Nasser Al-Kidwa, and in my turn
express the hope that next year we can return here
under much better circumstances.
Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): As
Chairman of the Arab Group for this month and as one
of the sponsors of the draft resolutions adopted today,
Egypt would like — without detailing political
positions that are well known to all — to explain its
position on draft resolution A/56/L.22. Many
delegations proposed amendments to that text to reflect
the incidents of the past two days and the terrorist acts
that took place on Saturday and Sunday, which were
condemned by Egypt and other members of the
international community, including the Palestinian
Authority.

16

As one of the sponsors of the draft resolution, we
would have been prepared to accept the amendment
proposed by some countries; we too proposed a small
amendment to make the text more balanced and to
reflect the situation, not only that of last weekend, but
also that of this morning, when, as we have seen on
television, excessive force was used in Gaza.
Regrettably and significantly, our proposal was not
accepted: the sponsors of draft resolution A/56/L.22
agreed that reference should be made to terrorist acts
and to the need to put an end to terrorist acts because
they are convinced that such acts are illegal and
harmful to peace and should be condemned.
Regrettably, the countries that had proposed the earlier
amendment did not accept our proposed reference to
restricting the illegal use of force. That raises grave
concern.
Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation is grateful to all delegations
that voted in favour of draft resolution A/56/L.24,
entitled “The Syrian Golan”. The Assembly’s adoption
of that draft resolution means a great deal to our people
and to all those struggling for liberation and for an end
to foreign occupation.
The resolution sends a clear and unambiguous
message that is beyond doubt: that occupation is
unacceptable and has been rejected; that the building of
settlements and the trampling of the rights of peoples
are unacceptable and have been utterly rejected.
The General Assembly has sent a very clear
message to Israel about the inadmissibility of the
acquisition of territory by force. This is something that
concerns all the world’s peoples; all countries want an
end to this occupation. The resolution further expresses
the Assembly’s deep concern at the fact that Israel has
not withdrawn from the Syrian Golan, which has been
under occupation since 1967, contrary to the relevant
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions.
The Assembly is thus clearly announcing a policy that
should be understood by the party that occupies the
territories of others. The Assembly has also declared
that the Israeli decision of 14 December 1981 to
impose its laws, jurisdiction and administration on the
occupied Syrian Golan is null and void and has no
validity whatsoever. It determines once more that
Israel’s continued occupation of the Syrian Golan and
its de facto annexation constitute a stumbling block in
the way of achieving a just, comprehensive and lasting
peace in the region.

A/56/PV.72

The voice of the international community should
be heard. The occupying Power should listen to this
voice and should understand that the current situation
cannot be resolved without its withdrawal from the
occupied Arab territories and the restoration of the
legitimate, inalienable rights of the Palestinian people.
Any attempts to distract the attention of the
international community from the real reason behind
all the problems that the Middle East is facing as a
result of the Israeli occupation are doomed. Peace and
security are integral; one cannot be achieved without
the other.
The President: I call on the observer of
Palestine, who wishes to speak in exercise of the right
of reply.
Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): I
must acknowledge that I do not understand the
procedural aspect that was followed after the vote. This
is an issue that could be looked into at a later stage.
I must also confess that I do not understand what
the representative of Israel said regarding the results of
the vote, except that the traditional position of Israel is
one that does not respect the absolute majority of
Assembly members. Israel has rejected all United
Nations resolutions — those of the Security Council,
the General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council and so forth. Not a single resolution has been
adopted in favour of the point of view of Israel, and for
the simple reason that it is illegitimate. It runs contrary
to the provisions of international law and those of the
United Nations Charter.
The draft resolutions that were adopted today fall
into this context. It is my hope that the representative
of Israel — that the Government of Israel — will
understand the pronouncements of the international
community as they are, rather than what they wish
them to be.

As a representative of a people under long-term
occupation, I feel extreme pain. I sincerely feel pain
when the representative of Israel lectures us about
morality as to what should or should not be; he is
simply representing an occupying force. On the same
moral basis, could we possibly expect him to condemn
foreign occupation? Could we hear him condemn
State-sponsored terrorism? Could we hear him
condemn extrajudicial executions? And could he
condemn the continued serious violations of the Fourth
Geneva Convention? How about war crimes? Settler
colonialism? Bringing colonialists and settlers to our
land? The acquisition of one third of Gaza’s territory to
give to 4,000 settlers and the expulsion of more than 1
million Palestinians living below the line of poverty?
Israel’s immoral and illegitimate practices have
caused hatred, anger and rejection of Israel’s
colonialism. We do not condone such practices. The
representative of Israel should not try to give the
impression that what he represents is a moral position.
The Israeli practices run contrary to all morals and
ethics, and putting an end to such practices is a sine
qua non for peace. Do not push the Palestinian people
even further. Do not try to drag the region into a total
war. What you have practised against our people is
more than enough. It is enough.
Please stop giving us lectures on morality and
ethics. Stop lecturing the General Assembly and other
organs of the United Nations, because this will lead to
nothing. It is unfair and unjust, and it will only lead to
more tension and animosity. Look at your practices,
and try to end them in favour of peace in the region.
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 41.
The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.

17
