V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

of the current decade and that the special difficulties
and upheavals experienced by Djibouti require special
measures, 89
Noting that the situation in Djibouti has been adversely affected by recent events in the area and by
the presence of a substantial number of refugees,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
of 31 May 1978,90 containing the report of the mission
to Djibouti,
Taking note of the extremely critical economic
situation in Djibouti and the list and the cost of urgent
projects formulated by the Government of Djibouti
that require international assistance, 91
Having noted the statement made by the Assistant
Secretary-General for Special Political Questions at the
48th meeting of the Second Committee, on 28 November 1978,92 in which he emphasized the urgency of
providing increased financial, material and technical
assistance to Djibouti,
Noting with appreciation the assistance already provided or pledged to Djibouti by Member States and
the organizations of the United Nations system,
1. Endorses the assessment and recommendations
of the mission to Djibouti contained in the report of
the Secretary-General;
2. Draws the attention of the international community to the critical economic situation confronting
Djibouti;
3. Also draws the attention of the international
community to the list of urgent short-term and longterm projects submitted by the Government of Djibouti for financial assistance, identified in the report
of the Secretary-General;
4. Expresses its appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for the measures he has taken to organize
an international economic assistance programme for
Djibouti;
5. Calls upon Member States, in the light of the
recommendation of the Committee for Development
Planning and in accordance with the previous resolutions of the General Assembly, to accord Djibouti,
as a matter of priority, privileges and benefits and
to give special consideration to the early inclusion
of Djibouti in their programmes of development
assistance;
6. Calls upon all States and all regional and interregional organizations and other intergovernmental
bodies to provide Djibouti with ample and appropriate assistance, bilaterally and multilaterally,
wherever possible in the form of grants, to enable
Djibouti to cope with its special economic hardships;
7. Invites the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund, the
World Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations, the World Bank and the International Fund for Agricultural Development to bring
to the attention of their governing bodies for their
89 See Official Records of the Economic and Socic1/ Council, 1978, Supplement No. 6 (E/1978/46 and Corr.I). para. 99.
90 A/33/106.
91 Jbid., appendix I.
02 A/C.2/33/5.

105

consideration the assistance they are rendering to
Djibouti, for which the General Assembly has requested
the Secretary-General to implement a special economic
assistance programme, and to report the results of
that assistance and their decisions to the SecretaryGeneral in time for consideration by the Assembly at
its thirty-fourth session;
8. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to continue and increase his
humanitarian assistance programmes on behalf of refugees in Djibouti and urges the international community to provide him speedily with the necessary
means to carry out those programmes;
9. Draws the attention of the international community to the special account established at United
Nations Headquarters by the Secretary-General for
the purpose of facilitating the channelling of contributions to Djibouti;
l 0. Requests the appropriate specialized agencies
and other organizations of the United Nations system
to co-operate closely with the Secretary-General in
organizing an effective international programme of
assistance to Djibouti and to report periodically to
him on the steps they have taken and the resources
they have made available to assist that country;
11. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary resources for an effective programme of financial,
technical and material assistance to Djibouti;
( b) To pursue with the Government of Djibouti
the question of organizing a meeting of donors and,
in this respect, to co-ordinate efforts with the United
Nations Development Programme, the Economic Commission for Africa and the World Bank;
( c) To ensure that adequate financial and budgetary arrangements are made to continue the organization of the international programme of assistance to
Djibouti and the mobilization of assistance;
(d) To keep the situation in Djibouti under constant review, to maintain close contact with Member
States, regional and other intergovernmental organizations, the specialized agencies and international financial institutions concerned and to apprise the Economic
and Social Council, at its second regular session of
1979, of the current status of the special economic
assistance programme for Djibouti;
( e) To arrange for a review of the economic
situation of Djibouti and the progress made in organizing and implementing the special economic assistance programme for that country in time for the
matter to be considered by the General Assembly at
its thirty-fourth session.
88th plenary meeting
19 December 1978
33/133.

Implementation of the medium-term
and long-term recovery and rehabilita•
tion programme in the Sudano-Sal1elian
region

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2816 (XXVI) of 14 December 1971, 2959 (XXVII) of 12 December 1972,
3054 (XXVTII) of 17 October 1973, 3253 (XXIX)

106

General Assembly-Thirty-third Sessiooi

of 4 December 1974, 3512 (XXX) of 15 December
1975, 31/180 of 21 December 1976 and 32/159 of
19 December 1977,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolutions 1918 (LVIII) of 5 May 1975, 2103 (LXIII)
of 3 August 1977 and 1978/37 of 21 July 1978,
Taking note of decision 25/10 of 27 June 1978 of
the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme concerning the implementation of
the medium-term and long-term recovery and rehabilitation programme in the Sudano-Sahelian region, 93
Noting with satisfaction the decisive role played by
the United Nations Sahelian Office on the one hand
~n helping to combat the effects of 'the drought and t~
implement the priority medium-term and long-term
recovery and rehabilitation programme adopted by the
States members of the Permanent Inter-State Committee on Drought Control in the Sabel and, on the
other hand, in mobilizing the necessary resources to
finance priority projects,
Noting with ~atisfaction the measures taken by the
Food and Agnculture Organization of the United
Nations and the World Food Programme to establish
stockpiles of food in the Sudano-Sahelian region,
Considering that the nature and magnitude of the
ne~ds of the countries of the Sudano-Sahelian region,
~h1ch are among the least developed countries, make
I! necessary for the international community to contmue and to strengthen its action of solidarity in
support of the recovery efforts and the economic development of those countries,
Having considered the reports of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of the medium-term
~nd long-term recovery and rehabilitation programme
m the Sudano-Sahelian region and the emergency
measures taken on behalf of the region, 94
I. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of
the ~ecretary-General on the implementation of the
~edmm-term an~ long-term recovery and rehabilitation programme m the Sudano-Sahelian region and the
emergency measures taken on behalf of that region; 95
2. Expresses its gratitude to the Governments
agencies of the United Nations, intergovernmental or~
ganizations, private organizations and individuals that
have contributed to the implementation of the mediumterm and long-term recovery and rehabilitation programme drawn up by the States members of the Permanent Inter-State Committee on Drought Control in
the Sabel;
3. Also expresses its gratitude to the Governments
and intei:national organizations, particularly the Food
and Agnculture Organization of the United Nations
and the World Food Programme, which have responded promptly and efficiently to the requests for
emergency assistance by the countries of the SudanoSahelian region victims of the drought in 1977;
4. Urges all Governments, agencies of the United
Nations, intergovernmental organizations, private organizations and individuals to continue to respond
favourably, either bilaterally or through the United
93 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1978, Supplement No. 13 (E/1978/53/Rev.l ), chap. XX,
sect. G.
94DP/326 and Corr.1; A/33/267.
911 A/33/267.

Nations Sahelian Office or any other intermediary, to
requests for assistance from the Governments of the
States members of the Permanent Inter-State Committee on Drought Control in the Sabel and from
the Committee itself;
5. Urges Member States, international financial
institutions and intergovernmental organizations to increase their support for and assistance to the shortterm measures taken in various fields by the States
members of the Permanent Inter-State Committee on
Drought Control in the Sabel to combat the effects of
the drought until the medium-term and long-term
measures produce their full effect;
6. _Urges Member States, particularly the developed
countnes, to support the efforts of the States members
of the Permanent Inter-State Committee on Drought
Cont1;ol in th~ Sabel to establish emergency and
secunty stockpiles of basic food-stuffs and stocks of
agricultural inputs;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his
efforts ~o mobilize the financial resources necessary
for the implementation of the medium-term and longterm projects identified by the States members of the
Permanent Inter-State Committee on Drought Control
in the Sabel;
8. Reaffirms the role of the United Nations Sahelian
(?ffice as the ce~tra~ point and principal body responsible ~or co-ordmatmg the efforts of United Nations
agencies to help the countries of the Sudano-Sahelian
region to implement their recovery and rehabilitation
programme;
9. Requests the United Nations Sahelian Office to
continue its close co-operation with the Permanent
Inter~State Committee on Drought Control in the Sahel
a_nd its efforts to ensure co-operation and co-ordinat1<;m betw_een United Nations programmes and bodies,
with a view to the implementation of the mediumterm and long-term assistance programme;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
report _to the General Assembly, through the Governing
Council of the United Nations Development Programme and the Economic and Social Council on
the implementation. ~f t~e medium-term and long-term
recovery and rehab1htat10n programme in the SudanoSahelian region .

88th plenary meeting
19 December 1978
33/134.

United Nations Conference on Technical
Co-operation among Developin« Countries
e

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of
12 J?ece?lber l 97 4 containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States and 3362 (S-VII)
~f 16 Septem~er 197 5 on development and internat10nal economic co-operation,
Recalling further its resolutions 31/179 of 21 December 1976 and 32/183 of 19 December 1977 on
t~e United Nations Conference on Technical Co-operat10n among Developing Countries as well as resolution
