S/2014/756*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
23 October 2014
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014) and 2165 (2014)
I. Introduction
1.
This eighth report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 17 of Security Council
resolution 2139 (2014) and paragraph 10 of Security Council resolution 2165
(2014), in which the Council requested the Secretary-General to report, every
30 days, on the implementation of the resolutions by all parties to the conflict in the
Syrian Arab Republic.
2.
The report covers the period from 18 September to 17 October 2014. The
information contained in the reports and the attached annex is based on the data
available to the United Nations actors on the ground and reports from open sources
and sources of the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic.

II. Major developments
A.

Political/military
3.
Conflict and high levels of violence continued throughout the Syrian Arab
Republic during the reporting period, including in the governorates of Aleppo,
Damascus, Darʽa, Deir ez-Zor, Hama, Hasakeh, Homs, Idlib, Quneitra and Raqqa.
Explosive weapons continued to be used, including in populated areas.
Indiscriminate aerial bombings by government forces and indiscriminate shelling
and attacks by armed opposition, extremist and designated terrorist groups 1
continued to result in death, injury and displacement.
4.
Syrian government forces continued military operations, including around
Damascus and central areas of the country. In Rif Dimashq, government forces
carried out air bombing campaigns. On 22 September, government forces conducted
two air raids on the town of Hamouria, in eastern Ghouta, striking a row of street
vendors, killing at least 10 civilians and injuring many others. On 24 September,
also in Rif Dimashq, government forces carried out an air raid on a residential area

__________________

* Reissued for technical reasons on 22 June 2015.
1 On 30 May 2013, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and the Nusra Front were
designated as terrorist groups by the Security Council under resolution 1267 (1999). The two
groups operate in the Syrian Arab Republic.

14-63132* (E)

230615

*1463132*

S/2014/756

in the district of Duma. According to information received by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), at least one
woman and four children between two and six years of age were severely injured
when a rocket struck their three-story building. Surface-to-surface missiles were
also reportedly fired into Jobar district, causing significant destruction to buildings.
In an incident on 26 September, six civilians, including a child, were reported killed
by such attacks.
5.
International non-governmental organizations reported an intensification of
bombing and shelling in and around the town of Erbin, Rif Dimashq. One hospital in
the area treated some 975 trauma patients between 4 and 14 October, of whom 180
were children. More than 60 patients were reported to have died, 10 of them
children under five. On 9 October, a market in Erbin was struck, with the hospital
reporting it received some 250 wounded.
6.
In Idlib, Homs, Aleppo, Deir ez-Zor and Darʽa, Syrian government forces
continued to shell opposition-held areas using artillery and airstrikes, including
barrel bombs. On 22 September, Government airplanes bombarded the towns of
Saraqib and Ehsim in Idlib with rockets, killing at least 43 people, including
children. In early October, during Eid al-Adha, barrel bombs were reportedly
dropped in the town of Saraqib, in Idlib, killing one man and causing significant
destruction. Barrel bombs were also reportedly dropped during Eid prayers in
Rastan, in Homs governorate, killing one civilian. Government aerial bombardments
in Aleppo were reported to have stopped for three days following the start of the
anti-ISIL coalition airstrikes on 23 September. From 26 September, however,
government airstrikes resumed with a significant number of reported barrel bombs.
Analysis by the Operational Satellite Applications Programme of the United Nations
Institute for Training and Research (UNITAR) indicates ongoing bombardment of
the city of Deir ez-Zor, likely in some instances by barrel bombs. OHCHR reports
that between 18 and 30 September, at least 12 civilians were allegedly killed as a
result of aerial attacks and shelling launched by government forces on Darʽa City
and surrounding areas. This includes the shelling of Al -Sabil neighbourhood of
Darʽa City on 22 September, which allegedly resulted in the killing of five civilians,
including two children. Barrel bombs were reportedly dropped on Hara on
10 October, resulting in the death of 19 civilians. The use of cluster bombs was also
reported in the opposition-controlled area of Darʽa al-Balad.
7.
During the reporting period, landmine use by government forces and
anti-Government armed groups continued to pose a threat to civilians. On
19 September, seven civilians, including two children, were allegedly killed in the
Lujah region in Darʽa Governorate when a landmine was set off. In Nawa, west of
Darʽa, two men working on their farm were critically injured in a landmine
explosion on 1 October. In Gadal village, approximately 40 kilometres north of
Darʽa City, an unexploded ordnance detonated on 3 October, alle gedly killing two
children under five years of age of the same family.
8.
Armed opposition and designated terrorist groups continued shelling
government-controlled areas, including in populated areas, using mortars, small
rockets and gas cannons, resulting in civilian casualties. On 21 September, armed
opposition groups fired mortars that landed near two schools, a playground and the
office of a non-governmental organization in the Al-Matar neighbourhood of Darʽa,

2/20

14-63132

S/2014/756

killing three children and one adult and injuring more than 30 people. Mortar fire
into Damascus also continued, resulting in numerous injuries.
9.
On 1 October, twin bomb attacks occurred close to Al-Makhzomi School in
Homs, killing over 50 people, including 29 children, and injuring dozens more , a
large majority of them children. The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
accused “armed terrorist groups” of this crime. No party claimed responsibility for
the attacks, which were condemned by both the Security Council and the Secretary General.
10. Violence and shifting front lines continued to lead to further displacement.
Around 40,000 civilians fled intensifying clashes in the Tal Hamis, Gweiran and
Yaroubiyeh areas of Hasakeh governorate, with most families displaced to Qamishli
city and surrounding areas. Fighting in northern Hama during the weeks prior to the
end of the reporting period resulted in some 30,000 people being displaced to rural
areas of northern Hama and southern Idlib. Fighting in the periphery of Damascus
around Dukkhania displaced thousands of people to neighbouring locations,
including Jaramana and Doylaʽa. Further fighting in those locations led to a second
wave of displacement, with many fleeing to Damascus and other parts of Rif
Dimashq. Thousands fled heavy shelling in Haraa, Zemreen and Atma in Darʽa
governorate and Quneitra governorate. OHCHR reported that aerial bombardment of
Deir Al-‘Adas, north of Darʽa City, led thousands of civilians to flee at the end of
September. In addition, power cuts coupled with shortages of water, commodities,
food items and fuel supplies, as well as disruptions to communication services,
forced the majority of the residents of Sanamain, Kafr Shamas and Jasim to flee
their villages.
11. Public services, including water and electricity, have been impacted in several
parts of the country. Yarmouk has been without a main water supply since early
September, forcing some 18,000 people still besieged in the area to re ly on
contaminated groundwater and private wells. The Al-Sakhour electricity station in
Aleppo was reportedly hit by a barrel bomb on 1 October, leading to a blackout in
the area for several days. A reported aerial attack on the Arab gas pipeline on
29 September led to power outages across the southern Syrian Arab Republic.
12. Bread scarcities are threatening food security in many parts of the country, in
particular the north, where commercial routes are disrupted by fighting and many
bakeries have been damaged or destroyed. Production has consequently decreased
and prices are prohibitive for many. Moreover, Government subsidies are not
applied in opposition-controlled areas, which have seen price increases of over
75 per cent in parts of Darʽa, Deir ez-Zor and Rif Dimashq in the past three months.
Fuel shortages have also been reported, driving up prices.
13. ISIL efforts were concentrated in the northern Syrian Arab Republic,
particularly in Kurdish areas. On 16 September, ISIL launched an offensive against
the Kurdish town of Ayn al-Arab/Kobane in Aleppo governorate, resulting in the
massive displacement of civilians, including into Turkey, and numerous death s and
injuries. More than 190,000 refugees have crossed into Turkey since the offensive
began. ISIL fighters indiscriminately shelled villages and communities in the area
surrounding Ayn al-Arab/Kobane City, including with heavy weapons and tanks,
taking control of the majority of those villages, and launched rockets, including into
Ayn al-Arab/Kobane City. OHCHR received allegations of at least nine executions

14-63132

3/20

S/2014/756

of civilians carried out by ISIL during their advance between 16 and 26 September,
including in the Kurdish village of Sharabani, Aleppo Governorate.
14. The international coalition undertook airstrikes against ISIL and other targets
in the Syrian Arab Republic beginning on 23 September. Airstrikes in defence of
Ayn al-Arab/Kobane were first launched on 27 September. As of 17 October,
fighting for control of the town continued. Most civilians reportedly fled the city,
but reports suggest that a number of people remained, with fighting ongoing. There
are concerns about the safety of those who remain in the area, in the light of the
violence and persecution by ISIL of religious and ethnic communities elsewhere in
the Syrian Arab Republic and Iraq.
15. In response to coalition airstrikes, ISIL has threatened retaliation against those
perceived to be “collaborators”, including civilians. This has heightened the
insecurity of aid workers. ISIL, Nusra Front and other Islamist groups have accused
the international coalition of fighting a war against Islam and have called for
retaliation against the coalition.
16. There are reports that ISIL is increasingly seeking refuge in civilian areas to
avoid detection and minimize risks of attack. According to Syrian human rights
groups, coalition strikes have hit civilian dwellings, and the targeting of Nusra Front
on 23 September allegedly led to the killing of at least 11 civilians, including four
children, particularly in the town of Kafr Daryan, Idlib governorate. The Syrian
Observatory for Human Rights reported that on 28 and 29 September coalition
airstrikes hit grain silos in the northeastern Syrian Arab Republic, killing and
wounding several civilians as well as fighters. Oil fields and a salt mine were also
reportedly hit. While numbers cannot be confirmed, reports suggest an estimated
80,000 people have been displaced from Raqqa, Deir ez -Zor, Abu Kamal, Mayadin
and Al Bab, largely to rural areas in Raqqa and Deir ez -Zor governorates, following
coalition airstrikes.
17. Recruitment of fighters, including foreign fighters, has reportedly increased
following the commencement of the international coalition airstrikes. In early
October, the Aleppo division of ISIL released a video claiming that dozens of
elements from Ahrar al-Sham defected and pledged allegiance to ISIL.
18. Foreign fighters have reportedly been killed as the result of airstrikes by the
international coalition. The Al-Qaida-affiliated Khorosan group, which the United
States of America targeted in airstrikes on 23 September, is said to comprise foreign
fighters from the region and Central Asia. Nusra Front reported that Abu Yousef
al-Turki was killed on 23 September. On 28 September, a Nusra Front fighter posted
a message that 11 fighters had been killed in a coalition airstrike, including three
citizens of the Netherlands and four citizens of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland.
19. On 3 October, ISIL released a graphic video of the execution of a volunteer
British humanitarian aid worker. This was the fourth such execution believed to be
carried out by the same individual. He may be a citizen of the United Kingdom. The
act was strongly condemned by the Security Council.
20. Negotiations continue for local ceasefires. Direct negotiations between
government officials and representatives of opposition groups had reportedly
stopped in Waʽer, Homs governorate, with fighting and restrictions on access
continuing. In Yarmouk camp, an opposition delegation reportedly met with a

4/20

14-63132

S/2014/756

government security branch in early October to discuss terms, which were still
under consideration. No agreement had been reached in Darayya, where intermittent
direct and indirect negotiations continued. A barrel bomb, visible from Damascus
city, was dropped in Darayya on 10 October, causing significant damage. On
20 September, pro-government media reported that a new agreement was concluded
in Qudsaya, west of Damascus.
21. In early October, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General to Syria, Staffan
de Mistura, resumed his consultations, visiting the Islamic Republic of Iran, Jordan,
Kuwait and Lebanon. Visits to the Russian Federation, Iraq, Turkey and Germany
were scheduled before the end of October. The visits followed a first round of
consultations in the region since the Special Envoy and his Deputy assumed their
duties at the beginning of September and would be complemented by a return visit
to Damascus and further consultations in other capitals in early November.

B.

Human rights
22. During the reporting period, concerns re-emerged regarding the safety and
well-being of 27 political prisoners and/or detainees transferred from Aleppo
Central Prison to Adra Central Prison after the Government recaptured the prison in
May 2014. Information received by OHCHR suggested that some of the prisoners
and/or detainees might have already qualified for release by virtue of completing
their sentences or as provided by the general amnesty under Legislative Decree 22
of 9 June 2014. OHCHR learned that during the reporting period, however, the
27 prisoners and/or detainees had been transferred to detention centres run by
military intelligence, including Branches 215 and 248 in Damascus, where
allegations of torture and ill-treatment are regularly reported.
23. The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic reported that between
21 September and 12 October, 1,015 persons were pardoned after surrendering
themselves and their weapons and pledging not to participate in the hostilities. The
Government did not provide further details of the pardons. O HCHR is not in a
position to verify this information.
24. On 30 September, ISIL reportedly released more than 70 Kurdish school
children out of a group of 153 who had been kidnapped in Aleppo on 29 May. The
fate of the remaining hostages is unknown. There are fears for their safety, given
that their exact location is not known. Similar fears exist concerning hundreds of
other detainees who are suspected to be held by ISIL in various locations in the
governorates of Hasakeh, Deir ez-Zor and Raqqa. According to local reports, on
22 September, ISIL released 150 detainees who were held for what ISIL considered
“minor offenses”.
25. On 5 October, a priest and several parishioners of Qunayeh in Idlib were
abducted by fighters linked to the Nusra Front. Four days later, the priest was
reportedly returned to the convent, where he was forcibly confined by the group.
The whereabouts of the remaining abductees remain unknown.
26. At the twenty-seventh session of the Human Rights Council, the Chair of the
independent international commission of inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic, Paulo
Pinheiro, presented its eighth report, in which the commission noted, inter alia, that
government forces continued to perpetrate massacres and conduct widespread

14-63132

5/20

S/2014/756

attacks on civilians. Indiscriminate and disproportionate aerial bombardment and
shelling had led to mass civilian casualties and had spread terror. Government forces
also used chlorine gas, an illegal weapon. In addition, the commission reported that
members of ISIL had committed massacres targeting civilians and captured soldiers,
and that ISIL had deliberately exposed civilians, including women and children, to
violence and indoctrination. Anti-government armed groups continued to commit
crimes without regard to international law.
27. The commission reiterated that the only avenue for putting an end to the
conflict was through dialogue and negotiation between the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic and the mainstream opposition, with the support of influential
States and the United Nations. In repeating its call to the Security Council to
consider referring the situation in the Syrian Arab Republic to the International
Criminal Court, the commission noted that inaction allowed the warring parties to
operate with impunity and exacerbated the violent conflict consuming the country.
During the interactive dialogue with the commission, a number of Member States
called for accountability and a referral to the International Criminal Court.
28. Members of the commission of inquiry, OHCHR and United Nations human
rights monitors continue to be denied access to the country.

C.

Humanitarian access
29. Some 10.8 million people in the Syrian Arab Republic remain in need of
urgent humanitarian assistance, including more than 6.4 million who are internally
displaced. Around 4.7 million people reside in areas considered hard to reach,
including at least 241,000 people in areas besieged by government and opposition
forces.
30. While United Nations agencies and partners continued to deliver a ssistance to
millions of people during the reporting period, the delivery of humanitarian
assistance, especially in hard-to-reach areas, remained extremely difficult and
insufficient to meet people’s needs. Violence, rapidly shifting conflict lines,
administrative hurdles and underfunding continued to hamper the relief effort as
needs continued to grow. During the reporting period, assistance reached 75 (26 per
cent) of the 287 locations identified as besieged or hard to reach. The World Food
Programme (WFP) and the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) reached some 390,050 people in 23 hard-toreach locations, more people than the previous month, but in fewer hard -to-reach
areas. Non-food items were delivered by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF), the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), UNRWA and the
International Organization for Migration (IOM) to 148,614 people in 47 hard -toreach locations, as compared to 104,837 people in 39 hard -to-reach locations the
previous reporting period. UNICEF provided water, sanitation and hygiene support
for some 501,561 people, as well as nutritional and educational support to children.
WHO delivered medicines and medical equipment for approximately 82,000
medical treatments in hard-to-reach locations, including in Raqqa and Deir ez-Zor
governorates.
31. Three inter-agency convoys took place during the reporting period to rural
Homs and eastern Aleppo City with multisectoral assistance for 49,000 people and

6/20

14-63132

S/2014/756

medicines for 43,000 patients. An inter-agency convoy targeting 15,000 people in
eastern Ghouta did not go ahead as the Ministry of Foreign Affairs did not give an
answer to the United Nations request for approval. The inter-agency convoy to
Harasta, agreed on 16 September, had not gone ahead as, despite repeated United
Nations requests, the joint committee has yet to convene. Final approval of the
convoy was conditional on further discussion through the committee.
32. The United Nations monitoring mechanism continued its activities in Turkey
and Jordan. During the reporting period, an additional monitoring team was
established in Gaziantep, bringing the total number of teams in Turkey to two . One
team was also operational in Jordan. Efforts were under way to identify a team for
Iraq; however its deployment remained pending owing to continued insecurity. The
monitoring mechanism benefited from excellent cooperation and support from the
Governments of Turkey and Jordan, including their facilitation of the establishment
of operations in Gaziantep and Amman, respectively.
33. Under the terms of resolution 2165 (2014), the United Nations and its partners
sent 23 shipments to the Syrian Arab Republic, many over several days, including
18 from Turkey and 5 from Jordan. Three border crossings were used: Bab al -Salam,
Bab al-Hawa and Ramtha. The shipments included food assistance for more than
160,000 people, non-food items for 240,000 people, water and sanitation supplies
for 79,000 people and medical supplies for more than 560,000 people, as well as
other items for 48,000 people in Aleppo, Darʽa, Hama, Idlib, Ladhiqiyah and
Quneitra governorates.
34. While cross-border shipments continued, and the United Nations and its
partners were seeking to scale up, they remained limited by insecurity, capacity and
funding. Al-Ramtha requires improvements to its infrastructure to enable consistent
and sustained use of the crossing. Funding shortfalls mean that some United Nations
agencies and partners are being forced to cut back on operations.
35. In line with resolution 2165 (2014), the United Nations notified the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic in advance of each shipment, including
details of content, destination district and number of beneficiaries. Monitoring
mechanism teams monitored the loading of the shipments and accompanied the
loaded vehicles to the respective border crossings. In addition, for each shipment,
the monitoring mechanism sent a notification to the Government confirming the
humanitarian nature of the shipment, in accordance with resolution 2165 (2014).
36. Following the consent of the respective Governments, the Nusaybin/Qamishli
border crossing point between Turkey and the Syrian Arab R epublic was once again
made available for United Nations agencies to deliver urgently needed supplies to
the Hassakeh governorate. The first set of deliveries began on 30 September and
continued throughout the reporting period. Using the Nusaybin/Qamishli border
crossing was a more efficient and effective method of delivery compared to costly
airlifts, and would allow WFP to meet its target for food distribution to over
227,000 people in the governorate for the first time in over a year and for UNICEF
to reach more than 100,000 people with non-food assistance and pre-position
supplies to respond to disease outbreaks for more than 28,000 people.
37. United Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations have developed
a combined two-month joint operational plan that encompasses both cross-line and
cross-border deliveries in four governorates of the Syrian Arab Republic, covering

14-63132

7/20

S/2014/756

food, health and non-food items as well as water, sanitation and hygiene. The
intention is to reach more people in need in those areas and ensure a more
harmonized and coordinated approach to aid delivery.
Besieged areas
38. Some 241,000 people remained besieged, 196,000 in areas besieged by
government forces in Madamiyet Elsham, eastern Ghouta, Darayya and Yarmouk,
and 45,000 in areas besieged by opposition forces in Nubul and Zahral.
39. During the reporting period, the United Nations reached Yarmouk with
assistance. Food was distributed to 8,516 people (3.5 per cent of people in besieged
areas) and non-food items to 2,140 people (0.9 per cent); medicines were delivered
for up to 1,115 (0.5 per cent).
40. In eastern Ghouta, 150,000 people remained besieged. No assistance reached
the area during the reporting period. One part of the area, Duma, was last assisted
with medicines and water and sanitation supplies on 9 September 2014, while food
and other crucial supplies were last provided on 28 May 2014.
41. In Madamiyet Elsham, around 24,000 people, including some 9,000 children,
continued to face a shortage of supplies to meet their basic needs as well as
movement constraints. It was last reached by the United Nations on 28 July 2014,
when WHO and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent delivered five tons of medical
assistance.
42. In Darayya (Rif Dimashq), about 4,000 people remain besieged. No assistance
reached Darayya during the reporting period. It was last reached in October 2012.
43. In Yarmouk, approximately 18,000 people remained besieged. UNRWA was
able to access the camp on 11 days during the reporting period, reaching 8,516
people with food, 2,140 with non-food items and 1,115 with medical assistance,
including antibiotics and a range of medicines for chronic and non -communicable
diseases, which were permitted for the third consecutive month. Some
1,500 children received textbooks. Water mains, which had been out of service since
early September, had not been repaired.
44. In Nubul and Zahra about 45,000 people remained besieged by opposition
forces. It was last reached on 8 May 2014.
Free passage of medical supplies, personnel and equipment
45. Access to medical supplies and equipment continued to be hampered by
insecurity, displacement and constraints imposed on humanitarian operations by
parties to the conflict. During the United Nations inter -agency convoy to the
villages of Tir Malla and Ghanto in rural Homs on 14 October, security forces
removed all injectable medicines, antibiotics and surgical supplies, including eight
inter-agency emergency health kits from the shipment, despite WHO having
received official approval from the Governor of Homs. As a result, people were
deprived of 9,891 much-needed medical treatments.
46. Owing to the breakdown in routine immunization services, 4,344 measles
cases were reported in the northern Syrian Arab Republic. In response, the Measle s
Control Task Force planned a two-phase measles vaccination campaign. In the first
phase, completed in August, 42,576 children in internally displaced person camps

8/20

14-63132

S/2014/756

were vaccinated. In the second phase, which began on 15 September, 27,000
children in 60 health-care facilities were vaccinated. On 16 September, the
campaign was suspended when, following immuniza tion, 15 children died, with
50 others affected. WHO immediately sent an expert assessment team to Gaziantep
to investigate the cause of the deaths. The investigation concluded that the most
likely cause of death was the incorrect use of a drug called atracurium, which was
added to vaccination packs in place of the standard diluent. The assessment team
also concluded that there was no evidence that the WHO-prequalified vaccine and
its correct diluent were the cause of the tragic event. As the risk of measles in the
Syrian Arab Republic remains extremely high, WHO recommends that measles
vaccinations be resumed, under improved conditions, as soon as possi ble.
47. Medical facilities and personnel continued to be attacked during the reporting
period. In September, Physicians for Human Rights documented seven attacks on
medical facilities, six by government forces and one by a non -State armed group
(the specific group is unknown). Two attacks were in Hama governorate, one in
Aleppo, one in Damascus, one in Rif Dimashq, one in Deir ez -Zor and one in Idlib.
Three were missile attacks, one was with barrel bombs, two were aerial
bombardments with unknown weapons and one attack was by shelling. One attack
was on a facility that had been attacked before. Physicians for Human Rights
documented the deaths of nine medical personnel in September, all of whom were
killed by government forces. Six were killed from shelling and bombing, one from
torture, one by execution and one was shot. Health-care facilities and personnel
enjoy special protection under international humanitarian law. Deliberate attacks
against health-care facilities and personnel constitute serious violations of
international humanitarian law.
Administrative procedures
48. No changes in administrative procedures were reported during the period. The
implementation of the truck-sealing procedures intended to facilitate and speed up
passage at checkpoints continued to slow the delivery of humanitarian assistance.
During the previous reporting period, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs informed the
United Nations that agencies could send biweekly or monthly loading plans, as
weekly notification was causing constraints. The movement of supplies to hard-toreach areas, however, continued to be negotiated on a case-by-case basis centrally
through meetings of the joint committee established following the adoption of
resolution 2139 (2014). The committee includes the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the
Ministry of Social Affairs and security personnel. Despite a verbal communication
from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs on 7 September that governors in Aleppo,
Hama, Homs and Idlib could authorize inter-agency cross-line convoys, central
approval continued to be sought. This led to significant delays in the approval of
some convoys.
49. As of 17 October, 35 United Nations visas or visa renewal requests remained
pending, 29 within the 15-working-day limit, 6 exceeding the 15-working-day limit
and 12 for international non-governmental organizations. While the number of visas
pending was reduced, international non-governmental organizations had started
cancelling visa requests (four cancelled in the reporting period) owing to delays in
receiving decisions on applications.

14-63132

9/20

S/2014/756

50. Six additional national non-governmental organizations were authorized to
partner with agencies of the United Nations system during the reporting period.
There are 99 national non-governmental organizations working with United Nations
organizations through 156 branches throughout the Syrian Arab Republic.
51. International non-governmental organizations are unable to conduct
independent needs assessments; most cannot open sub-offices; and they are not
authorized to partner with national non-governmental organizations or participate in
inter-agency cross-line convoys or United Nations field missions.
Safety and security of staff and premises
52. Mortar and rocket fire into Damascus City continued to affect the safety and
security of humanitarian actors. On 4 October, two mortars landed near the Dama
Rose hotel, close to the area where United Nations staff reside.
53. On 3 October, ISIL released a video showing the execution of a British aid
worker and threats to an American aid worker.
54. On 24 September, unknown assailants shot at a United Nations convoy of two
armoured vehicles on the road between Aleppo and Homs near Sheik Hilal village.
One of the vehicles was badly damaged. The six United Nations staff members
escaped unharmed.
55. Gunfire and mortars struck in the vicinity of the UNRWA distribution point in
Yarmouk camp in Damascus, halting the distribution of food and health services,
most recently on 11 October.
56. Twenty-seven United Nations national staff members, 24 of them UNRWA staff
members, continued to be detained or missing. The total number of humanitarian
workers killed in the conflict since March 2011 is 66. This includes 17 United Nations
staff members, 38 Syrian Arab Red Crescent staff members and volunteers, seven
Palestinian Red Crescent Society volunteers and staff members and four international
non-governmental organization staff members.

III. Observations
57. Tragically, in the month since the previous report, heinous attacks and
atrocities against civilians have continued, committed by all sides in the Syrian
conflict. The senseless killing of dozens of children and other civilians in Ho ms on
1 October is a grotesque reminder that this conflict and those fuelling it are robbing
the Syrian Arab Republic of its future. It is one more shocking event in a reporting
period that has witnessed continued indiscriminate use of weapons by all parti es,
including barrel bombing by Syrian government forces on a near -daily basis.
58. Given the very real implications for peace and security, the international
community has rightly mobilized to counter the threat posed by terrorism, but a
military campaign alone cannot resolve the crisis in the Syrian Arab Republic or
stem the spread of terrorism from the Syrian Arab Republic and Iraq. It is a
complex, protracted regional conflict that requires the international community to
use all the tools at its disposal. A solely military response could also have the
unintended consequence of further isolating groups that have been politically,
culturally and economically marginalized in the Syrian Arab Republic.

10/20

14-63132

S/2014/756

59. The threat posed by ISIL raises serious additional protection concerns, as
evidenced by the offensive on Ayn al-Arab/Kobane, which resulted in the massive
displacement of civilians, including into Turkey, and large numbers of deaths and
injuries. In the light of the gross and extensive violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law the terrorist group has committed in areas that have
fallen under its control in the Syrian Arab Republic and Iraq, I reiterate my urgent
call on the international community to take immediate action to protect the people
left in Ayn al-Arab/Kobane.
60. While the world’s attention has been focused on the barbarity of ISIL and its
advance in the Syrian Arab Republic, people throughout the country continue to be
killed and injured. They face grave abuses at the hands of the Government and other
parties to the conflict, who continue to violate international human rights and
humanitarian law. The continued use of explosive weapons with wide area effects in
populated areas is having a devastating effect. Thousands of civilians have been
killed or maimed. Millions have been forcibly displaced by fear and through the
deliberate destruction of essential civilian infrastructure, including health facilities
and schools.
61. Continued attacks against health-care facilities and personnel and the denial of
care to the wounded and sick — basic obligations under international humanitarian
law — continue to be of grave concern. The international community must do more
to ensure that the Government and other parties to the conflict ab ide by their
international legal obligations and are held accountable for their actions.
62. Access to hard-to-reach areas, where some 4.7 million people are in need,
remains extremely limited. Violence, insecurity, shifting conflict lines and other
obstacles, including administrative hurdles, constrain the ability of humanitarian
organizations to deliver aid. Some 241,000 people remain besieged, the majority by
government forces, despite the Government's repeated statements that it is
responsible for looking after its people. It is unacceptable that ordinary people are
denied the basics required for their survival: food, health care and clean water. It is
unacceptable that people should suffer when assistance is available a short drive
away. Humanitarian workers have been horrified by the dire conditions they have
seen in Yarmouk, one of the besieged areas where there has been wholly insufficient
access.
63. Humanitarian actors on the ground continue to serve people in need
throughout the Syrian Arab Republic at great personal risk, and I commend their
commitment and bravery. At a time when the Organization should be scaling up
operations to respond to growing needs, United Nations agencies and their partners
are being forced to cut back operations owing to a lack of funds. I strongly appeal to
donors to urgently provide additional funding so that we can continue our response
efforts, particularly as winter approaches.
64. Additional support must also be provided to neighbouring countries that
continue to bear the weight of hosting over 3 million refugees from the Syrian Arab
Republic. The international community must better share this burden so that all
those fleeing the country are protected. Refugees and those hosting them need our
help and support to live in safety and with dignity.
65. In each of my reports to the Security Council I have made the point that what
is most needed in the Syrian Arab Republic is an end to the violence. This can come

14-63132

11/20

S/2014/756

only through a political process, which is more urgent than ever, but that goal seems
even further away today. The situation throughout the country continues to
deteriorate rapidly. Many more people have been killed. Violations of international
human rights and humanitarian law are rife. Nearly 3 million children are out of
school. Three quarters of the population is impoverished. The currency has
plummeted and food prices have soared since the start of the conflict. Terrorist
organizations such as ISIL will thrive, and violence will persist throughout the
Syrian Arab Republic unless the deep-seated roots of the conflict are addressed
through a process that brings together all sectors of Syrian society. My Special
Envoy for the Syrian Arab Republic, Staffan de Mistura, began his mission with
vigour last month. He will engage intensively with regional and Syrian actors, from
whom support is essential in the search for new openings to launch a credible,
comprehensive and inclusive political process. A solution must be found. We cannot
continue to watch people die. The heightened risk of sectarian viol ence compels us
all to work even harder for peace.

12/20

14-63132

S/2014/756

Annex
Implementation of Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014)
and 2165 (2014): available data
1.

Protection of civilians a
Examples of attacks on civilian facilities (schools, hospitals, camps, places
of worship):
• On 9 October, a market in Erbin, eastern Ghouta, was reportedly struck. A local
hospital reported it received some 250 wounded.
• On 1 October, twin bomb attacks close to Al-Makhzomi School in Homs killed
over 50 people, including 29 children and injured dozens more, a large majority
of them children.
• On 1 October, the Al-Sakhour electricity station in Aleppo was reportedly hit
by a barrel bomb.
• In mid-September, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) destroyed
the Armenian Church in Deir ez-Zor.
Large-scale impact of conflict on public services:
• The conflict continued to disrupt health-care services. Hospitals have been
damaged in 12 of the country’s 14 governorates. Out of 97 Ministry of Health
hospitals:
o 42 per cent are reported as fully functioning; 34 per cent are reported as
partially functioning; and 24 per cent are reported as not functioning at
all.

2.

Safe and unhindered humanitarian access to people in need
Hard-to-reach areas:
• Food assistance was provided to 390,046 people during the reporting period in
hard-to-reach areas (381,530 by the World Food Programme (WFP) and 8,516
by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA)).
• Non-food items were provided to 148,614 people in hard-to-reach areas
(111,340 by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), 2,140 by UNRWA, 9,134 by the United Nations Population Fund
(UNFPA) and 26,000 by the International Organization for Migration (IOM) ).
• Water and sanitation assistance was provided to 501,561 by the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF).
• Educational support was provided to 46,013 children (44,501 by UNICEF and
1,512 by UNRWA).

__________________
a The United Nations has a distinct and regular mechanism of reporting on the six grave violations

against children in armed conflict that has set verification standards and periodicity of reporting
to identify trends.

14-63132

13/20

S/2014/756

• Nutritional support was provided for 12,900 children by UNICEF.
• Medical supplies were delivered for 82,889 treatments (81,774 by the World
Health Organization (WHO) and 1,115 by UNRWA).
Inter-agency cross-line convoys
• Three inter-agency convoys took place during the reporting period:
o On 15 October, an inter-agency convoy was dispatched to east Aleppo
City with nutritional supplies for 7,500 children, non -food items for
approximately 15,000 people and medicines for 43,000 patients.
o Two inter-agency convoys took place to areas in rural Homs:
o On 14 October, an inter-agency convoy reached Tir Malla, Ghanto
and Jaborien with multisectoral assistance for 14,000 people.
o On 22 September, an inter-agency convoy reached Al Houla with
multisectoral assistance for up to 12,500 people.
• One inter-agency convoy to eastern Ghouta was requested but did not take
place during the reporting period, as no feedback was received from the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
• One inter-agency convoy to Harasta, Rif Dimashq, was approved on
16 September but has not been permitted to move owing to the absence of a
meeting of the joint committee.
Besieged areas
• In total, 241,000 people remain besieged.
• In besieged areas, during the reporting period, food assistance was distributed
to 8,516 people (UNRWA), or 3.5 per cent of those besieged; non -food items
were distributed to 2,140 people (UNRWA), or 0.9 per cent; and medical
assistance was distributed to 1,115 people, or 0.5 per cent. UNRWA also
distributed textbooks for approximately 1,500 students in Yarmouk.
Cross-border assistance
• According to the Turkish Red Crescent Society, humanitarian actors have
channelled about 23 million dollars in humanitarian assistance monthly on
average from Turkey into the Syrian Arab Republic through the zero -point
delivery system administered by the Society. The monthly average does not
include assistance delivered by commercial or other channels.
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 2165 (2014)
• The United Nations and its partners have sent 23 shipments, many over a
number of days — 18 from Turkey and 5 from Jordan — to the Syrian Arab
Republic under the terms of Security Council resolution 2165 (2014), using
three border crossings: Bab al-Salam, Bab al-Hawa and Ramtha. The
shipments have included food assistance for more than 160,000 people,
non-food items for 240,000 people, water and sanitation supplies for 79,000
people and medical supplies for more than 560,000 people, as well as other

14/20

14-63132

S/2014/756

items for 48,000 people in Aleppo, Darʽa, Hama, Idlib, Ladhiqiyah and
Quneitra governorates.
Safety of humanitarian workers
• The number of humanitarian workers killed in the conflict since March 2011
stands at 66, including 17 United Nations staff, 38 Syrian Arab Red Crescent
staff and volunteers, seven Palestine Red Crescent Society volunteers and
staff, and four international non-governmental organization staff.
• A total of 27 United Nations national staff members continue to be detained or
missing, of whom 24 are UNRWA staff.
Declaration of commitment
• A total of 30 armed opposition groups have signed the declaration of
commitment, affirming their core responsibilities under international
humanitarian law and their commitment to facilitate action to meet the needs
of civilians on the basis of need alone. Of the 30 signatories, one signed during
the reporting period and one signed in the previous reporting period but was
not reported.
o Twenty-first Division (11 September 2014)
o Tajammu' Alwiya Fajr al-Hurriya (15 October)
3.

Safe passage of medical personnel and supplies
Attacks on medical facilities during the reporting period
• Physicians for Human Rights documented seven attacks on medical facilities
in September. Six were by government forces and one by a non-State armed
group (specific group is unknown). Two attacks were in Hama governorate,
one in Aleppo, one in Damascus, one in Rif Dimashq, one in Deir ez -Zor and
one in Idlib. Three were by missiles, one by barrel bombs, two by aerial
bombardment with unknown weapons and one by shelling. One attack was on
a facility that has previously been attacked. In total, Physicians for Human
Rights has documented 202 attacks on 161 separate medical facilities
throughout the Syrian Arab Republic. Of those, 182 (90 per cent) were by
government forces; 14 by non-State armed groups, including the Free Syrian
Army, ISIL, the Nusra Front and the Islamic Front (7 per cent); and six by
unknown forces (3 per cent). Aleppo governorate continues to have the highest
number of attacks, with 56 in total.
• In September, Physicians for Human Rights documented the deaths of nine
medical personnel, of whom three were targeted killings. All nine were killed
by government forces. Six were killed by shelling and bombing, one by
torture, and one by execution, and one was shot. In total, Physicians for
Human Rights has documented the deaths of 565 medical personnel through
30 September 2014. A total of 557 deaths were by government forces and eight
by non-State armed groups.

14-63132

15/20

S/2014/756

Removal of medicines and medical supplies from convoys
• Despite previous authorization, Syrian authorities on 14 October removed
medical supplies, including all injectable medicines, antibiotics and surgical
supplies, from an inter-agency convoy heading to the opposition-controlled
villages of Tir Malla and Ghanto in Homs governorate. As a result, people in
those areas were deprived of supplies for 9,891 medical treatments.
Polio vaccination campaign
• Polio vaccines were provided to over 1 million children under the age of five
(out of 1.2 million targeted) during the latest subnational immunization
campaign, which took place from 31 August to 4 September. According to
post-campaign monitoring coverage, rates are around 97 per cent, inclu ding
many hard-to-reach locations, although problems were encountered in reaching
children in some districts in Aleppo, Homs, Raqqa, Deir ez -Zor and Rif
Dimashq. Since the campaign began in late 2013, UNICEF has provided
34 million doses of oral vaccine. The next polio round is scheduled to take
place from 19 to 23 October, targeting 2.9 million children.
4.

Administrative hurdles
• On 9 June, the Ministry of Social Affairs communicated to governors that all
convoys or missions to “hot spot areas” b required the approval of the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs, the High Relief Committee and the National Security
Office. Previously, the governors were delegated to coordinate and authorize
delivery of assistance within their respective governorates, including a cross
lines of conflict. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs communicated verbally to the
United Nations on 7 September that this requirement has been removed and
governors have been empowered to authorize inter-agency cross-line convoys.
Delivery of assistance to cross-line locations continues, however, to be
hampered as a result of the directive.
• On 7 July, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs communicated a time frame for
submitting the weekly loading plans in accordance with the truck -sealing
procedures rolled out for the movement of trucks for regular programmes:
loading plans are to be submitted by United Nations agencies each Monday
during working hours. The Government has committed to clear the weekly
loading plans on Thursday for distributions to start on Saturdays. On
26 August, the Ministry stated that agencies could send the loading plans on a
biweekly or monthly basis to simplify procedures, as weekly loading plans
were creating constraints.
• An exemption was obtained with respect to the distribution of medicines and
medical equipment and water, sanitation and hygiene items for regular
programmes. The distribution of such items will be exempted from some of the
new procedures rolled out by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in April and May.

__________________
b The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic refers to “hot spots”. Clarification was requested

by the United Nations on 16 July for the definition and criteria of “hot spots” but has not been
received. For the purpose of the present report, they are referred to as hard-to-reach areas until
clarified because of the difficulty in reaching these locations.

16/20

14-63132

S/2014/756

The distribution of medical aid for cross-line deliveries will be coordinated by
the Ministry of Health on a case-by-case basis.
• On 11 September, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs notified the United Nations
that regular importation of goods through the official bor der crossings, namely
Jdaidet Yacoub, Tartus port, Ladhiqiyah port, Naseeb and Nusaybin, can
proceed to United Nations or international non-governmental organization
warehouses directly from the crossing upon authorization by the official in
charge of the crossing rather than requiring an additional facilitation letter
from the governor. Other administrative procedures continue to apply.
Clearance procedures for telecommunications equipment
• During the reporting period, UNHCR received approval for the installation of
very small aperture terminal (VSAT) satellite stations in its Aleppo office. In
addition, although UNHCR has obtained approval to import and operate Cisco
Systems telephony, the supplier continues to remain reluctant to issue the
licence. Government approval to import and operate information and
communications technology equipment remains a lengthy process that can take
months. Daily follow-up remains the only way to obtain the relevant
permissions.
Empowered interlocutors
• Government of the Syrian Arab Republic. The joint United Nations and
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic committee established following the
adoption of resolution 2139 (2014) includes a security focal point. Regular
meetings take place between the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the United
Nations Humanitarian Coordinator on an almost daily basis.
• The opposition is still unable to designate empowered interlocutors. The
fragmented nature of the opposition makes it difficult to clearly identify an
interlocutor for armed opposition groups. Ad hoc local engagement is ongoing
to negotiate access. Interlocutors vary depending on the localities where access
is being negotiated.
Visas
• The revised visa policy established by the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic on 4 March continued to be implemented. As at 16 October, a total of
35 United Nations visas or renewal requests remained pending, 29 within the
15-working-day limit and six exceeding the 15-working-day limit.
• As at 11 September, the number of pending visas for international
non-governmental organizations is at 12. While the number of visas pending
has decreased, international non-governmental organizations have begun
cancelling requests (four cancelled during the reporting period) owing to
delays receiving feedback.

14-63132

17/20

S/2014/756

International non-governmental organization partners
• The number of international non-governmental organizations approved to work
in the Syrian Arab Republic remains at 16.
• International non-governmental organizations are still not authorized to work
directly with national non-governmental organizations and are not allowed to
accompany United Nations convoys.
• There was no progress in the revision of the standard memorandum of
understanding for international non-governmental organizations with the
Syrian Arab Red Crescent and line ministries.
National non-governmental organization partners
• As of 16 October, the number of national non-governmental organizations
authorized to partner with the United Nations increased to 99, operating
through 156 branches, with six national non-governmental organizations
approved during the reporting period (five in Homs governorate and one in
Damascus governorate).
5.

Funding
• A total of $59.8 million in funding for the Syrian crisis was registered during
the reporting period. Of that amount, $52.1 million was for activities inside the
Syrian Arab Republic and $7.7 million was for support to Syrian refugees in
neighbouring countries.
• Of the total amount reported for the Syrian Arab Rep ublic during the period,
43.3 per cent ($25.9 million) was for activities included in the Syrian Arab
Republic Humanitarian Assistance Response Plan. For neighbouring countries,
56.7 per cent ($33.9 million) of the amount reported was for activities includ ed
in the Syrian Arab Republic Regional Refugee Response Plan.
• As at 17 October, the total funding for the Syrian Arab Republic Humanitarian
Assistance Response Plan and the Syrian Arab Republic Regional Refugee
Response Plan stood at 47 per cent ($6.02 billion requested, $2.83 billion
received). The Syrian Arab Republic Humanitarian Assistance Response Plan
is 38 per cent funded and the Syrian Arab Republic Regional Refugee
Response Plan is 52 per cent funded.

6.

Overview of United Nations humanitarian response
Food assistance
• In September, WFP and partners provided food assistance for 3.9 million
people — 93 per cent of the overall monthly target. However, in addition to
security-related constraints, a fuel shortage slowed transport capacity to Hama
and Rif Dimashq.
• Of the total assistance dispatched, 90 per cent was delivered through regular
programme operations, 8 per cent through cross-line missions and 2 per cent
through cross-border operations under resolution 2165 (2014). The number
of beneficiaries of cross-border food shipments tripled from 27,500 in August
to 75,000 in September. In addition, following the opening of the Nusaybin/

18/20

14-63132

S/2014/756

Qamishli border crossing on 23 September, WFP began the transportation of
food assistance aimed at supporting over 227,000 people per month (provided
the crossing remains open). By 15 October, a total of 19,423 family food
rations for over 97,000 people (42 per cent of the plan) had been off -loaded in
Qamishli.
Core relief items and shelter
• UNHCR dispatched core relief items for more than 271,336 people in the
reporting period. As of 15 October 2014, UNHCR has distributed 12,907,158
non-food items benefiting more than 3,635,603 individuals in 13 governorates.
• IOM reached 77,000 people in 59 locations in 10 governorates with non-food
items during the reporting period.
• UNICEF provided non-food items (for example, winter clothing, plastic sheets
and blankets) to 18,080 children and internally displaced persons.
• So far in 2014, UNHCR has completed the rehabilitation of collective shelters
in seven out of 11 governorates planned, benefiting 14,315 people.
Furthermore, private shelters were upgraded for 27,066 beneficiaries in Homs,
Rif Dimashq, Darʽa and Aleppo.
Health
• Through its regular programme, WHO distributed medicines and supplies for
approximately 1,618,384 medical treatments c during the present reporting
period in Aleppo, Damascus, Homs, Idlib and Quneitra governorates.
• UNICEF and partners supported 65,700 women and children with access to
primary health-care services.
• UNFPA continued to support its implementing partners in the delivery of
lifesaving reproductive health services through 28 mobile clinics, 27 static
clinics and 13 medical points in 10 governorates. Reproductive health services
were delivered to 17,000 women, including 4,100 with family planning
services and 3,600 pregnant women referred for delivery services. Some 430
women used reproductive health vouchers supported by UNFPA for the
delivery services. UNHCR continues to provide medical equipment, medicine s
and support to 13 primary health-care clinics in the Damascus, Rif Dimashq,
Homs, Tartus, Aleppo and Hasakeh governorates, benefiting almost 367,000
people since the beginning of the year.
Nutrition
• UNICEF and partners screened almost 70,000 children for malnutrition; over
1,700 received multi-micronutrient supplements and 48 were treated for severe
acute malnutrition.

__________________
c One standard treatment course (for example, a course of antibiotics for eight days) is considered

as treatment for one person. Treatment courses are determined for each medicine distribution on
the basis of international WHO standards.

14-63132

19/20

S/2014/756

Water, sanitation and hygiene
• During the reporting period, UNICEF and partners reached over 481,500
people with access to clean water through water tankering, enhancement of
water storage and/or household water treatment. In addition, over 80,000
people received hygiene items and hygiene promotion messages and almost
23,000 internally displaced persons and children in learning facilities obtained
access to appropriately designed toilets and hand-washing facilities.
• In total, over 16.5 million people have been assisted with safe access to water
and improved sanitation since the beginning of the year.
Education
• Almost 441,500 children received education supplies as part of the “Back to
Learning” campaign for the 2014/15 school year, carried out in cooperation
with the Ministry of Education.
Palestine refugees
• Through regular programming, UNRWA provided food assistance to 38,416
people; non-food items to 4,899 people; health consultations to 71,000 people;
education to 39,975 students; 422 new microfinance loans; and water,
sanitation and hygiene/shelter support to 13,865 people.
Agriculture
• The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), with
support from partners, provided agricultural support (cereal seeds and animal
feed) to 21,161 people in Raqqa, Hama, Homs and Idlib.
Protection and community services
• UNHCR continued to extend protection support thro ugh seven offices,
17 community centres, partner organizations and outreach volunteers. Since
the beginning of the year, UNHCR has provided 279,450 vulnerable
individuals with protection assistance.
• UNFPA supported partners to provide medical examination and psychosocial
support for around 2,900 women in five governorates. In addition, 75 survivors
of gender-based violence — out of 500 women screened — received specialized
services, including medical counselling. Furthermore, training and capacity building was provided for health-care staff and volunteers.
• UNICEF supported 10,036 children with psychosocial support. This includes
786 children in the Wa’er neighbourhood of Homs City and 117 Iraqi refugee
children in Newroz Camp.

20/20

14-63132
