S/2012/825

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
13 November 2012
Original: English

Letter dated 8 November 2012 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit to you a letter dated 25 October 2012 from
Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, Chairperson of the African Union Commission (see
annex), forwarding the communiqué of the 339th meeting of the African Union
Peace and Security Council, held at the ministerial level in Addis Ababa on
24 October 2012 on the situation in Mali, as well as the report of the Chairperson of
the African Union Commission on the Strategic Concept for the Resolution of the
Crises in Mali and Other Related Aspects.
The communiqué of the Peace and Security Council ministerial meeting,
among other things, reaffirms the objectives and principles of Security Council
resolution 2071 (2012) of 12 October and urges the Security Council to adopt, in
due course, a resolution authorizing the deployment of the envisaged African-led
international force. The report of the Chairperson of the Commission stresses the
efforts of the international community to address the crisis in Mali, including the
steps initiated by the Security Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council in this regard.
I would be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

12-58742 (E) 171212

*1258742*

S/2012/825

Annex
Letter dated 25 October 2012 from the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission addressed to the Secretary-General
I am writing to bring to your attention the outcome of the ministerial meeting
of the African Union Peace and Security Council that took place in Addis Ababa, on
24 October 2012, on the situation in Mali.
I am pleased to inform you that the meeting was successful, enabling the Peace
and Security Council to take stock of the most recent developments in Mali and to
adopt decisions on the way forward, the implementation of which, we believe, will
greatly assist us to address the challenges at hand.
The Peace and Security Council adopted the Strategic Concept for the
Resolution of the Crises in Mali and Other Related Aspects developed by the
African Union Commission in close collaboration with the Malian transitional
authorities, the countries of the region, the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), the United Nations, the European Union and other partners. The
Strategic Concept, which was prepared as part of the response to the request by the
Security Council, as contained in resolution 2056 (2012), articulates in a holistic manner
the political, security, military and other measures required for the early and lasting
resolution of the overlapping crises facing Mali. It is our conviction that this document
can greatly facilitate a coordinated approach by the international community to the
situation in Mali, in support to the African-led efforts. I would appreciate if the Peace
and Security Council communiqué and the attached report on the Strategic Concept and
Other Related Aspects (see enclosures) could be circulated to all the Security Council
members, for their information and action as appropriate. It is our hope that the Security
Council will lend its full support to the Strategic Concept, thus facilitating its
implementation by all concerned stakeholders.
In Mali, as in other conflicts and crisis situations, coordination is a sine qua
non for success. I am pleased to inform you that I have appointed a High
Representative for Mali and the Sahel, in the person of President Pierre Buyoya, to
enhance our contribution to the ongoing efforts, as well as coordination with all
concerned international stakeholders, in particular the United Nations. The High
Representative will work closely with your Special Envoy for the Sahel, Romano
Prodi, and your Special Representative for West Africa, Said Djinnit. He will be
backed in his efforts by the Office that the African Union is planning to shortly
establish in Bamako.
I would like to seize this opportunity to reiterate our deep gratitude to the
Security Council for the steps it has already taken to assist Africa in addressing the
crises in Mali. The adoption of resolutions 2056 (2012) and 2017 (2012) bear
testimony to this commitment. We look forward to the report that you will be
presenting to the Security Council, in accordance with resolution 2017 (2012), on
the envisaged deployment of an African-led international force to respond to the
request of the Malian authorities. In this respect, the African Union will contribute
actively to the joint planning and appreciates the assistance being rendered by the
United Nations on the basis of resolution 2071 (2012), and I plan to send to you the
concept of operations by 15 November 2012 following its approval by the Peace and
Security Council.
(Signed) Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma

2

12-58742

S/2012/825

Enclosure 1
Communiqué on the situation in Mali
[Original: English]
The Peace and Security Council of the African Union, at its 339th meeting,
held at the ministerial level on 24 October 2012, adopted the following decision on
the situation in Mali:
Council,
1.
Takes note of the Report of the Chairperson of the Commission on the
Strategic Concept for the Resolution of the Crises in Mali and Other Related
Aspects [PSC/MIN/3(CCCXXXIX)]. Council also takes note of the statement made
by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Mali, as well as of the
statements made by the representatives of Côte d’Ivoire, current Chair of the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), and Burkina Faso, in her
capacity as ECOWAS Mediator on the crisis in Mali, the President of the ECOWAS
Commission and the Special Representative of the United Nations SecretaryGeneral for West Africa;
2.
Recalls its previous communiqués on the situation in Mali, in particular the
communiqués of its 323rd and 327th meetings held on 12 June and 14 July 2012,
respectively [PSC/PR/COMM. (CCCXXIII) and PSC/AHG/COMM/1.(CCCXXVII)],
and reaffirms its full support for the decisions taken by ECOWAS in response to the
crises in Mali;
3.
Reaffirms its unwavering commitment to the national unity and territorial
integrity of Mali, as well as its total rejection of terrorism and armed rebellion as
means of pressing political demands. Council underlines the determination of the
African Union to ensure strict compliance with these fundamental principles;
4.
Expresses its appreciation to Presidents Yayi Boni of Benin, Chairman of the
Union, Alassane Dramane Ouattara of Côte d’Ivoire, Chairman of ECOWAS, Blaise
Compaoré of Burkina Faso, ECOWAS Mediator, Goodluck Jonathan of Nigeria,
Associate Mediator, the other regional leaders, and the President of the ECOWAS
Commission, Kadré Désiré Ouédraogo, for their continued commitment and tireless
efforts aimed at assisting Mali to overcome the challenges facing it. Council also
pays tribute to the core countries for their contribution and steadfastness in the fight
against terrorism and transnational organized crime;
5.
Welcomes the adoption by the United Nations Security Council, on 12 October
2012, of resolution 2071 (2012), as well as support being extended to the efforts by
the region and Africa as a whole, in order to seek an early solution to the crises in
Mali. Council also welcomes the appointment of a Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for the Sahel, in order to enhance the ongoing efforts on the ground by the
United Nations, notably through the Special Representative of the United Nations
Secretary-General for West Africa. Furthermore, Council thanks the other African
Union partners, including the European Union and its Member States, the United
States and other international actors for their commitment;
6.
Commends the authorities and other political actors in Mali for the significant
progress made in resolving the institutional crisis provoked by the coup d’état of
22 March 2012, including the formation of the Government of National Unity on
20 August 2012. In this context, and bearing in mind paragraph 10 of communiqué

12-58742

3

S/2012/825

PSC/AHG/COMM/1.(CCCXXVII), Council decides to lift the suspension of Mali’s
participation in the activities of the African Union, as contained in paragraph 9 of
communiqué PSC/PR/COMM(CCCXV) of its 315th meeting, held on 23 March
2012;
7.
Welcomes the conclusions of the meeting of the Support and Follow-up Group
on the Situation in Mali, held in Bamako on 19 October 2012, which welcomed the
Strategic Concept for the Resolution of the Crises in Mali and Other Related
Aspects. Council decides to adopt the Strategic Concept, which constitutes an
important step towards greater coordination between the Malian stakeholders and
the international actors and a holistic approach to the crises in Mali through
concrete measures with respect to the transition and governance in Mali, the
restoration of State authority in the north, the reform of the security sector,
elections, stabilization and post-conflict peacebuilding, the fight against terrorism
and transnational organized crime, the challenges facing the Sahel-Saharan region
and humanitarian assistance, as well as coordination and follow-up. Council
underlines that the Concept is intended to help structure international action to
resolve the crises in Mali. In this regard, Council requests the Chairperson of the
Commission, pending the transmission of the concept of operations referred to in
paragraph 9 below, to submit the Strategic Concept to the United Nations Security
Council to seek the latter’s total support for its effective implementation;
8.
Requests the Malian authorities, prior to the submission by the United Nations
Secretary-General of the report requested by the United Nations Security Council in
paragraph 7 of resolution 2071 (2012), to take the following steps, in order to
strengthen efforts aimed at resolving the crises in Mali:
(i) Enhance coherence among the transitional institutions in order to
facilitate the implementation of the two main transitional tasks, namely the
restoration of State authority over the northern part of the country and the
organization of free, fair and transparent elections in the first quarter of 2013;
(ii) Elaborate as a matter of priority, in consultation with ECOWAS and the
African Union and with the support of the United Nations and other
international partners, through broad-based national consultations, a detailed
road map, with concrete steps and timelines, on the implementation of the two
main transitional tasks, in accordance with Security Council resolutions 2056
(2012) and 2071 (2012);
(iii) Establish, as soon as possible, the envisioned national structure that will
be in charge of conducting negotiations with Malian armed groups in the north
that are willing to engage in dialogue to find a political solution to the crisis,
on the basis of strict respect for the national unity and territorial integrity of
Mali and the rejection of terrorism and transnational organized crime, as well
as armed rebellion, it being understood that negotiations cannot be openended. In this respect, Council underlines the importance of the involvement of
all the components of the populations in the north, as well as of the rebel
groups that disassociate themselves from terrorism and transnational organized
crime and renounce any separatist agenda;
(iv) Initiate concrete steps towards combating impunity, ensuring scrupulous
respect for human rights, as well as full and effective civilian control of the
military, consistent with relevant ECOWAS, African Union and United Nations
decisions and resolutions;

4

12-58742

S/2012/825

(v) Take immediate steps to facilitate the efforts of the international
community to respond to the request regarding the deployment of an
international military force.
9.
Welcomes the ongoing efforts for the rapid finalization of the joint planning
for the deployment of an African-led international force in Mali to respond to the
request of the Malian authorities to regain control of the occupied territories in the
north of the country, dismantle terrorist and criminal networks and ensure the full
restoration of State authority throughout the national territory. In this regard,
Council welcomes the planning conference scheduled to take place in Bamako from
30 October to 4 November 2012, with the participation of Mali, ECOWAS, the core
countries, the African Union, the European Union and the United Nations, as well as
other international partners, to harmonize approaches and finalize the concept of
operations for the planned deployment in Mali, for transmission, no later than
15 November 2012, to the United Nations Secretary-General;
10. Stresses that the concept of operations should take into account the
contributions that could be made, in line with the Protocol Relating to the
Establishment of the Peace and Security Council and in accordance with relevant
decisions of the Council and the Assembly of the Union, by other African countries,
including Mali’s neighbours, in terms of intelligence, logistics and troops, and aim
at strengthening the operational capacity of the Malian defence and security forces,
to enable them to play a leading role in the reconquest of the north and the
execution of other related tasks;
11. Looks forward to the report of the Secretary-General of the United Nations
pursuant to paragraph 7 of resolution 2071 (2012), and urges the Security Council to
adopt, in due course, a resolution authorizing the deployment of the envisaged
African-led international force in accordance with the request of the Malian
authorities;
12. Urges African Union Member States and the international community as a
whole, including regional and international organizations, to make available to the
Malian defence and security forces the required financial, logistical and capacitybuilding support, as requested by resolution 2071 (2012). In this regard, Council
requests the Chairperson of the Commission, in consultation with ECOWAS, to
urgently take the necessary steps to mobilize support from within the continent, in
accordance with resolution 2071 (2012), the African Union Constitutive Act and the
relevant provisions of the Protocol Relating to the Establishment of the Peace and
Security Council, including through the early convening of a resource mobilization
conference;
13. Requests the Chairperson of the Commission, in collaboration with ECOWAS,
the core countries, other African countries and international partners, to establish,
within a period of one month from the date of adoption of this decision, a list of
terrorist groups and criminal networks active in northern Mali and of their leaders,
for the immediate imposition of sanctions. Council reiterates its determination to
impose sanctions against Malian rebel groups that do not unequivocally dissociate
themselves from terrorist and criminal networks and/or refuse to engage in a
negotiation process to find a solution to the crisis on the basis of the abovementioned principles, and in this regard notes the expressed readiness of the
Security Council to adopt targeted sanctions;
14. Encourages the core countries to intensify their efforts to combat terrorist and
criminal networks, in particular through the Fusion and Liaison Unit and the Joint

12-58742

5

S/2012/825

Operational Command, urges closer coordination between them and the other
neighbours of Mali, and requests the Commission to take all necessary steps to this
end;
15. Calls for greater regional and international support to cope with the immediate
humanitarian needs in northern Mali and in the neighbouring countries hosting
Malian refugees;
16. Welcomes the timely decision of the Chairperson of the Commission to
appoint a High Representative for Mali and the Sahel, and encourages her to
accelerate the opening of an African Union Office in Mali to strengthen the African
Union’s contribution to the ongoing efforts and ensure more effective coordination
with ECOWAS and the countries of the region, as well as with the international
partners;
17. Underlines the urgent need for all international actors to closely coordinate
their efforts to address the multifaceted challenges facing the Sahelo-Saharan
region, taking into account, in this regard, the important role of the United Nations
Special Envoy and the African Union High Representative for Mali and the Sahel;
18.

6

Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.

12-58742

S/2012/825

Enclosure 2
Report of the Chairperson of the Commission on the Strategic
Concept for the Resolution of the Crises in Mali and Other
Related Aspects
I.

Introduction
1.
Since the outbreak of the conflict in the north of Mali in January 2012 and the
institutional crisis arising from the coup d’état of 22 March 2012, sustained efforts
have been made at the regional, continental and international levels to help find a
lasting solution. In particular, the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) has taken a number of steps to address the situation, notably through the
launching of a mediation process and the activation of its Standby Force in order to
assist in the preservation of the national unity and territorial integrity of Mali. It is
within this context that ECOWAS requested the support of the African Union, the
United Nations and the European Union, towards the deployment of a stabilization
mission in Mali.

II.

Relevant decisions and resolutions of the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union and of the Security Council
2.
At its 323rd meeting, held in New York, on 12 June 2012, and in response to
the request made by ECOWAS for the deployment of elements of its Standby Force,
the Peace and Security Council authorized ECOWAS, in collaboration as
appropriate with the core countries, namely Algeria, Mauritania and Niger, to put in
place the required military and security arrangements towards the achievement of
the following objectives: (i) ensuring the security of the transitional institutions;
(ii) restructuring and reorganizing the Malian security and defence forces; and
(iii) restoring State authority over the northern part of the country and combating
terrorist and criminal networks. In this respect, the Peace and Security Council
requested the African Union and ECOWAS Commissions, with the support of the
United Nations, the European Union and other partners, and in consultation with all
countries neighbouring Mali, to speedily finalize the work already initiated towards
the precise definition of the mandate and the elaboration of the concept of
operations and other related documents for the envisaged force, in support of the
formal request to the Security Council seeking authorization for the provision of a
support package funded by United Nations-assessed contributions. The Peace and
Security Council also requested the Chairperson of the Commission to coordinate
this process with ECOWAS and all other concerned actors. On 23 June 2012, and as
part of the implementation of this communiqué, the Commission convened a
meeting of members of the Support and Follow-up Group for a preliminary
exchange of views on the modalities for the development of the envisaged draft
Strategic Concept and its content.
3.
In its resolution 2056 (2012),* adopted on 5 July 2012, following the
conclusions of the inaugural meeting of the Support and Follow-up Group, held in
Abidjan on 7 June 2012, the United Nations Security Council took note of the
request by the African Union and ECOWAS for endorsement of the envisaged
ECOWAS stabilization force and underlined its readiness to further examine the
* The resolution referred to is on file with the Secretariat and is available for consultation.

12-58742

7

S/2012/825

request once additional information had been provided regarding the objectives,
means and modalities of the envisaged deployment and other possible measures. In
this respect, the Security Council encouraged close cooperation among the Malian
transitional authorities, the ECOWAS and African Union Commissions and
countries in the region, in order to prepare detailed options for the deployment, and
requested the Secretary-General to support the preparation of the said options.
4.
At its 327th meeting, held in Addis Ababa on 14 July 2012, at the level of the
Heads of State and Government, under the chairmanship of President Alassane
Dramane Ouattara of Côte d’Ivoire, the Peace and Security Council underlined the
need for the early finalization of the Strategic Concept with ECOWAS, in
collaboration with the core countries, the United Nations, the European Union and
other partners. The Council expressed its intention to consider and adopt that
document as quickly as possible, before its submission to the United Nations
Security Council.
5.
On 12 October 2012, and in response to the request of the transitional
authorities of Mali to ECOWAS, the African Union and the United Nations, the
Security Council adopted resolution 2071 (2012).* In paragraph 7 of the resolution,
the Security Council requested the Secretary-General to immediately provide
military and security planners to assist ECOWAS and the African Union, in close
consultation with Mali, the neighbouring countries of Mali, countries of the region
and all other interested bilateral partners and international organizations, in the joint
planning efforts to respond to the request of the transitional authorities of Mali for
such an international military force. The Security Council requested the SecretaryGeneral, in close consultation with the above-mentioned partners, to submit, no later
than 45 days after the adoption of the resolution, a written report on its
implementation, including support to be provided and detailed and actionable
recommendations to respond to the request of the transitional authorities of Mali
regarding an international military force, including means and modalities of the
envisaged deployment, in particular the concept of operations, force generation
capabilities, strength and support financial costs.

III.

Meeting of the Support and Follow-up Group held in Bamako
6.
It is against this background that the African Union Commission, in close
consultation with ECOWAS, the United Nations and the European Union, convened
a meeting of the Support and Follow-up Group on the Resolution of the Crises in
Mali, in Bamako on 19 October 2012, with the aim to review the evolution of the
situation in Mali and consider the draft Strategic Concept. The meeting was wellattended, with high-level representation from all the neighbouring countries of Mali,
other countries of the region, ECOWAS, the United Nations, the European Union,
the International Organization of la Francophonie (OIF) and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation (OIC), as well as a number of bilateral partners, including all
the permanent members of the Security Council. I took part in this meeting, which
was my first international trip following my inauguration on 15 October 2012.
7.
In the conclusions adopted following the meeting, the Support and Follow-up
Group welcomed the draft Strategic Concept as an important step to further
coordination among the international stakeholders and to assist in comprehensively
dealing with the crises in Mali, through action-oriented measures covering issues
relating to the transition and governance in Mali, the restoration of State authority in
the north, security sector reform, elections, stabilization and post-conflict

8

12-58742

S/2012/825

peacebuilding, the resumption of basic services and humanitarian assistance, and
follow-up. The Group noted that the Council would consider the draft, for adoption
and transmission to the United Nations Security Council with a view to seeking its
support for the Concept.
8.
I recommend that the Peace and Security Council endorse the draft Strategic
Concept and that it request the Security Council to extend its full support towards its
implementation. The Peace and Security Council may also wish to urge the other
international partners to support the Strategic Concept and to anchor their actions
within that framework. Clearly, the Malian authorities and stakeholders have a
critical role to play, as Malian leadership and ownership is required for the
resolution of the overlapping crises facing the country. It should be noted that, as
part of the support to the Malian efforts and in view of the progress made in the
resolution of the institutional crisis, as demonstrated by the establishment of the
Government of National Unity, the Strategic Concept recommended lifting the
suspension measure regarding the participation of Mali in the activities of the
African Union, consistent with the spirit of the Peace and Security Council’s
communiqué of 14 July 2012.

IV.

Joint planning to respond to the request of the transitional
authorities of Mali
9.
In accordance with the relevant decisions of the Peace and Security Council
and Security Council resolution 2071 (2012),* as well as the conclusions of the
Bamako meeting of the Support and Follow-up Group, the Commission is taking the
necessary steps to work, alongside the Malian authorities, ECOWAS, the United
Nations, the European Union and other stakeholders, notably the core countries,
towards the finalization of the joint planning to respond to the request of the
transitional authorities of Mali regarding an African-led international military force
to assist the Malian armed forces in recovering the occupied regions in the north.

V.

Observations
10. I thank all the States and organizations that contributed to the finalization of
the Strategic Concept, which is the product of a joint and coordinated effort among
the African Union, ECOWAS, the United Nations, the countries of the region and
bilateral and multilateral partners. I would like to, once again, express the African
Union’s high appreciation to President Yayi Boni of Benin, current Chairman of the
African Union, as well as to the ECOWAS Commission and the leaders of the
countries of the region, especially Presidents Alassane Dramane Ouattara, current
Chair of ECOWAS, Blaise Compaoré, ECOWAS Mediator, and Goodluck Jonathan,
Associate Mediator, for their tireless efforts towards the restoration of peace,
security and stability in Mali. I also thank the core countries for their contribution
and determined struggle against terrorist and criminal networks in the Sahel-Saharan
region, within the structures they have set up.
11. It is crucial that the entire continent mobilize itself in support of Mali as part
of an African-led solution supported by the international community. Our continent
simply cannot remain idle when two thirds of the territory of a Member State are
occupied by armed, terrorist and criminal groups. As the Peace and Security Council
has repeatedly stressed, the principles at stake in the crisis in Mali, in particular
respect for the national unity and territorial integrity of Member States, as well as

12-58742

9

S/2012/825

the rejection of terrorism and transnational organized crime, are of paramount
importance for the stability of the continent and its development. No effort should
be spared to safeguard these principles.
12. I thank the United Nations for its efforts, as evidenced by the adoption by the
Security Council of resolutions 2056 (2012) and 2071 (2012), the work of the
Special Representative of the United Nations Secretary-General for West Africa and
the appointment of a Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sahel. For my
part, I intend to quickly appoint a High Representative for the Sahel, who, together
with the Office to be established by the African Union in Bamako, will contribute to
strengthening African Union support to the ongoing efforts, as well as the
coordination with the Malian actors, ECOWAS, the core countries and various other
international actors. I also appeal to all our partners to provide all the necessary
support and assistance to the Malian transitional authorities, ECOWAS and the
African Union in their efforts to restore the authority of the Government of Mali in
the north and to hold free, transparent and democratic elections, in accordance with
the tasks defined for the transition.

10

12-58742

S/2012/825

Attachment 1
Overview of the situation in Mali and efforts of the international
community to find lasting solutions to the crises
I.

Introduction
1.
The situation in Mali consists of several overlapping crises linked mainly to
the entrenchment of terrorist groups in the north of the country, the development of
a war economy of criminal nature, including drug trafficking and hostage-taking and
the conflict that erupted in the north in January 2012, as well as to the subsequent
institutional crisis that emanated from the 22 March 2012 coup d’état in Bamako.

II.

Situation in the north
2.
Until towards the end of 2011, the situation in the north of Mali was
dominated by the activities of a mix of terrorist and criminal groups that have
entrenched themselves in the region over the past 10 or so years. These include the
Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb which, for many years, has engaged in suicide
bombings, attacks against security forces of countries in the region and kidnapping
of foreigners for the payment of ransom and/or the release of imprisoned members.
The region is also home to other criminal networks involved in hostage-taking,
human trafficking, illicit trafficking of drugs, cigarettes and arms, including
explosives, and other illicit activities, taking advantage of porous borders, weak
security mechanisms and the absence of State authority. These are significant
sources of funding and patronage for the terrorist groups and other entities in a
region stricken by poverty, and at the same time undermine the rule of law.
3.
Starting in 2012, as one of the consequences of the Libyan conflict, the
situation on the ground suddenly deteriorated with the breakout of the armed
rebellion spearheaded by the National Movement for the Liberation of Azawad. The
Movement is comprised mainly of former combatants of Tuareg origin, many of
whom fought with the Libyan army and returned to Mali with their arms following
the downfall of the Qaddafi regime. The Movement also includes other elements
who were involved in previous rebellions in the same region, particularly in the
early 1990s. As the rebellion led by the Movement escalated, other groups emerged
in the region, professing various political and religious agendas, while also engaging
in criminal and other activities, including hostage taking. Prominent among these
groups is Ansar Dine (the Defenders of the Faith). Mention should also be made of
the Movement for Oneness and Jihad in West Africa, a splinter group of Al-Qaida in
the Islamic Maghreb, which is mostly financed by drug traffickers. These groups,
which benefited from the flow of arms emanating from the looted Libyan and later
Malian military depots subsequently extended their control to all three northern
regions of Mali (Gao, Kidal and Timbuktu).
4.
Having conquered the northern regions, with the support of Ansar Dine, the
National Movement for the Liberation of Azawad proclaimed an independent and
secular state of Azawad in the north, claiming that the Tuareg people are
marginalized in the Malian polity and that earlier agreements to address this issue
had not been honoured by the central authorities. The Movement appears to have
subsequently renounced the claim of separatism. This change came against the
background of its defeat by other groups, namely Ansar Dine and the Movement for
Oneness and Jihad in West Africa, advocating for an Islamic State in Mali, with their

12-58742

11

S/2012/825

backward and extremist interpretation of the religion. As noted above, the latter
group finances its activities with proceeds of drug trafficking. All the evidence
indicates that these two groups have operational links with Al-Qaida in the Islamic
Maghreb. With the collapse of State presence in the north of Mali, they now have
greater latitude to pursue their criminal and terrorist activities.
5.
The conflict in the north of Mali has caused a grave humanitarian situation in
the Sahel-Sahara region, which was already in a state of extreme vulnerability,
because of recurring droughts, food crises and a fall in remittances as a result of the
return of thousands of migrant workers who fled the conflict in Libya. The fighting
has led to massive displacement of civilians, both within Mali and to the
neighbouring countries. There are about 160,000 internally displaced persons and
over 202,000 Malians have sought refuge in Algeria, Burkina Faso, Mauritania and
Niger. Mention should also be made of the looting of warehouses of humanitarian
organizations and medical facilities, as well as the obstruction of their operations by
armed groups. The disruption of supplies of basic necessities and local market
activities has exacerbated the conditions of the local populations.
6.
The armed groups occupying the north of Mali have committed serious human
rights violations. These include arbitrary arrests, torture, amputation and public
flogging, rape, summary executions and the use of child soldiers. Some of the
groups active on the ground have also engaged in the desecration, damage and
destruction of sites of holy, historic and cultural significance, some of which are
listed as United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) World Heritage sites, including in the city of Timbuktu.

III.

Institutional crisis
7.
The institutional crisis in Mali was triggered by the military coup of 22 March
2012, staged by a group of soldiers blaming the deplorable conditions of the army
which, according to them, made it impossible to effectively face the rebellion in the
north. Indeed, the coup took place against the background of a deteriorating military
situation in the north and serious violations of international humanitarian law by the
advancing rebels, as illustrated by the summary execution of several Malian military
personnel in early March 2012 in Aguelhok. It should be noted that presidential
elections had been scheduled for 29 April 2012 and the mandate of the deposed
President was constitutionally due to end in June 2012.
8.
The authors of the coup organized themselves into a military junta called the
National Council for the Recovery of Democracy and the Restoration of the State.
The National Council, which suspended the Constitution and dissolved all
Republican institutions, set itself the objective of restoring State authority in the
north and thereafter organizing free, fair and transparent elections. However, in the
days following the coup, the situation on the ground deteriorated further. Taking
advantage of the political vacuum in Bamako, the armed terrorist and criminal
groups made further gains, culminating in the occupation of all three of the northern
regions of the country.
9.
In the weeks following the military coup, a number of human rights violations
were committed in Bamako, including arbitrary arrests, acts of harassment,
disappearances and other abuses, targeting key political figures among others. In
addition, isolated groups challenged the legitimacy of the power of the interim
President, Dioncounda Traoré, who was assaulted on 21 May 2012, leading to a
two-month-long medical evacuation to France. This situation prompted calls by the

12

12-58742

S/2012/825

international community for all Malian stakeholders to desist from unlawful conduct
and for all concerned to abide by civilian rule.

IV.

Efforts to resolve the crises in Mali
10. ECOWAS and the African Union, as well as the core countries, supported by
international partners, including the United Nations and the European Union, have
made and continue to make important efforts to assist in resolving Mali’s
overlapping crises. In particular, ECOWAS and the African Union strongly
condemned the attacks by the armed and terrorist groups and reaffirmed their
commitment to respect for the national unity, territorial integrity and sovereignty of
Mali. Regarding the institutional crisis, the two organizations, along with other
members of the international community, condemned the military coup and took a
number of measures to ensure a swift return to constitutional order.

A.

Restoration of constitutional order
11. Bearing in mind the urgent need to resolve the institutional crisis so as to
create conducive conditions for addressing the situation in the north, ECOWAS and
the African Union made determined efforts towards the restoration of constitutional
legality. The process spearheaded by the ECOWAS Mediator, President Blaise
Compaoré of Burkina Faso, resulted in the signing on 6 April 2012 of a framework
agreement for the restoration of constitutional order with the National Council for
the Recovery of Democracy and the Restoration of the State. In accordance with the
Malian Constitution, the agreement foresaw the transfer of power from the military
junta to the Speaker of Parliament, Mr. Dioncounda Traoré, following the formal
resignation of President Amadou Toumani Touré on 8 April 2012. Mr. Cheick
Modibo Diarra was appointed Prime Minister and a new Government was formed.
Since then, and while some challenges remain, notable progress has been made to
address the concerns expressed by the international community, particularly with
respect to the interference of the former military junta in political matters, violations
of human rights and acts of intimidation.
12. The ECOWAS-led mediation, with the support of the African Union and the
rest of the international community, has contributed to greater coherence in the
transitional process. Following the return to the country of the interim President
after recovering from the grave injuries he sustained during the assault on him and
his address to the nation of 29 July 2012, the Malian stakeholders, on 20 August
2012, established an inclusive national unity Government under the leadership of
the interim President and Prime Minister Cheick Modibo Diarra. This development
came in response to the requests made by the Support and Follow-up Group at its
inaugural meeting in Abidjan, on 7 June 2012; the ECOWAS Summit held in
Yamoussoukro, on 28 and 29 June 2012; by the Regional Contact Group on Mali, at
its meeting held in Ouagadougou on 7 July 2012; and by the African Union, for a
more inclusive transitional framework.

B.

Dialogue with armed groups
13. Efforts have also been made regarding the negotiations with those rebel groups
in the north willing to engage in dialogue on the basis of respect for the unity and
territorial integrity of Mali and the rejection of armed rebellion and terrorism. The
ECOWAS Mediator held meetings with representatives of the National Movement
for the Liberation of Azawad and Ansar Dine in Ouagadougou in June 2012 and

12-58742

13

S/2012/825

dispatched his Minister for Foreign Affairs to Gao and Kidal in August 2012 to meet
with representatives of Ansar Dine and the Movement for Oneness and Jihad in
West Africa. The representative of the Mediator impressed upon them the need to
unequivocally disassociate themselves from the terrorist and criminal groups, with
whom no dialogue can be contemplated, and to respect the territorial integrity of
Mali. After these groups indicated their readiness to hold a dialogue under the
mediation of ECOWAS, the Mediator urged them to clearly articulate their demands
for the dialogue with the Malian authorities.
14. On his part, the interim President, in his address to the nation on 29 July 2012,
announced his intention to set up a National Commission for Negotiations to handle
the talks with armed and rebel movements in the north. It should be noted, here, that
several prerequisites for such an engagement had already been defined by ECOWAS
and the African Union, including: (i) the reaffirmation of the territorial integrity of
Mali; (ii) the centrality of the 1992 Constitution; (iii) the outright rejection of
terrorist and criminal groups, as well as of armed rebellion; and (iv) the imperative
of allowing humanitarian access to the rebel-controlled zones. From this arises the
question about the readiness of Malian armed groups to renounce all plans that may
undermine the country’s territorial integrity and to unambiguously distance
themselves from terrorism and transnational organized crime, which could make
them credible interlocutors in the search for a negotiated settlement.
C.

Deployment of an ECOWAS stabilization force
15. ECOWAS has also taken steps towards the deployment of a stabilization force
in Mali. As part of this effort, ECOWAS, with the support of the African Union, the
United Nations, the European Union and other partners, dispatched technical
assessment missions to Mali and convened a number of planning meetings. In
September 2012, the Malian authorities addressed formal requests to ECOWAS and
the United Nations for military assistance to end the rebellion and dismantle the
terrorist and criminal networks operating in the north.

D.

Contribution by the core countries
16. The core countries have contributed to the efforts to address the crisis in the
north of Mali within the framework of the structures they have set up, namely the
Fusion and Liaison Unit, the Tamanrasset Joint Military Command and their
ministerial-level consultative mechanism.
17. At their ministerial meetings, held respectively in Nouakchott, Mauritania, on
8 April 2012, and in Niamey, Niger, on 6 August 2012, the core countries, having
reiterated their commitment to the national unity and territorial integrity of Mali,
expressed their readiness to contribute to the restoration of peace, security and
stability in that country through support to dialogue with armed groups willing to
negotiate, recourse to military force to eradicate terrorist groups and the restoration
of State authority. It should be noted that contacts with the Malian armed groups,
with the exception of Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb and the Movement for
Oneness and Jihad in West Africa, have been initiated by the core countries, in
particular Algeria and Mauritania, to request them to fully disassociate themselves
from the terrorist groups and to engage in negotiations within the strict framework
of the relevant African Union principles.

14

12-58742

S/2012/825

E.

Contributions by other international partners
18. Other members of the international community are also actively involved in
the search for a solution to the crises in Mali. In addition to the convening of a highlevel meeting on the Sahel in New York on 26 September 2012 and the subsequent
appointment by the Secretary-General of Mr. Romano Prodi as his Special Envoy,
mention should be made of the adoption by the United Nations Security Council of
two resolutions on the situation in Mali (2056 of 5 July 2012 and 2071 of
12 October 2012). Notably, in its resolution 2071 (2012), the Security Council
expressed its readiness to respond to the request of the Malian authorities regarding
an international military force to assist the Malian armed forces in recovering the
occupied regions in the north. It also requested the Secretary-General to assist
ECOWAS and the African Union in the planning for the deployment of an
international military force, and to submit a report in that respect within 45 days.
19. On 23 July 2012, the European Council reiterated its commitment to
implement the comprehensive European Union Strategy for Security and
Development in the Sahel and requested the European External Action Service and
the European Commission to elaborate options with a view to: (i) ensuring a gradual
return to development cooperation; (ii) supporting the deployment of a stabilization
force; (iii) contributing to the restructuring of the Malian forces under civilian
control; and (iv) preparing longer-term actions to help stabilize the north of Mali.
The European Council also met on 15 October 2012 to further consider the situation
in Mali. The International Organization of la Francophonie (OIF), the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) and a number of bilateral partners, including France
and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, which have
designated Special Envoys for the Sahel, as well as the United States of America,
are also contributing to the international efforts to help resolve the crises in Mali.

F.

Progress and challenges
20. Overall, significant progress has been made regarding the resolution of the
institutional crisis. However, further efforts are required to facilitate the successful
completion of the transition. Conversely, the situation in the north continues to
worsen. The armed terrorist and criminal groups, which continue to carry out all
kinds of abuses, are further entrenching themselves, including by attempting, and
partly succeeding, to buy some level of support among the local populations, taking
advantage of their extreme vulnerability. In so doing, they are posing an everincreasing threat to Mali, the region and beyond; hence the need for urgent,
concerted and holistic international action to help Mali decisively to address this
situation.

12-58742

15

S/2012/825

Attachment 2
Communiqués of the 323rd and 327th meetings of the
African Union Peace and Security Council
Communiqué of the 323rd meeting
[Original: English]
The Peace and Security Council of the African Union, at its 323rd meeting,
held in New York, on 12 June 2012, adopted the following decision on the situation
in Mali:
Council,
1.
Takes note of the briefing made by the Commissioner for Peace and Security on
the evolution of the situation in Mali, as well as of the statement made by the
representative of Côte d’Ivoire, on behalf of the current Chair of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS). Council also notes the participation
in the meeting, as invitees, of representatives of the core countries (Algeria,
Mauritania and Niger), and the statement made by the representative of Niger;
2.
Recalls its previous decisions on the situation in Mali, in particular
its communiqués dated 20 March [PSC/MIN/COMM.(CCCXIV)] and 3 and
24 April 2012 [PSC/PR/COMM.(CCCXVI) and PSC/MIN/COMM./2.(CCCXIX)],
respectively;
3.
Reiterates the African Union’s concern at the continued occupation of the
northern part of Mali by the armed, terrorist and criminal groups operating in that
area, the increasing linkages between terrorist and criminal networks, as well as the
violations of human rights committed by these groups and the dire humanitarian
situation prevailing on the ground;
4.
Also reiterates the African Union’s concern at the continuing fragility of the
institutions established as part of the process towards the restoration of
constitutional order, as demonstrated by the unacceptable physical assault against
the interim President, Mr. Dioncounda Traoré, the continued interference of military
elements in the management of the transition and other related acts which
undermine the integrity of the transition;
5.
Commends once again President Blaise Compaoré of Burkina Faso, the
ECOWAS Mediator, and President Alassane Dramane Ouattara of Côte d’Ivoire,
current Chairman of ECOWAS, for their ongoing efforts and the results achieved so
far towards the full restoration of constitutional order. Council also reiterates its
high appreciation to them for the timely consultative summit on the situation in Mali
that they held in Lomé, on 6 June 2012, and at which participated President Denis
Sassou-Nguesso of the Republic of the Congo, Chairperson of the African Union
Peace and Security Council for the month of June 2012, President Thomas Boni
Yayi of Benin, Chairman of the Union, President Faure Essozimna Ginassingbé of
Togo, President Mahamadou Issoufou of Niger and President Macky Sall of
Senegal, as well as Prime Minister Cheick Modibo Diarra of Mali;
6.
Welcomes the convening of the inaugural meeting of the Support and Followup Group on the Situation in Mali, in Abidjan, Côte d’Ivoire, on 7 June 2012, in

16

12-58742

S/2012/825

accordance with its communiqués of 20 March and 3 April 2012, and endorses its
conclusions. Council stresses the critical importance that the Group is expected to
play in mobilizing international support for the African-led efforts on the situation
in Mali, and encourages it to convene regularly and to take all appropriate steps
towards the full implementation of the conclusions of its inaugural meeting;
7.
Reiterates the African Union’s strong condemnation of the armed attacks
against the Malian State and the unacceptable and dangerous presence of terrorist
and criminal groups in the northern part of the country, as well as the threat that
recourse to armed rebellion poses to the viability of African States and to the
democratization processes on the continent;
8.
Also condemns the violations of human rights and abuses committed by the
armed and terrorist groups operating in the northern part of Mali and expresses
concern at the humanitarian situation on the ground. Council commends the
countries hosting a large number of Malian refugees, namely Algeria, Burkina Faso,
Mauritania and Niger, and recognizes the burden borne by them as a result of this
situation. Council also commends the humanitarian organizations involved in the
relief operations for their efforts, and urges African Union Member States and the
international community at large to extend the required assistance to the affected
civilian populations;
9.
Expresses its full support to all efforts aimed at addressing, by peaceful means,
the causes of the recurring rebellions in northern Mali, and to dialogue with Malian
groups that would commit to negotiating on the basis of the following principles:
scrupulous respect for the national unity and territorial integrity of Mali, which
cannot be the subject of any discussion or negotiation, and total rejection of
recourse to armed rebellion and of any relation with terrorist and criminal networks,
which must be neutralized by all possible legitimate means;
10. Reaffirms its support for the continuation of the ECOWAS mediation, with the
participation of the core countries, in accordance with its communiqué of 20 March
2012, and requests the Chairperson of the African Union Commission to take the
steps he deems appropriate to back the mediation efforts and facilitate coordination
among all concerned;
11. Stresses the urgent need to create a conducive environment to enable the
transitional institutions to fully exercise their responsibilities, in conditions of
security and without any interference by the military junta and its civilian
supporters, as well as the need for scrupulous respect for fundamental freedoms. In
this respect, Council strongly condemns the unacceptable physical assault against
the interim President, calls for the speedy identification and trial of all those
involved in the attack, and demands the immediate dissolution of the National
Council for the Recovery of Democracy and the Restoration of the State, whose
existence, under any form, is not consistent with the restoration of constitutional
order in the Republic of Mali. Council reiterates its determination to take and
implement sanctions against all those whose action is impeding the full return to
constitutional order, and requests the Commission, in consultation with ECOWAS
and other stakeholders, to draw up a preliminary list of individuals and entities, in
particular the members of the military junta and their civilian supporters,
undermining the process of returning fully to constitutional order, for consideration
and action as appropriate;

12-58742

17

S/2012/825

12. Expresses its full support to the transitional institutions, and urges all African
Union Member States and partners to extend the required assistance to facilitate the
attainment of the objectives of the transition, namely the reorganization and
restructuring of the security and defence forces, the restoration of State authority
throughout the territory of Mali, and the organization of free, fair and transparent
elections, within the agreed period of 12 months;
13. Requests the Malian Government to fully assume its responsibilities in the
management of the transition, stresses the need for close and continued cooperation
between the Government and the different political actors and civil society in Mali
on the various challenges facing the country, and encourages all the Malian
stakeholders, with the support of ECOWAS, to quickly develop a road map outlining
the various tasks to be carried out during the transition, so as to facilitate the
attainment of the set objectives;
14. Reaffirms the provisions of article 16 of the Protocol Relating to the
Establishment of the Peace and Security Council on the relationship between the
African Union and the regional mechanisms for conflict prevention, management
and resolution, which are part of the overall security architecture of the Union, as
well as the January 2008 Memorandum of Understanding on Cooperation between
the African Union and the Regional Mechanisms in the Area of Peace and Security,
concluded in pursuance of article 16 of the Peace and Security Council Protocol.
Council, within this framework and recalling its earlier support to the activation of
the ECOWAS Standby Force, authorizes ECOWAS, in collaboration as appropriate
with the core countries, namely Algeria, Mauritania and Niger, to put in place the
required military and security arrangements towards the achievement of the
following objectives:
(i)

Ensuring the security of the transitional institutions;

(ii)

Restructuring and reorganizing the Malian security and defence forces; and

(iii) Restoring State authority over the northern part of the country and
combating terrorist and criminal networks;
15. Requests the core countries to contribute, as appropriate, to the design,
planning and implementation of the above-mentioned military and security
arrangements in Mali;
16. Calls upon, as a matter of urgency, the United Nations Security Council to
endorse the envisaged deployment of an ECOWAS force as outlined above, and to
lend its full support to the efforts being exerted to this end. Council appeals to all
African Union Member States in a position to do so, as well as to African Union
partners, to extend logistical, financial and technical support to ECOWAS and to
assist in the restructuring, reorganization and re-equipment of the Malian security
and defence forces;
17. Requests the African Union and ECOWAS Commissions, with the support of
the United Nations, the European Union and other partners, and in consultation with
all countries neighbouring Mali, to speedily finalize the work already initiated
towards the precise definition of the mandate and the elaboration of the concept of
operations and other related documents for the envisaged force, in support of the
formal request to the United Nations Security Council, seeking authorization for the
provision of a support package funded by United Nations-assessed contributions.

18

12-58742

S/2012/825

Council requests the Chairperson of the Commission to coordinate this process with
ECOWAS and all other concerned actors, in order to finalize it within three weeks
from the adoption of this decision;
18. Reiterates the need for a regional and long-term approach to address the
structural problems facing the Sahel region. In this respect, Council stresses the
relevance of the Strategy adopted at its ministerial meeting held in Bamako on
20 March 2012 [PSC/MIN/DECL.(CCCXIV)], and requests the Commission to
actively ensure its follow-up and implementation;
19.

Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.

Communiqué of the 327th meeting
[Original: English]
The Peace and Security Council of the African Union, at its 327th meeting,
held on 14 July 2012, adopted the following decision on the situation in the
Republic of Mali:
Council,
1.
Takes note of the Report of the Chairperson of the Commission on the
situation in Mali [PSC/AHG/3(CCCXXVII)]. Council also takes note of the
statements made by the current Chairman of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), the ECOWAS Mediator, the President of the ECOWAS
Commission, the United Nations and by the core countries, namely Mauritania,
Niger and Algeria, as well as by South Africa and Togo, as African Union Member
States in the United Nations Security Council;
2.

Recalls its earlier communiqués on the situation in Mali;

3.
Reaffirms the unflinching commitment of the African Union and that of all its
Member States to the national unity and territorial integrity of the Republic of Mali,
which cannot be the subject of any discussion or negotiation, and Africa’s
determination to spare no effort to ensure their preservation. Council also reaffirms
the African Union’s utter rejection of terrorism and the recourse to armed rebellion
to further political demands;
4.
Expresses its deep concern at the seriousness of the situation in northern Mali,
marked by the increasing consolidation of control of the region by the armed,
terrorist and criminal groups. Council notes with concern the presence in northern
Mali of different armed and terrorist groups, such as Al-Qaida in the Islamic
Maghreb, Ansar Dine, the Movement for Unity and Jihad in West Africa and Boko
Haram. Council further notes that this situation poses a serious threat to regional
and international peace and security and, as such, calls for urgent and effective
action by the entire international community;
5.
Strongly condemns the violations of human rights perpetrated by the various
armed, terrorist and criminal groups which occupy the northern part of Mali, and the
senseless and unacceptable destruction of the cultural, spiritual and historical
heritage of this region, notably in Timbuktu, which is a serious violation of
international law, and urges that the perpetrators be brought to justice before the
relevant international jurisdictions. Council also notes the continuing deterioration
of the humanitarian situation in the region, and stresses the need for urgent action to

12-58742

19

S/2012/825

allow the delivery of food aid to the affected populations. Council reiterates the
gratitude of the African Union to Algeria, Burkina Faso, Mauritania and Niger, for
hosting Malian refugees and for their support and assistance. Council also thanks all
humanitarian agencies providing support to the affected populations;
6.
Reiterates the full support of the African Union to the ECOWAS efforts aimed
at resolving the crisis in Mali. In this regard, Council pays tribute to President
Alassane Dramane Ouattara, President of Côte d’Ivoire and current Chairman of
ECOWAS, President Blaise Compaoré, President of Burkina Faso and Mediator in
the Malian crisis, President Goodluck Jonathan, President of Nigeria and Associate
Mediator and the other members of the ECOWAS Contact Group on Mali, as well as
to President Thomas Yayi Boni, President of Benin and Chairman of the African
Union, for their commitment and sustained efforts. Council also notes with
satisfaction the action of the core countries. Council welcomes the interaction that
has developed between ECOWAS and the core countries, and encourages all
stakeholders to continue on this path, in accordance with its decision of 20 March
2012, in Bamako [PSC/MIN/COMM.(CCCXIV)];
7.
Endorses the communiqués issued by the forty-first ordinary session of
ECOWAS Assembly of Heads of State and Government, held in Yamoussoukro, on
28 and 29 June 2012, and the second meeting of the ECOWAS Contact Group on
Mali, held in Ouagadougou, on 7 July 2012. Council also welcomes the adoption, on
5 July 2012, by the United Nations Security Council of resolution 2056 (2012);
8.
Reiterates its strong condemnation of the physical assault against the interim
President, Mr. Dioncounda Traoré, and requests the Chairperson of the Commission,
in collaboration with the President of the ECOWAS Commission, to put in place,
with the support of the United Nations, an international commission of inquiry to
shed light on the assault and to identify its perpetrators and sponsors, with a view to
bringing them to justice. Council requests the current authorities, working closely
with ECOWAS, to facilitate the return to Mali of the interim President, to enable
him to fully and effectively assume his responsibilities;
9.
Reiterates the urgent need to strengthen the transitional institutions, to enable
Mali to address the serious challenges it faces, particularly in the northern part of
the country. In this regard, Council demands an end to the unacceptable interference
of the military junta and their civilian supporters in the management of the
transition and the effective dissolution of the National Committee for the Recovery
of Democracy and the Restoration of the State. Council calls for the early
finalization of the list of individuals whose action is impeding the transition, to
allow for the immediate imposition of sanctions by the African Union and
ECOWAS. Council requests the United Nations Security Council and other African
Union partners to support such sanctions;
10. Urges the interim President and the Prime Minister to immediately commence
the required consultations with the Malian political and civil society actors, with a
view to forming an expanded national unity Government, as requested by ECOWAS,
the African Union and the United Nations. Council requests the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission and the President of the ECOWAS Commission, in
close consultation with the Mediation and with the support of the Special
Representative of the United Nations Secretary-General for West Africa and other
partners, on the basis of the communiqué of the Ouagadougou Contact Group
meeting, to facilitate the holding, as soon as possible, of consultations among the

20

12-58742

S/2012/825

Malian stakeholders, in Bamako, for the formation of the Government of national
unity by 31 July 2012, in accordance with the decision of the Contact Group
meeting. Council emphasizes that the formation of this Government will mark the
completion of institutional normalization and pave the way for the lifting of the
suspension measure taken by the African Union, as well as for greater mobilization
of Africa and the rest of the international community, in support to the efforts of the
transitional authorities;
11. Encourages dialogue with groups willing to negotiate on the basis of respect
for the unity and territorial integrity of Mali and the total rejection of armed
rebellion, terrorism and related criminal activities. In this regard, Council reaffirms
its support to the efforts of the ECOWAS Mediator and the Contact Group, and
stresses the need for continued coordination with the core countries;
12. Reiterates its determination to impose sanctions against terrorist and criminal
groups operating in northern Mali, as well as against any other armed group that
impedes the search for a solution to the crisis and the efforts of ECOWAS and the
African Union. In this regard, Council calls upon all Member States concerned to
extend full cooperation to the Commission to expedite the finalization of the list of
armed, terrorist and criminal groups operating in the northern part of Mali, for their
inclusion on the list of terrorist groups established by the African Union, in
conformity with communiqué PSC/PR/COMM.(CCCXVI), adopted at its 316th
meeting, held on 3 April 2012;
13. Recalls its communiqué PSC/PR/COMM.(CCCXXIII) of 12 June 2012,
authorizing ECOWAS, in collaboration, as appropriate, with the core countries, to
put in place the required security and military arrangements, to achieve the following
objectives: (i) ensure the security of the transitional institutions, (ii) restructure and
reorganize the Malian security and defence forces, and (iii) restore State authority
over the northern part of the country, as well as fight against terrorist and criminal
networks. Council welcomes the measures taken by ECOWAS in this regard,
including the dispatching of a technical assessment mission to Bamako, with the
participation of the African Union. Council reiterates its call on all Member States
and the international community as a whole, for them to provide the necessary
technical, logistical and financial support;
14. Welcomes the launching by the African Union Commission, during the
consultative meeting held in Addis Ababa, on 23 June 2012, of the process towards
the development of a strategic concept articulating, in a holistic manner, the
political, security and military measures towards the early resolution of the crisis in
Mali. Council calls for the early finalization of this concept with ECOWAS, in
collaboration with the core countries, the United Nations and other partners. Council
stresses that this concept and the planning conducted by ECOWAS must be mutually
reinforcing. Council expresses its intention to consider and adopt this concept as
quickly as possible, before its submission to the United Nations Security Council, to
enable the latter to further consider the request of ECOWAS and the African Union,
in accordance with paragraph 18 of resolution 2056 (2012);
15. Calls upon the African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights to
investigate the human rights situation in northern Mali, including the atrocities
committed against the Malian military and their families in Aguelhok, in January
2012, and to submit a comprehensive report with concrete recommendations on the
way forward;
16.

12-58742

Decides to remain actively seized of the situation.

21

S/2012/825

Attachment 3
Conclusions of the meeting of the Support and Follow-up Group
on the Situation in Mali, held on 7 June 2012
1.
The Support and Follow-up Group on the Situation in Mali established by the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union, at its 314th meeting, convened at
the ministerial level in Bamako on 20 March 2012, held its inaugural meeting in
Abidjan on 7 June 2012.
2.
The meeting, organized under the auspices of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), the African Union and the United Nations, was
chaired by Mr. Jean Ping, Chairperson of the African Union Commission. The
meeting brought together the ECOWAS Member States, the core countries, the
current Chairperson of the African Union, the permanent members of the United
Nations Security Council and African Union Member States sitting on this body, as
well as bilateral and multilateral partners.
3.
The participants expressed their serious concern about the situation in Mali. In
this regard, they noted the growing grip of the armed, terrorist and criminal groups
operating in the northern part of Mali, the increasing linkages between terrorist and
criminal networks, as well as the violations of human rights there and the dire
humanitarian situation prevailing on the ground.
4.
The participants also noted the continuing fragility of the institutions
established within the framework of the process for the restoration of constitutional
order following the coup d’état of 22 March 2012, as evidenced by the physical
assault on the interim President, Mr. Dioncounda Traoré, and the persistence of
impediments to the action of the transitional institutions.
5.
The participants noted that the current situation in Mali, which calls into
question basic principles of the African Union, namely respect for the unity and
territorial integrity of Member States, as well the rejection of unconstitutional
changes of government, terrorism and cross-border crimes, constitutes a serious
threat to the viability of the State of Mali, the stability and security of the region and
that of the continent as a whole, as well as to international security.
6.
In this context, the participants stressed the imperative and urgency of closely
coordinated, rapid and efficient international action to take up the challenges at
hand. This action must be based on the pooling of regional and continental efforts,
within the framework of the African Union, and close partnership with the United
Nations and other members of the international community.
7.
In conformity with the mandate given to it by the Peace and Security Council,
the Group considered both the institutional crisis and the security and humanitarian
situation in northern Mali.
8.
Regarding the institutional crisis, the participants welcomed the efforts made
by the President of Burkina Faso, within the framework of the mediation entrusted
to him by ECOWAS. They noted with satisfaction the results achieved, which made
it possible, in accordance with the framework agreement of 6 April 2012, to
establish the various institutions responsible for the management of the transition.

22

12-58742

S/2012/825

9.
The participants encouraged the Government, the political forces and civil
society, including the representatives of the northern regions, within the framework
of an inclusive national dialogue and the functioning of the constitutional
institutions of the country, to quickly develop, with the support of ECOWAS, a road
map stating the various tasks to be carried out during the transition, so as to attain
the objectives set, namely the reorganization and restructuring of the defence and
security forces, the restoration of State authority throughout the territory of Mali
and the organization of free, transparent and fair elections, within the agreed period
of 12 months. They also encouraged the transitional institutions to fully assume
their responsibilities. They expressed the readiness of their respective organizations
and countries to support the transitional institutions and to mobilize the necessary
financial and other forms of necessary support.
10. In this context, the participants stressed the need for close and continued
cooperation between the Government and the different political actors and civil
society in Mali, on the various challenges faced by the country. In so doing, the
objective is to form an all-inclusive and more representative Government in order to
build the broadest consensus possible that would allow Mali to overcome the
daunting challenges that it is currently facing. They urged the different national
stakeholders to take all necessary initiatives to this end, taking into account the
ECOWAS mediation, with the support of the African Union and the United Nations.
11. The participants reaffirmed the need to establish the necessary conditions to
enable the transitional institutions to fully exercise their responsibilities in
conditions of security and without any interference by the military junta and its
civilian supporters, as well as the need for scrupulous respect for fundamental
freedoms. After having strongly condemned the unacceptable physical assault
against the interim President, the participants:
(i) Demanded the rapid identification of all the perpetrators and sponsors of
this assault, for them to be brought to justice, without prejudice to actions that
could be initiated by the relevant international mechanisms;
(ii) Demanded that the military junta (the National Council for the Recovery
of Democracy and the Restoration of the State) be immediately dissolved and
pull out from the management of the transition and that the armed forces focus
exclusively, under the authority of the interim President and the Government,
on their primary task of preserving and defending the unity and territorial
integrity of Mali;
(iii) Expressed the determination of their respective organizations and
countries to impose and to scrupulously implement sanctions against all
military and civilian elements who, in one way or another, hinder the transition
and the action of the Government, fuel hatred or perpetrate acts of violence
and intimidation, including arbitrary arrests. They called upon ECOWAS, the
African Union and the United Nations to start preparing a list of the
individuals concerned, with the support of the different countries and
organizations members of the Support and Follow-up Group. In addition to
these sanctions, the appropriate international mechanisms could also be seized
of the matter; and
(iv) Requested ECOWAS, with the support of the African Union, the United
Nations and other international partners, to take the necessary steps to ensure

12-58742

23

S/2012/825

the security of the officials of the transition, in particular the interim President.
In this regard, the participants encouraged the transitional Government to
unconditionally extend to ECOWAS all the necessary cooperation.
12. As regards the situation in the northern part of Mali, the participants reiterated
the strong condemnation by the international community of the armed attacks
against the Malian State and the unacceptable and dangerous presence of terrorist
and criminal groups in that region of the country. They emphasized the danger that
recourse to armed rebellion posed to the viability of African States and to the
democratization processes on the continent, as well as the serious threat posed by
the entrenchment of terrorist and criminal groups in the northern part of Mali, for
that country, the region and the rest of the international community.
13. The participants condemned the violations of human rights and abuses
committed by the armed and terrorist groups operating in northern Mali. In
particular, they expressed concern about the humanitarian situation in the region, as
well as the burden borne by the countries hosting a large number of Malian
refugees, particularly Algeria, Burkina Faso, Mauritania and Niger. They requested
the humanitarian agencies working in the field to pursue their efforts. With regard
particularly to the delivery of humanitarian aid in northern Mali, the participants
stressed the need to spare no efforts to ensure that the aid destined to the Malian
civilian population is not diverted by the armed and terrorist groups occupying that
part of the Malian territory.
14. The participants stressed that any solution to the crisis in northern Mali should
be based on the following principles:
(i) Scrupulous respect for the unity and territorial integrity of Mali, which
cannot be the subject of any discussion or negotiation;
(ii) Rejection of recourse to armed rebellion, which cannot be justified,
especially in the context of the existing channels of expression in Mali which
allow for the peaceful pursuit of any legitimate claim; and
(iii) The implacable struggle against the terrorist and criminal networks,
which must be neutralized by all possible legitimate means.
15. On this basis, the participants expressed the support of their respective
organizations and countries to all efforts aimed at peacefully addressing, by peaceful
means, the causes of the recurring rebellions in northern Mali. Dialogue with groups
willing to negotiate should be based on respect for the unity and territorial integrity
of Mali, as well as the total rejection of terrorism and related criminal activities. The
participants affirmed their support for the continuation of the ECOWAS mediation,
with the involvement of the core countries, in accordance with the decision taken by
the African Union Peace and Security Council on 20 March 2012 in Bamako. The
participants stressed the need to obtain from the groups concerned the acceptance of
the above-mentioned principles and to conclude the negotiations, as soon as
possible, failing which other options, including the use of force, would be
considered.
16. At the same time, the participants recognized the need to mobilize all
appropriate means, including military, to help the Malian Government to reorganize
and restructure its defence and security forces, and support its efforts to restore, in
the shortest possible time, its authority over the northern part of the country, as well

24

12-58742

S/2012/825

as fight the terrorist and criminal groups and other entities whose actions undermine
stability and security in Mali and the whole region. They welcomed the initiative
taken by ECOWAS to activate its Standby Force and recognized the important
contribution that could be made by the African Union, through the African Centre
for Studies and Research on Terrorism, and the core countries, through the structures
they had already established, including the Fusion and Liaison Unit in Algiers and
the Committee of the Joint Chiefs of Staff in Tamanrasset, Algeria.
17. The participants affirmed the willingness of their respective organizations and
countries to provide financial, logistical and other support to such efforts. They also
affirmed their willingness to work for the speedy mobilization of adequate support
from the United Nations on the basis of a formal request, accompanied by a specific
mandate and concept of operations, submitted through the African Union. In this
regard, they urged the African Union Peace and Security Council to convene, as
soon as possible, to take the decisions it deemed appropriate, in order to mobilize
the international community, particularly the Security Council of the United
Nations, under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, in support of the
efforts of the continent.
18. More generally, the participants reaffirmed the need for a regional and longterm approach to address the structural problems facing the Sahel region. In this
respect, they stressed the relevance of the recommendations endorsed by the Peace
and Security Council ministerial meeting in Bamako and the importance of the
strategy developed by the European Union.
19. The participants expressed their support for the Conference on Drought in the
Sahel that the African Union and ECOWAS intend to organize at the end of June
2012, on the margins of the next ECOWAS Summit, in Yamoussoukro. They called
upon the international community to fully support the initiative.
20.

On the follow-up to the conclusions of this meeting, the participants agreed to:
(i) Meet, at least once every two months, under the auspices of ECOWAS,
the African Union and the United Nations, as a consultation and coordination
structure on the situation in Mali, in its dual aspects of the institutional crisis
and the situation in the north, in order to facilitate effective international
action in support of African efforts;
(ii) Recommend to the African Union and ECOWAS to send a delegation
comprising, in addition to these two organizations, the United Nations and the
European Union to deliver the message of the inaugural meeting of the
Support and Follow-up Group to all the Malian stakeholders, in support of the
mediation of ECOWAS and the efforts to restore the authority of the State over
the northern part of the country;
(iii) Convene, at the initiative of the co-chairs, in between the regular
meetings of the Group, restricted meetings based on issues to be considered, in
Addis Ababa or any other venue agreed to by the co-chairs, to follow up these
conclusions and submit recommendations on the way forward; and
(iv) Request the African Union Peace and Security Council to meet, as soon
as possible, to discuss the situation in Mali, particularly in the light of these
conclusions, for the purpose of formally requesting the support of the United
Nations Security Council.

12-58742

25

S/2012/825

21. The participants thanked ECOWAS, the African Union and the United Nations
for having taken the initiative of organizing this meeting. They expressed their
gratitude to the Government of Côte d’Ivoire for having accepted to host the
meeting and for its generous hospitality, and to the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI) for all the logistical arrangements it made.

26

12-58742

S/2012/825

Attachment 4
Conclusions of the meeting of the Support and Follow-up Group
on the Situation in Mali, held on 19 October 2012
1.
The Support and Follow-up Group on the Situation in Mali convened in
Bamako on 19 October 2012 as a follow-up to its inaugural meeting in Abidjan on
7 June 2012. The meeting, which took place under the joint chairmanship of the
African Union, the United Nations and the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), was attended by high-level representatives of the countries of the
region and international partners.
2.
The meeting was opened by the interim President of the Republic of Mali,
Mr. Dioncounda Traoré. It is the first international meeting in which the new
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma,
participated since she took office, on 15 October 2012.
3.
The meeting afforded an opportunity to review the latest developments in Mali
and to extensively interact with the Malian authorities, in particular the Prime
Minister and Ministers of the Government of National Unity, on the way forward. It
also reviewed the draft Strategic Concept for the Resolution of the Crises in Mali,
prepared by the African Union in consultation with the Malian authorities,
ECOWAS, the United Nations, the European Union and other international
stakeholders.
4.
The meeting marked the re-engagement of Mali in multilateral diplomatic
efforts. It provided the participants with the opportunity to unite in solidarity with
the people of Mali and to agree with the Malian State on an effective mobilization of
efforts to complete the restoration of constitutional order, as well as to safeguard the
national unity and territorial integrity of Mali. It is in this spirit that the following
conclusions were reached:
(a) The meeting commended ECOWAS and the regional leaders for their
commitment and sustained efforts to assist Mali to overcome the challenges facing
it. It stressed the contribution of the core countries in combating terrorist and
transnational criminal networks in the region. The meeting also expressed
appreciation to the African Union for its initiatives, including the announcement
made by the Chairperson of the African Union Commission regarding the
appointment of a High Representative for Mali and the Sahel, as well as the opening
of an African Union Office in Mali, and its overall coordinating role in line with the
principles underpinning the African Peace and Security Architecture. The meeting
welcomed the appointment by the United Nations Secretary-General of a Special
Envoy for the Sahel, Mr. Romano Prodi, as well as the adoption of Security Council
resolutions 2056 (2012) and 2071 (2012). It commended other international actors,
including the European Union, the International Organization of la Francophonie
(OIF), the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) and bilateral partners, for
their contributions to the ongoing efforts;
(b) The meeting welcomed the progress made in addressing the institutional
crisis triggered by the coup d’état of 22 March 2012, including the formation of the
Government of National Unity on 21 August 2012. At the same time, the meeting
reiterated the deep concern of the international community about the prevailing
situation in the northern part of Mali, stressing that it constitutes a serious threat to

12-58742

27

S/2012/825

peace and security in Mali, the region and beyond. It also expressed concern about
the dire humanitarian situation on the ground;
(c) Underlining the critical importance of united national leadership and
ownership in the search for lasting solutions to the crises in Mali, the meeting called
on the Malian authorities and stakeholders to redouble their efforts and to take full
advantage of the existing international momentum, notably by:
(i) Enhancing coherence among the transitional institutions, to facilitate the
implementation of the two main transitional tasks, namely the restoration of
State authority over the northern part of the country and the organization of
free, fair and transparent elections in the first quarter of 2013;
(ii) Elaborating as a matter of priority, through broad-based national
consultations and with the support of the international community, a detailed
road map, with concrete steps and timelines, on the implementation of the two
main transitional tasks, in accordance with Security Council resolutions 2056
(2012) and 2071 (2012);
(iii) Urgently establishing the envisioned national structure that will be in
charge of conducting negotiations with the Malian armed groups in the north
that are willing to engage in dialogue to find a political solution to the crisis,
on the basis of strict respect for the national unity and territorial integrity of
Mali and the rejection of terrorism, and transnational organized crime, as well
as armed rebellion. The meeting emphasized that negotiations cannot be openended;
(iv) Seizing the opportunity of the meeting of the African Union Peace and
Security Council on 24 October, devoted to the situation in Mali, to provide a
timetable on the implementation of the tasks mentioned in paragraph 4 (c) (ii)
and (iii) above;
(v) Respecting human rights and the rule of law, combating impunity and
ensuring full and effective civilian rule over the military, consistent with
relevant ECOWAS, African Union and United Nations decisions and
resolutions, as well as pronouncements by other international actors; and
(vi) Taking immediate steps to facilitate the efforts of the international
community to respond to the request regarding the deployment of an
international military force, including by sensitizing all those concerned in this
regard;
(d) The participants expressed the determination of their respective countries
and organizations to sustain the current international momentum and to extend the
required support to the Malian-led efforts to address the challenges at hand. In this
respect, considering the assistance requested by the Malian transitional authorities
from ECOWAS, the African Union, the United Nations, the European Union and
other partners, the meeting:
(i) Welcomed the draft Strategic Concept as an important step to further
coordination among the international stakeholders and assist in
comprehensively dealing with the crises in Mali through action-oriented
measures covering issues relating to the transition and governance in Mali, the
restoration of State authority in the north, security sector reform, elections,

28

12-58742

S/2012/825

stabilization and post-conflict peacebuilding, the resumption of basic services
and humanitarian assistance, and follow-up;
(ii) Noted that the African Union Peace and Security Council is due to
consider the draft Strategic Concept on 24 October 2012, with a view to
endorsing it and transmitting it to the United Nations Security Council for it to
lend its support to the proposed Concept;
(iii) Encouraged ECOWAS, the African Union, the United Nations and the
European Union, in cooperation with Mali and other stakeholders, to expedite
the finalization of the joint planning to respond to the request of the
transitional authorities of Mali for an African-led international military force
to assist the Malian armed forces to recover the occupied regions in the north
of Mali. In this respect, the meeting requested the three organizations to
immediately prepare a joint workplan that would outline all the tasks that need
to be undertaken to finalize the planning, including the concept of operations,
it being understood that all related activities should as much as possible take
place in Mali. The participants looked forward to the submission by the
Secretary-General of a report on the envisaged deployment and other related
aspects, in accordance with resolution 2071 (2012), and noted with satisfaction
the readiness of the Security Council to respond to the request of the Malian
transitional authorities;
(iv) Called for the adoption of sanctions against terrorist and criminal
networks, as well as against all Malian rebel groups and individuals who do
not cut off all ties with terrorist organizations and/or refuse to embark on a
negotiated process towards addressing the crisis as outlined above, noting that
the Security Council has already expressed its readiness to adopt targeted
sanctions;
(v) Encouraged the core countries to intensify their efforts to combat
criminal and terrorist networks, in particular through the Liaison and Fusion
Unit and the Joint Operational Command, called for enhanced coordination
between them and ECOWAS, and urged the African Union Commission to
immediately take the required initiatives to this end;
(vi) Urged the international community as a whole, including regional and
international organizations, to swiftly extend the necessary capacity-building,
financial and logistical support to the Malian defence and security forces to
enable them to play the lead role in restoring full State authority over the
northern part of the country and dismantling the terrorist and criminal
networks, in accordance with Security Council resolution 2071 (2012);
(vii) Stressed the critical need for all international actors concerned to closely
coordinate their efforts towards addressing the multifaceted challenges facing
the Sahel-Sahara region, recognizing in this respect the important role that the
United Nations Special Envoy can play. The participants agreed to convene, in
the near future, a meeting of the Support and Follow-up Group devoted to this
issue, and welcomed the offer by the European Union to host this meeting;
(viii) Appealed for greater regional and international support to address the
immediate humanitarian emergency arising from the crisis in the north of Mali,
both within Mali and in the countries hosting refugees fleeing the conflict;

12-58742

29

S/2012/825

(e) The participants strongly emphasized the critical importance of a strong
partnership and an effective working relationship at all levels among the
international stakeholders, including ECOWAS, the African Union and the United
Nations, to facilitate coordinated support to the Malian-led efforts. In this respect,
the participants stressed the central coordinating role of the Support and Follow-up
Group and urged the co-chairs, working with other international stakeholders, to
urgently develop modalities aimed at enhancing the functioning and effectiveness of
the Group.

30

12-58742
