S/2017/73

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
25 January 2017
Original: English

Thirteenth report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
paragraph 4 of Security Council resolution 2107 (2013)
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security Council
resolution 2107 (2013) and covers developments pertaining to the issues of missing
Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and missing Kuwaiti property, including the
national archives, since the issuance of the previous report of 21 October 2016
(S/2016/885).
2.
On 30 November, in carrying out his responsibilities under Security Council
resolution 2107 (2013), my Deputy Special Representative for Iraq for Political
Affairs at the United Nations Assistance Mission in Iraq (UNAMI) met the head of
the Arab Department at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Iraq, Hussein Al -Khatib,
and emphasized that a holistic approach, which included reaching out to witnesses,
conducting field work and finding new and creative ways of dealing with the issue
of missing persons and property, had the potential to bring about much -needed
results. My Deputy Special Representative requested the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, which leads on the issue within the Government of Iraq, to con tinue to
mobilize and coordinate the efforts of all entities of the Government of Iraq that
were involved in the file. Mr. Al-Khatib conveyed the assurances of the Government
of Iraq that it is firmly committed to improving relations with Kuwait and pointe d
out that the Government of Iraq was grateful to Kuwait for its humanitarian
assistance and its understanding of the prevailing security and financial situation in
Iraq. He emphasized that efforts to reach the desired results on the file on missing
persons and property would continue and that information provided by the witnesses
following the latest public announcements was currently being verified in close
cooperation between the Ministries of Defence and Foreign Affairs.
3.
On 1 December, my Special Representative for Iraq met the Ambassador of
Kuwait to Iraq, Salem Ghassab Mohammed Al-Zamanan, who emphasized the
importance of continuing the work on the file on missing persons and property in
order to achieve tangible results. My Special Representative noted that UNAMI was
closely following developments and was in contact with relevant entities of the
Government of Iraq to ensure that efforts were continually applied to that task. He
underlined that the inclusion of the Ministry of Defence of Iraq in rel evant

17-00917 (E)

270117

*1700917*

S/2017/73

endeavours had contributed technical aspects and expertise that had helped to move
the process forward.
4.
On 12 December, my Deputy Special Representative for Iraq for Political
Affairs met the Undersecretary for Legal Affairs and Multilateral Rela tions of the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Iraq, Omar Barzanji, who reiterated the commitment
of Iraq to advancing the file on missing persons and property. Mr. Barzanji further
elaborated on the preparations for the meeting of the Kuwait -Iraq Joint Ministerial
Committee, noting its importance in strengthening bilateral relations.
5.
On 27 and 28 December, the sixth session of the Kuwait-Iraq Joint Ministerial
Committee was held in Baghdad, with the aim of further bolstering cooperation
between the two countries. The First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Kuwait, Sheikh Sabah Khalid Al Hamad Al -Sabah, and the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq, Ibrahim Al -Jaafari, signed three memorandums
of understanding covering security, industry and transportation, as well as a
programme of work on cultural cooperation. In subsequent high -level meetings with
the President of Iraq, Mohammed Fuad Masum, the Prime Minister of Iraq, Haider
Al Abadi, and the Speaker of the Council of Representatives of Iraq, Salim
Al-Jubouri, Sheikh Sabah Khalid Al Hamad Al-Sabah reiterated his country’s full
support for the fight of Iraq against terrorism, and commended the progress
achieved by the Iraqi security forces.
6.
Improving bilateral ties and goodwill between Iraq and Kuwait was also in
evidence when, for the third time, Kuwait supported the request made by Iraq to the
Governing Council of the United Nations Compensation Commission established
pursuant to Security Council resolution 692 (1991) for an additional one-year
deferral until 1 January 2018 of the payment of the remaining $4.6 billion in
reparations owed to the Government of Kuwait pursuant to paragraph 21 of Security
Council resolution 1483 (2003). During the reporting period, Kuwait dedicated
$30 million to United Nations agencies to ease the humanitarian crisis faced by Iraq,
supporting the provision of emergency food assistance to thousands of Ir aqi families
affected by the ongoing crisis in Mosul, as well as expanding life -saving assistance
to the Iraqi children and distribution of winterization equipment to the displaced
population.

II. Recent activities with regard to the repatriation and return
of all Kuwaiti and third-country nationals, or their remains
7.
During the reporting period, the Ministry of Defence of Iraq continued to
gather, verify and analyse information provided by numerous citizens following a
public call for witnesses that was broadcast on Iraqi radio and television channels in
September. In order to streamline the verification procedure, the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs shared with the Ministry of Defence information available from a number of
witnesses. The Ministry of Defence further requested intelligence and security
services to provide any available information on potential burial locations, including
Salman Pak, Khamisiyah and Radwaniyah, in an effort to pinpoint the location of
the sites. In order to cross-check the information and develop a complete and up -todate database, the Ministry additionally requested the International Committee of

2/5

17-00917

S/2017/73

the Red Cross (ICRC) to provide a list of all locations where Kuwaiti rem ains had
been found, along with the names of those persons whose remains had been located.
8.
From 23 to 25 October 2016 and from 19 to 24 December 2016, the technical
team of the Ministry of Defence of Iraq undertook excavation work on a potential
burial site in Karbala governorate in the presence of a witness. In the course of this
process, 158 trenches were dug. Nevertheless, no human remains have been found
to date.
9.
On 1 November, the Ministry of Defence of Iraq designated the Deputy of the
General Legal Adviser and head of the technical committee in charge of the file on
missing Kuwaiti persons, Brigadier General Hazem Qassem Majid, as its
representative in the Committee established by the authorities of the Kurdistan
Region of Iraq to coordinate work related to a witness who might be in possession
of information on a potential burial site in Sulaymaniyah governorate. This
represented a follow-up to the discussions previously conducted with a witness by
the Iraqi Ministry of Defence, the Kurdistan Regional Government Ministry of
Martyrs and Anfal Affairs, ICRC and the Consulate of Kuwait in Erbil.
10. On 5 December, my Deputy Special Representative for Iraq for Political
Affairs met Brigadier General Hazem Qassem Majid. The Brigadier General
expressed his full commitment to making progress on the file and indicated that the
Prime Minister of Iraq welcomed activities undertaken by the Ministry of Defence
of Iraq as part of the overall Government objective of improving the relationship
between Iraq and Kuwait, as well as between Iraq and the international community.
Echoing previously raised concerns over the lack of budgetary allocations for the
file in 2016, he expressed the hope that funds requested for the 2017 budget would
be approved in order to support planned work. The Brigadier General expressed
gratitude for the continued patience of the Kuwaiti side against the background of
the financial and security challenges faced by Iraq. He emphasized that, once the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) was defeated, the Ministry would be able
to fully focus its efforts on the file. He provided assurances that the Ministry of
Defence would be ready to shoulder responsibilities and seek to obtain positive
results. My Deputy Special Representative welco med the activities of the Ministry
of Defence and urged the continuation of all efforts, particularly those relating to
the witnesses and newly obtained information, to ensure that it was substantiated
and that all leads were duly followed. He encouraged the Ministries of Defence and
Foreign Affairs to strengthen their coordination and cooperation on the file.
11. On 8 January, during an official visit to Baghdad, the President of ICRC, Peter
Maurer, met the Prime Minister of Iraq, Haider Al Abadi, to disc uss ICRC
operations in that country, including the support of ICRC in resolving the issue of
missing persons, which remained a focus of its humanitarian work. The importance
of the role of ICRC was also recognized on 11 January in Kuwait during the
meeting between Mr. Maurer and the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Sheikh Sabah Khalid Al Hamad Al -Sabah, who praised the
humanitarian efforts of ICRC, particularly those related to finding Kuwaiti missing
persons and prisoners of war from the 1990-1991 Gulf War.

17-00917

3/5

S/2017/73

III. Recent activities with regard to the return of
Kuwaiti property
12. On 30 November, during his meeting with my Deputy Special Representative,
Mr. Al-Khatib confirmed that a large number of Kuwaiti books had been found in
university libraries across Iraq. The books were currently being collected and
itemized. My Deputy Special Representative welcomed the news and urged the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs to consider undertaking a specialized public campaign
that would target those with information pertaining to the national archives,
encouraging them to come forward.
13. During the reporting period, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Iraq completed
the inventory of 2,368 Kuwaiti books from Babil University and 3,726 boo ks from
the University of Kufa, preparing them for an official handover to Kuwait.
14. On 23 December 2016, in Babil governorate, Iraqi security personnel seized
what is believed to be an ancient manuscript stolen from the Kuwait Museum during
the 1990-1991 Iraqi occupation. The Ministries of Foreign Affairs and the Interior
of Iraq are coordinating with each other on the matter. Following conclusion of legal
and judicial procedures, the manuscript will be handed over to the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs of Iraq for authentication.

IV. Observations
15. I welcome the continued strengthening of relations between Iraq and Kuwait,
which are growing closer with each passing year. I commend Kuwait for its
generosity and the humanitarian support it has provided to Iraq, showcasing
friendship and solidarity with the people of Iraq in their time of need. I express
gratitude for their understanding of the financial difficulties faced by the
Government of Iraq and the agreement to postpone the compensation payment s for
an additional year.
16. Full normalization of relations between Iraq and Kuwait can take place only if
and when the file on missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and missing
Kuwaiti property, including the national archives, is closed. I welco me the
acknowledgement by the Government of Iraq of its obligations and of the
expectations from both Kuwait and the wider international community on this issue.
This is an indication of the commitment of the Government of Iraq to shouldering
its responsibility and its intention to achieve long-awaited results.
17. Over the past several months, the Ministry of Defence of Iraq has
demonstrated resolve and commitment to pushing the file on missing persons
forward and exerting much-needed efforts in an attempt to reach tangible results. I
welcome the renewed energy and hard work and, while mindful of priorities with
regard to ISIL, urge continued engagement in this respect during the period ahead.
With this in mind, I call on the Government of Iraq to allocate the necessary funds
in 2017 that would allow the Ministry of Defence to intensify activities and fully
meet its responsibilities.

4/5

17-00917

S/2017/73

18. I applaud the support, guidance, encouragement and unwavering dedication
shown by the tripartite members under the able chairmanship of ICRC. Their
determination over the years to see a resolution of this file is commendable. I
encourage the Government of Iraq to continue to actively participate in this
mechanism, as recommendations stemming from fruitful deliberations at e ach
tripartite meeting provide a useful platform to clarify the best way forward. I further
encourage the Government of Iraq to present its findings and continually share
information on its activities with the members, even outside of the regularly
scheduled meetings, as a means of expediting this process. I remain hopeful that
working on parallel tracks, primarily by contacting witnesses, corroborating their
statements, gathering information from all available sources, conducting required
fieldwork, using new technology and continuing with an in-depth scientific review
project, will move this file forward.
19. I welcome the discovery and itemization of over 6,000 Kuwaiti books from the
libraries of Babil University and the University of Kufa and look forward to their
official handover to Kuwait. This gives me hope that the right approach, backed by
determined efforts, can lead to the discovery of the remaining Kuwaiti property,
particularly the national archives. I urge the Government of Iraq to maintain its
efforts and encourage it to consider the recommendation advanced by my Deputy
Special Representative of a public campaign specifically focused on the national
archives.
20. I reiterate the commitment and dedication of UNAMI with regard to
supporting and facilitating all efforts on this important humanitarian endeavour.

17-00917

5/5
