S/PV.7065

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

7065th meeting

Wednesday, 20 November 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Liu Jieyi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(China)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Ms. King
Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Araud
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Laassel
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Gasana
Mr. Menan
Mr. Wilson
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Central African region
Report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa and on the Lord’s Resistance Army-affected areas
(S/2013/671)

13-57257 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1357257*

S/PV.7065

Central African region

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

been signed, and several other rebel groups continue to
operate in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
and to threaten local communities with impunity.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Central African region
Report of the Secretary-General on the
activities of the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa and on the Lord’s Resistance
Army-affected areas (S/2013/671)
The President (spoke in Chinese): Under rule 39
of the Council’s rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Abou
Moussa, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2013/671, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the activities of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa and on
areas affected by the Lord’s Resistance Army.
I now give the floor to Mr. Moussa.
Mr. Moussa (spoke in French): I have the honour and
privilege to introduce the fifth report of the SecretaryGeneral on the activities of the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa and on the Lord’s Resistance
Army-affected areas (S/2013/671).
In terms of peace and security, the situation in
Central Africa is dominated by concerns about growing
instability in the Central African Republic and the
proliferation of armed groups in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Those two situations are being
followed closely by this body.
In the Central African Republic, the security,
humanitarian and human rights situation is deteriorating
rapidly and significantly, while the political transition
arrangements remain fragile. The recent increase in
sectarian violence is particularly alarming. There is an
urgent need to address this crisis before it spirals out of
control and leads to further loss of life.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, while the
defeat of the Mouvement du 23 mars by the Congolese
Armed Forces and the United Nations peacekeepers was
a victory in and of itself, a peace agreement has still not

2/21

20/11/2013

The fifth report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/671) provides an overview of the political and
security situation in the subregion of Central Africa. It
also highlights the current challenges threatening the
peace and security of States and the subregion, and the
initiatives undertaken by the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa (UNOCA), Member States
and subregional organizations in response.
(spoke in English)
While the specific issues are detailed in the report,
I would like to highlight three key threats with which
the Central Africa subregion is currently confronted.
First, insecurity and instability in the Central
African Republic continue to have security and
humanitarian implications for that country’s neighbours.
The inability of a central State authority to control
elements of Séléka has led to border tensions between
the Central African Republic and Cameroon, and to
border closures that reduce bilateral vital economic
activity. Flows of refugees from the Central African
Republic into neighbouring countries are straining the
capacity of a subregion already struggling to cope with
multitudes of displaced persons. The potential for the
crisis in the Central African Republic to spill over into
the wider subregion is real.
Secondly, transnational crime remains a serious
challenge to the security of Central Africa. In the
Gulf of Guinea, piracy and armed robbery now occur
with higher incidence than in the Gulf of Aden off the
Somali coast. Pirates and armed robbers have thrived
in these inconsistently controlled transboundary
waters, increasing the growth of cross-border criminal
networks and threatening the economic security of West
and Central Africa. On land, resource-rich areas in the
remote border regions of the Central African Republic
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo continue to
be exploited to support various forms of illicit trade,
including poaching.
Thirdly, Central African countries are vulnerable
to destabilization from looming threats posed by
terrorism and extremism outside the immediate
subregion. Chadian peacekeepers, deployed to support
the African-led and subsequent United Nations missions
in Mali, have been the target of recent terrorist attacks

13-57257

20/11/2013

Central African region

in Tessalit. The recent joint visit of the SecretaryGeneral and the President of the World Bank to the
Sahel highlighted the security concerns on the very
doorstep of Central Africa. The Nigerian-based militant
group Boko Haram has exploited the porous and poorly
secured border between Nigeria and Cameroon, and just
last week abducted a French Catholic priest in northern
Cameroon. Conflict between the Nigerian army and
Boko Haram has driven an estimated 8,000 Nigerian
refugees into Cameroon, among whom are suspected
insurgents.
How has UNOCA supported the subregion in
addressing these considerable challenges? UNOCA
continues to prioritize its engagement with the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS), which
remains committed to playing an important role in the
subregion on security issues. ECCAS troops remain on
the ground in the Central African Republic, and the
ECCAS-appointed mediator, President Sassou Nguesso
of the Republic of Congo, has remained engaged in
addressing the crisis. ECCAS was reinvigorated by the
appointment in August of Secretary-General Ahmad
Allam-Mi. UNOCA’s close collaboration with ECCAS
allowed us to facilitate increased dialogue between that
institution and the African Union over the deployment
of the African-led International Support Mission for the
Central African Republic.
On the critical issue of maritime insecurity in the
Gulf of Guinea, UNOCA, together with the United
Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWA), has been
a consistent and driving force behind the collective
efforts of numerous stakeholders. As a result, Central
African Heads of States and Government, along with
their counterparts in West Africa, acted decisively by
agreeing to adopt the Yaoundé Declaration establishing
a coherent interregional approach for combatting
maritime insecurity in the Gulf of Guinea. This
milestone achievement reflects the existing cooperation
among coastal States and landlocked States, as well
as three subregional organizations, across the two
subregions to address a pressing common security
concern. The subsequent activities to operationalize
the strategy reveal sustained political will to meet
commitments and an affirmation of the collaborative,
interregional process for doing so.
In our role as secretariat of the United Nations
Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions
in Central Africa (UNSAC), UNOCA has continued
to shape and guide the deliberations of Member States

S/PV.7065

on key security challenges in the subregion. During
the thirty-sixth session of the Committee in Kigali,
UNSAC member States agreed that poaching, or the
illegal killing of elephants for the sale of ivory, was a
direct threat to the security of their States. They decided
to retain the subject as a standing agenda item during
all future meetings of the Committee.
On the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA), I can report
that our joint diplomatic efforts with Ambassador
Madeira, the African Union Sepcial Envoy for the
Lord’s Resistance Army issue, have ensured continuing
regional cooperation among the governments of LRAaffected countries. In particular, the operations of the
African Union Regional Task Force resumed in August
in the Central African subregion, while the Democratic
Republic of Congo lifted border restrictions for
Regional Task Force operations conducted by foreign
contingents.
With the critical support of United States military
advisers, Regional Task Force contingents are now
fully operational. Military operations have degraded
the LRA and limited it to pursuing survival tactics.
However, recent attacks in South Sudan attributed to
the LRA are a reminder that the group remains a serious
and unpredictable threat to communities throughout
the subregion. We must therefore remain vigilant and
continue making progress on the implementation plan
for the UN regional strategy to address the threat
and impact of the LRA, which remains the guiding
framework for our collective efforts.
For the coming period, UNOCA will continue its
institutional strengthening work with ECCAS in the
area of mediation. We will continue leading on the
issue of maritime insecurity in the Gulf of Guinea,
working closely with our colleagues in UNOWA, the
three subregional organizations and international
partners, to operationalize the decisions of the Yaoundé
Summit. Together with the United Nations CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force, we will advance
the development of a counter-terrorism strategy for
Central Africa.
Given the linkages between youth unemployment,
peace and security, UNOCA will — together with the
African Development Bank, the World Bank, the United
Nations Development Programme and the International
Labour Organization — finalize a proposal and
mobilize the resources required to convene a regional
youth employment forum. We will identify areas

13-572573/21

S/PV.7065

Central African region

for cooperation with concerned Governments on the
issue of poaching. At the same time, we will continue
undertaking country assessment missions so that we
will remain well placed to identify emerging threats
and their regional implications.
On the LRA, UNOCA will continue its close
and fruitful partnership with the African Union in
achieving progress in a number of areas. We will update
the regional strategy implementation plan, with a view
to identifying the most critical needs and funding
gaps. We will enhance the existing coordination
mechanisms in order to ensure that our collective
efforts have the greatest impact. We will work with our
partners to identify long-term stabilization activities,
and our efforts will be facilitated by a recent World
Bank preliminary assessment in LRA-affected areas.
Finally, we will focus on further strengthening regional
cooperation by organizing a high-level summit on the
LRA issue.
On issues such as the situation in the Central
African Republic, maritime insecurity and the LRA,
Central African countries have demonstrated a
determination to act collectively. A visa-free travel
regime, set to go into effect in January 2014 in five
of the six countries of the Central African Economic
and Monetary Community, reflects the gravitational
pull towards greater subregional integration. Those are
encouraging trends that should be sustained.
Lastly, UNOCA will capitalize on those positive
developments by redoubling its efforts to advance
subregional security in close collaboration with
Member States and subregional organizations.
I thank the members of the Security Council for
their steadfast support to UNOCA.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Moussa for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I would particularly
like to thank Special Representative Moussa for his
statement this morning and for the continued work
of United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA) on these issues.
The Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) has blighted
the heart of Africa for over 20 years, and it remains a
violent threat to civilians across Central Africa. The

4/21

20/11/2013

United Kingdom condemns in the strongest terms the
human rights abuses that the LRA continues to commit.
But progress against that scourge is being made.
As Special Representative Moussa has told us this
morning, the concerted efforts of the affected countries,
the African Union (AU), the United Nations and other
partners, have substantially weakened the LRA. A
permanent eradication of the threat that they pose is
closer now, we believe, than ever before, but that goal
can be achieved only through sustained regional and
international focus.
Progress is being made in implementing the United
Nations regional strategy to address the threat and
reduce the impact of the activities of the LRA. However,
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
must continue to use its coordination role to deliver
across the entire strategy. The regional strategy and the
African Union Regional Cooperation Initiative against
the LRA are both essential in ending the LRA threat.
It is important that Special Representative Moussa
and African Union Special Envoy for the Lord’s
Resistance Army Madeira continue to encourage the
full implementation of both. All regional Governments
should fulfil their commitments under the Regional
Cooperation Initiative and take measures to ensure that
the Lord’s Resistance Army is not able to operate with
impunity in their territory.
The United Kingdom has provided UNICEF with
funding to protect women and children in LRA-affected
areas, but we believe more funding is needed. We urge
members of the international community to contribute
resources to ensure that the protection of civilians is at
the forefront of counter-LRA efforts. Countries affected
by the LRA would benefit from establishing standard
operating procedures for the reception and handover of
LRA women and children to civilian women and childprotection actors.
Cross-border cooperation among the United
Nations Missions in the LRA-affected countries
must be enhanced. The United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in the Central African Republic and the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan should develop and
adopt common standard operating procedures and
swift information-sharing so they can anticipate LRA
movements and imminent threats better than they can
currently do.

13-57257

20/11/2013

Central African region

The United Nations, the AU and the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) must
continue to work together to maintain a clear picture of
the LRA’s current capabilities and areas of operation.
More also needs to be done to investigate the LRA’s
possible sources of financing, including their alleged
involvement in elephant poaching and related illicit
smuggling. Cutting off the LRA’s last remaining source
of finance could be the thread that finally unravels that
deplorable group.
I also want to discuss UNOCA’s broader role in the
region. UNOCA is playing an important coordinating
role between the Economic Community of Central
African States and the African Union to tackle the
crisis in the Central African Republic and further work
on maritime security, as Special Representative Moussa
has set out for us. The United Kingdom wants to ensure
clarity on the UNOCA’s achievements. UNOCA must
continue to add real value to regional and subregional
efforts at a time when resources are tight and demands
on the United Nations system are so high. In particular,
criminality in the Gulf of Guinea threatens economic
development, peace and security in the region and has
a wider impact on international trade, energy, security
and stability.
UNOCA ably supported ECCAS, the Economic
Community of West African States and the Commission
of the Gulf of Guinea on the Heads of State summit on
maritime security held in Yaoundé in June, as we have
heard. The code of conduct concerning the repression
of piracy and the agreement among regional States to
work together to tackle maritime crime is an important
step forward. UNOCA should continue to work with the
regional economic communities and regional States as
they work to implement the code.
The main focus of UNOCA’s work should continue to
be on reducing the threat posed by the Lord’s Resistance
Army. For too long, the LRA has stifled the potential
for progress and development in Central Africa. The
United Kingdom therefore stands by and will continue
to support the work of Special Representative Moussa
and Ambassador Madeira and their offices in bringing
an end to the LRA threat once and for all.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
would like to thank Special Representative Moussa for
his briefing and for all his efforts on behalf of stability
and peace in the Central African region.

S/PV.7065

Since its founding, more than a quarter century ago,
the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) has been a constant
source of terror and suffering. Tens of thousands of
Africans have died because of its rapacious violence,
and countless young people have been compelled to
serve as underage soldiers and sex slaves.
We commend the progress achieved against the
LRA over the past several months and welcome the
renewed vigour with which a number of regional and
international partners have taken on the LRA threat.
We would all like to see the day when Joseph Kony and
those indicted with him are brought to justice and we
can pronounce the LRA a thing of the past. Important
gains are being made, but that day of reckoning is not
yet here and experience warns that we should take
nothing for granted.
For our Government, what makes the LRA threat
a key issue on the Council’s agenda is our belief
that, with sustained engagement, it is now within the
international community’s reach to eliminate the LRA
threat entirely. It is essential, therefore, that we remain
united in our determination to crush the LRA, which
has proven its willingness to wait out the international
community and to exploit to its advantage every
opportunity to regroup, such as the increased instability
in the Central African Republic over the past year.
We cannot allow the LRA to believe that it will get a
reprieve to continue intimidating and terrorizing local
populations in countries where institutions are already
fragile, governance is weak and the scale of human
suffering is high.
Success in those efforts will have ramifications that
extend beyond the LRA. Indeed, coordinated efforts
against the LRA by regional States, the African Union
(AU), the United Nations and the entire international
community serve as one of the best models of an Africanled security initiative, bolstered by international
support, bilateral partners, the Security Council and
civil society. My Government specifically commends
the AU Regional Task Force’s armed contingent from
Uganda, the Democratic People’s Republic of the
Congo and South Sudan for ramping up operations and
increasing their cooperation in recent months. Their
efforts have placed unprecedented pressure on the
LRA, reducing the number and intensity of attacks,
fragmenting its forces, encouraging defections and
shrinking by 25 per cent the size of the population
displaced by LRA-related violence over the past year.

13-572575/21

S/PV.7065

Central African region

The United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa (UNOCA) has the vital job of coordinating
United Nations activities in the region. We urge the
Secretariat to provide Special Representative Moussa
with the necessary staff and support, including at least
one full-time staff member dedicated to counter-LRA
efforts within UNOCA. We also commend the Special
Representative and AU Special Envoy Madeira for their
diplomatic efforts to ensure the resumption of Task
Force operations in the Central African Republic, along
with more wide-ranging efforts in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Their partnership is not only
crucial to the success of counter-LRA efforts overall,
but also provides a useful model for collaboration
between the AU and the United Nations.
We also encourage the United Nations Missions in
the South Sudan and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to work more closely with the AU Regional Task
Force to protect civilians, provide logistical support
and persuade LRA members to lay down their arms.
The United States is fully committed to doing its part,
and will continue to provide military advisers, airlift
support and civilian protection assistance to counterLRA efforts. We are proud of the contribution that our
special forces and other military and civilian personnel
are making to the joint effort, and hope that partners
such as the European Union will also maintain their
backing for the AU Regional Task Force.
As the LRA threat diminishes, we cannot turn our
backs on the communities that have been terrorized
by it for so long. We should begin planning now for
the day after that on which Joseph Kony and the LRA
are a thing of the past. We are concerned about reports
that several international aid organizations have
withdrawn from LRA-affected areas in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In that regard, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the World
Bank will be crucial to support for the recovery of
LRA-affected populations. The International Working
Group on the Lord’s Resistance Army, co-chaired by
the United States and the European Union, recently
identified telecommunications, road rehabilitation and
support for civil society as priority areas for support for
recovering communities. We call on global donors to
contribute to those efforts.
As Special Representative Moussa has rightly
pointed out, the LRA does not operate in a vacuum,
and a number of pressing issues that affect the region
as a whole also merit our attention. The most worrying

6/21

20/11/2013

aspect is the ongoing security, human-rights and
humanitarian crisis in the Central African Republic.
The United States Government remains committed
to finding a speedy solution that will allow for the
protection of civilians, the restoration of security and
State authority and humanitarian access in that country.
We believe that adherence to the February 2015 election
cycle laid out in the Libreville agreements remains
critical to the long-term success of stabilization efforts
in the Central African Republic. We also note that close
cooperation between the AU Regional Task Force and
any AU peacekeeping mission deployed in the Central
African Republic will be essential.
UNOCA’s efforts to combat disturbing regional
trends such as the threat of terrorism, increased
trafficking in conventional weapons, ivory poaching
and a surge in piracy through the Gulf of Guinea are
also welcome. My Government strongly supports
efforts by UNOCA to mobilize regional action on those
issues.
In conclusion, I note that we are in the midst of a
pivotal moment in the Central African region. If today
we apply the necessary forethought to invest adequate
attention and resources in a number of crises brewing
across the region, whether they involve the LRA, the
broader human-rights and humanitarian crisis in the
Central African Republic or preventing the scourges of
terrorism and piracy from taking deeper root, we have
a real opportunity to save countless lives and precious
resources, and to help to usher the region towards the
stability and prosperity that its people deserve.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Abou Moussa
for his comprehensive briefing and for presenting
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2013/671) on the
activities of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa (UNOCA) and on the areas affected by
the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA).
The complex political, security and humanitarian
crisis in the Central African Republic continues to have
an adverse impact on the stability and security of the
entire Central African subregion. We note with serious
concern the deteriorating situation in the country
due to increasing violence, widespread criminality,
the circulation of weapons and rising numbers of
refugees and internally displaced persons. The negative
impact of the crisis on the region and various regional
processes, including efforts to address the threat

13-57257

20/11/2013

Central African region

posed by the Lord’s Resistance Army, require the
swift implementation of all transitional arrangements
and the urgent restoration of the rule of law and the
reinstatement of constitutional order in the country.
We commend the mediation efforts of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) aimed
at solving the crisis, and the support that other regional
institutions have provided to ECCAS. Azerbaijan
welcomes the decision of the African Union Peace
and Security Council to authorize the deployment of
an African-led international support mission in the
Central African Republic, as well as resolution 2121
(2013), adopted by the Security Council last month.
The multifaceted challenges destabilizing the Sahel
region require a comprehensive and multidimensional
response at the national, regional and international
levels. The United Nations Integrated Strategy for the
Sahel creates a solid framework for addressing the
drivers of chronic instability in the region. Special
emphasis must be placed on enhancing coordination
and mobilizing resources to promote inclusive
economic growth in the Sahel. We therefore welcome
the Secretary-General’s continuing engagement,
including through his recent mission to the region,
aimed at galvanizing international support for the
affected countries.
Piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf of Guinea
represent another serious threat to the security and
economic development of the Central African subregion.
We fully subscribe to the Secretary-General’s call for
implementing the decisions adopted at the Yaoundé
Summit of Heads of State and Government on Maritime
Safety and Security on 24 and 25 June, which will pave
the way for strengthening subregional and interregional
cooperation in order to enhance maritime security in
the region.
We note with concern the growing menace that
poaching and illicit trading in ivory pose to sustainable
peace and stability in Central African States. Such
cross-border criminal activities, which have reached
alarming levels, are among the major sources of
financing for various transnational criminal networks
and armed groups, including the LRA. The military
and other radical measures taken by individual ECCAS
member States against wildlife traffickers should be
complemented by stronger regional collaboration and
international assistance.

S/PV.7065

We welcome the overall progress in combating the
Lord’s Resistance Army and the decrease in its attacks,
owing to resolute action by LRA-affected countries and
to operations carried out by the African Union Regional
Task Force, as well as the continuing international donor
contributions. Nevertheless, the group remains a serious
threat and a source of insecurity in Central Africa. The
goal of totally eradicating that menace necessitates the
full and uninterrupted implementation of the United
Nations and African Union LRA-related initiatives.
The attention of the Governments concerned, and the
international donor assistance, should continue to focus
on strengthening individual and collective response
capacities, addressing long-term development needs,
providing humanitarian assistance to the affected areas
and promoting return and recovery programmes there.
I wish to conclude by expressing our full support
for UNOCA’s activities and underlining its important
contribution to the advancement of peace and security in
Central Africa. Its increased cooperation with regional
and subregional arrangements is critical to tackling the
problems and challenges engulfing the region.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Abou Moussa, for his briefing.
Thanks to renewed military operations by the
Regional Task Force of the African Union (AU) and the
support of the international community, the territory
controlled by the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) is
shrinking. Reports of continued defections from the
LRA are also encouraging. In order to accelerate this
trend, disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and repatriation or resettlement programmes need
to be effectively implemented in the affected areas,
with adequate financial support. The Republic of
Korea appreciates the coordinating role played by
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
for the counter-LRA regional strategy, undertaken in
cooperation with United Nations missions and regional
organizations.
To bring to an end the atrocities committed by
the LRA in Central Africa, active cooperation among
LRA-affected countries is critical. We expect the
Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the Sudan and South Sudan to fully support
the collective efforts for the success of cross-border
operations against the LRA. It is also of concern that
the armed groups are often sustained by poaching and

13-572577/21

S/PV.7065

Central African region

the illicit trade in wildlife. Even more troubling is the
fact that these illegal activities feed on rising youth
unemployment and pose a potential threat to peace and
stability in the region. In this regard, we commend the
efforts of the Central African Economic and Monetary
Community to revive the regional economy.
The Central African Republic is becoming
a potential safe haven for the remaining LRA
operatives. Gross human rights violations continue
and transitional authorities seem unable to stop them.
The priority should therefore be to protect civilians
and provide humanitarian assistance to those in urgent
need. We in the Security Council should continue to
encourage the Central African Republic authorities to
actively cooperate with the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic
(BINUCA) and the African-led International Support
Mission in the Central African Republic to restore
public order and end impunity.
Last month, the Council enhanced BINUCA’s
mandate. The report of the Secretary-General before
us (S/2013/671) suggests various options to support the
Central African Republic. We look forward to closed
consultations in this regard in the days to come.
Regarding piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf of
Guinea, we commend the Yaoundé Summit convened in
June, which laid the groundwork for a regional strategy.
We hope that regional leaders will translate their resolve
into concrete follow-up measures. Lastly, we appreciate
the continued efforts of Special Representative Abou
Moussa and his staff, who are working in a challenging
environment.
Ms. King (Australia): I would like to thank Special
Representative Moussa for his briefing today. This is an
important opportunity for the Council to discuss all the
critical challenges facing the Central African Region
and the important role of the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) in addressing
them. I would like to focus my remarks on three
interrelated issues: addressing the crisis in the Central
African Republic, maintaining momentum on efforts to
permanently eradicate the threat posed by the Lord’s
Resistance Army (LRA), and supporting UNOCA and
regionally led efforts to address other challenges to
Central Africa’s peace and security.
First and foremost, we must address the
deteriorating security situation and grave human
rights and humanitarian crisis in the Central African

8/21

20/11/2013

Republic. We have heard stark warnings of increasing
interreligious violence in the Central African Republic
and the risk of the situation spiralling further out of
control, with devastating consequences for the country
itself and, as Mr. Moussa has said, potentially the
wider region as well. The crisis demands an urgent and
comprehensive response, and the Council must fulfil
its commitment to considering all potential options to
stabilize the situation.
Australia strongly supports the implementation
of resolution 2121 (2013), which strengthened the
mandate of the United Nations Peacebuilding Office
in the Central African Republic (BINUCA). We must
now consider the options put forward by the SecretaryGeneral on international support for the African-led
International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic (MISCA) and the potential transition to a
United Nations peacekeeping operation. In our view,
form should follow function; we should take forward
the option or options that will best address the situation
in the Central African Republic now and in the longer
term. We should maintain momentum in the coming
weeks in order to respond swiftly. We know that the
cost of inaction will be unacceptable.
Secondly, we must maintain momentum to
permanently eliminate the threat posed by the Lord’s
Resistance Army. We know all too well that the LRA
thrives in security vacuums and in environments of
weak or absent State authority. The total breakdown
in security and law and order in the Central African
Republic has given the LRA room to operate.
We welcome the resumption of the activities
of the Ugandan contingent of the African Union
(AU) Regional Task Force. Yet the LRA has had an
opportunity to regroup by retreating into rural areas
beyond the Regional Task Force’s area of operations.
This only underscores the importance of increasing
coordination between the Regional Task Force, MISCA
and BINUCA.
The threat posed by the LRA is diminished but not
extinguished. Earlier this week, we heard concerning
reports from the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) of suspected LRA attacks and abductions in
Western Equatoria — the first in South Sudan in over
two years. A resumption of LRA activity was observed
in north-east DRC earlier in November, breaking two
months of relative calm. Arrest warrants issued in
July 2005 by the International Criminal Court against

13-57257

20/11/2013

Central African region

S/PV.7065

Joseph Kony and other senior LRA remain unexecuted
eight years on.

that UNOCA has to play in conflict prevention, early
warning and mediation.

Enhanced regional and international efforts to
combat the LRA have yielded positive results. We
commend the African Union Regional Cooperation
Initiative against the Lord’s Resistance Army and the
significant progress made in operationalizing the AU
Regional Task Force. As the Secretary-General’s report
notes, military operations have degraded the LRA and
its ability to establish bases, reduced the number of
attacks, and increased pressure on LRA combatants to
defect. We need to seize the current opportunity to put
an end once and for all to this abhorrent group and to
the atrocities it has committed against civilians.

Let me conclude by reaffirming Australia’s full
support for Special Representative Moussa and UNOCA
in all their efforts.

Additional efforts are clearly needed to enhance the
implementation of the United Nations regional strategy.
UNOCA has an importance coordinating role to play
in helping to translate the strategy into tangible results
on the ground. This requires the full commitment of
all stakeholders, the LRA-affected countries — which
have primary responsibility — regional organizations,
the entire United Nations system and international
partners. As the LRA’s tactics continue to evolve, crossborder coordination and information-sharing are all the
more important to enhance the protection of civilians,
in particular women and children, who have suffered
greatly at the hands of the LRA. The United Nations
peacekeeping and political missions in the region — the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, UNMISS and
BINUCA — have a vital role to play in this regard,
and should further enhance their cooperation with the
AU Regional Task Force.
Finally, we must support UNOCA and regionally
led efforts to address other, often-related challenges to
Central Africa’s peace and security. One such challenge
is the issue of poaching and trafficking of wildlife in
the Central Africa region, which has reached alarming
levels, as noted in the Secretary-General’s report. Aside
for the ecological impact and cruelty of these practices,
such illicit activities are used to finance transnational
criminal networks and armed rebel groups, including
the LRA. It is increasingly viewed by countries of
the region as a threat to their security. We therefore
encourage further regional and international efforts
to address poaching. We welcome the assistance being
provided by UNOCA to regional efforts to address this
and other challenges facing Central Africa. I would like
to underscore Australia’s belief in the important role

Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Abou Moussa for his briefing and the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2013/671).
Many challenges undoubtedly remain in Central
Africa, as mentioned by Mr. Abou Moussa, including
ever-increasing acts of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea
and the situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which remains fragile despite the victory over
the Mouvement du 23 mars. I will focus my remarks on
two topics: the Central African Republic and the Lord’s
Resistance Army (LRA).
With regard to the Central African Republic,
I would like my statement to be heard as a warning,
given the exceptional seriousness of the humanitarian
situation in the Central African Republic, and as an
appeal. I believe that no one can underestimate the risk
of the humanitarian situation in the Central African
Republic, which could lead to killings and violence on
a massive scale if the international community does not
intervene. I can only advise participants in this meeting
to meet the representatives of the humanitarian agencies
and entities of the Organization or of non-governmental
organizations who are courageously working in the
Central African Republic.
If they were to do so, they would all hear horrific
reports of the situation of the population, who are
terrorized and at risk from gangs of bandits — let us br
frank — and, at the same time, from being immersed
in interreligious violence. The Christians are afraid of
the Muslims. The Muslims are afraid of the Christians.
They are both made up of militia who, of course, blindly
engage in violence, the primary victims of which are
civilians, including women and children. We must act
and respond very swiftly in order to prevent the worst,
which unfortunately happened 20 years ago on that
same continent.
I have said that the humanitarian situation is
extremely dangerous. The entire Central African
population, half of which is made up of children, is
affected. More than 1 million people suffer from food
insecurity and 400,000 have been displaced. There are
almost daily cases of extorsion, violence and killings

13-572579/21

S/PV.7065

Central African region

in a country where the State no longer exists. There
is no State whatsoever. There are no longer any State
authorities. There are only militia, who are making
their own laws. So we must act. My statement is also an
appeal to the international community.
I am well aware that the Central African Republic
is a country that is not well known. We do not often
think about it and is not often on the front pages.
Nevertheless, today, an extremely serious tragedy is
taking place there. It is not only a moral tragedy, which
would be sufficient to mobilize us, but also a tragedy
that may have repercussions for the stability of the
entire region. We have already seen incidents reported
on the border between the Central African Republic and
Cameroon. So there is the risk of the Central African
Republic becoming a failed State in Central Africa and
a centre of instability for all States of the region.
The States of the region have responded. We
must of course commend the efforts of the Economic
Community of Central African States and the African
Union. Those States decided to deploy the African-led
International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic. They therefore deserve the support of the
United Nations and, of course, the bilateral support
of all relevant States. At the initiative of France, the
Council will have the opportunity to consider in
detail the resources that could be used to support that
force and to find a lasting solution to the crisis in the
Central African Republic. As I have said, all those
humanitarian, political and security challenges require
all actors to cooperate. In that regard, UNOCA must
work with regional and subregional organizations.
Having talked about the the Central African
Republic and tried to convince participants and my
colleagues of the seriousness of the situation there, I
will now turn to the other major focus of my colleagues’
statements, that is, the Lord’s Resistance Army.
Here, I can only reiterate what has already been said,
namely, that I am very pleased with the recent progress
in combating that armed group, whose cruelty and
violence are extreme. We therefore encourage relevant
States and partners to continue along that path in order
to put an end to the threat.
The offensive launched by the African Union
against the LRA is a reality. We have said that. The
African Union’s Regional Task Force to fight the LRA
has proved its effectiveness. Here, we should of course
commend Uganda and other contributing regional

10/21

20/11/2013

countries for their commitment. We must now ensure
that the LRA does not benefit from a security vacuum
to prosper. Another issue linked to the situation in the
Central African Republic is to ensure that the western
part of the country does not become a safe haven for
LRA terrorists.
At the same time, we must not forget the need for
justice. We must bring to justice the principal Lord’s
Resistance Army leaders, in particular Joseph Kony,
and encourage all States concerned to increase their
cooperation and collaboration with the International
Criminal Court in that regard. Measures to protect
civilians must of course be strengthened. That means
further sharing of information and intelligence among
regional United Nations operations and offices and
between the Organization and the African Union
regional force. Access and humanitarian assistance to
those areas affected by the the Lord’s Resistance Army,
which are often by defintion very isolated and remote,
must also be made possible as soon as possible.
France supports all efforts through its contribution
to the African Peace Facility of the European Union.
With regard to the Central African Republic, members
know that France is present in Bangui and will strenthen
its presence in order to provide effective support to the
African force. It will also support LRA-affected States
bilaterally.
The LRA-affected States have a leading role to
play, together with the African Union, in the fight
against that group. Let us stand by their side.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): We would
like to thank Mr. Abou Moussa for presenting the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/671) and, in
that regard, reiterate Togo’s support for his work as
Head of the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa (UNOCA) in a very difficult situation.
The report before us clearly notes that some
Central African countries have continued their efforts
to strengthen stability, democracy, the rule of law and
the political and economic governance. The holding
of calm legislative, parliamentary and local elections
in Equatorial Guinea and Cameroon are a testimony
to that. The same goes for the military defeat of the
Mouvement du 23 mars in eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo, where that rebel group has committed
many atrocities and seriously violated human rights
and international humanitarian law.

13-57257

20/11/2013

Central African region

S/PV.7065

The hope for the unprecedented peace in that part
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, marked
by almost two decades of recurring and very bloody
tragic conflict, is clearly the result of the new strategy
of the United Nations and regional countries to
establish lasting peace, security and cooperation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes
Region.

However, given the current situation, it goes
without saying that MISCA will not be effective
without the strong financial and logistical support of the
United Nations, in particular, and of the international
community. Such support must become a reality. In
this respect, my country aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of France on the situation in
the Central African Republic.

We therefore hope that the talks in Kampala will
bring about the signing of a peace agreement to put
an end to the conflict once and for all by ensuring
accountability for the perpetrators of human rights
violations and international humanitarian law in
line with the 14 November presidential statement
(S/PRST/2013/17).

As confirmed by the Secretary-General in his report
(S/2013/671), the efforts of the international community
have certainly weakened the Lord’s Resistance Army
(LRA), but that armed group still has the capacity to
cause problems, especially in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Central African Republic. In the
Central African Republic in particular, the prevailing
situation has had a negative impact on the fight against
the LRA, which has concentrated most of its fighters
there, posing an even greater threat to the civilian
population, especially women and children. An attack
by that armed group was even witnessed in South
Sudan, although the country had seen no LRA attack
since the second half of 2011.

While there is now a wave of optimism in some
countries of the region, others, such as the Central
African Republic, continue to face tragic situations
and many security and humanitarian challenges.
Indeed, since the forceful seizure of power by the
Séléka rebellion, chaos has reigned in Central African
Republic. The current situation, which is marked by
communal and interreligious clashes, leads us to warn
that if the international community does not intervene
in the most robust possible way, the Central African
Republic risks falling into total anarchy.
Given that situation, we commend the work of
the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS), the African Union, the United Nations
and other actors and partners of the Central African
Republic to enhance security for civilians, howsoever
slightly, and provide the required humanitarian
assistance to hundreds of thousands of refugees and
internally displaced persons. Moreover, we believe that
a return to constitutional order through the holding of
free and democratic elections within a reasonable time
frame is one way for the Central African Republic to
emerge from crisis, and we express our gratitude to all
those working to that end.
Moreover, the decision to deploy the African-led
International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic (MISCA), and most importantly the adoption
by the Council of resolution 2121 (2013) shed light on
the measures taken by the international community to
face the threat of the destabilization of the entire region
if instability and violence were to take root in Central
African Republic.

However, we welcome the fact that progress
has been made in recent months in the fight against
the LRA. Among those advances, we would cite the
operationalization of the Regional Task Force and the
approval granted to the South Sudanese army to track
LRA fighters within the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The results obtained thus far show that if the
various stakeholders involved in this struggle, including
donors and the international community, were to deploy
greater financial and logistic efforts, the LRA would be
totally destroyed.
However, if that struggle is to be successful, the
Chief of the LRA, Joseph Kony, and his principal
lieutenants must be caught and brought to justice. To
that end, it remains essential that all States of the region
enhance their cooperation in executing the international
arrest warrants issued against these criminals. Their
arrest would also allow for a rapid surrender of fighters,
who should thereafter be supported through a properly
managed process of disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation and reintegration.
Despite the efforts made and tangible results
achieved here and there, the Central African region
still faces substantial challenges. Sea piracy is without
a doubt among such challenges. We welcome the efforts
being made by the countries concerned in that respect,

13-5725711/21

S/PV.7065

Central African region

with the support of various partners, and believe that
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
should be afforded the appropriate support to promote
a rapid implementation of the regional strategy against
that phenomenon.
We also express our serious concern about the
poaching and killing of elephants and other wildlife
that are taking place in some countries of the region.
Obviously, the sale of ivory and other products from
such poaching is a primary source of financing for the
activities of criminal groups and rebels. We believe
that the fight against that growing phenomenon must
involve actions upstream and down. In other words,
urgent measures must be taken not only in countries
where poaching is rampant, but also in countries of
transit and destination for the products of poaching.
In this respect, we call upon the States concerned to
strengthen their cooperation in the fight against such
acts and to enhance, without delay and with the support
of partners, security measures in parks and other
protected areas where these animals live.
In that regard, we welcome the decision of the
United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa, at its thirty-sixth
ministerial meeting held in Kigali from 20 to 23 August,
to include the issue of the fight against poaching on
the agenda of its next meeting. We further welcome the
launch, at the high-level meeting co-hosted by Gabon
and Germany, on the sidelines of the General Assembly
at its sixty-eighth session, a three-year fundraising
programme to fight poaching and illegal trafficking
in endangered species. The combination of all those
initiatives will surely curb that phenomenon, which
not only threatens the survival of protected species but
above all feeds conflict in the region.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting today. I also thank Mr. Abou
Moussa, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa (UNOCA) for his briefing. I take this
opportunity to commend UNOCA for its consistent
efforts and involvement in all regional initiatives aimed
at restoring peace and stability in the Central African
region.
As it is at the heart of the continent, the Central
African region may be a yardstick for the situation
in Africa. The subregion is faced with extreme cases
of ineffective State authority over some territories

12/21

20/11/2013

and porous borders. That is particularly true for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Central
African Republic. The region is plagued by uncontrolled
armed groups, including terrorist movements like the
Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA), gangs of thugs like
the ex-Séléka and the “anti-balaka”, but above all, the
genocidal movement called the Forces démocratiques
de libération du Rwanda (FDLR), which continues to
spread and propagate its genocidal ideology 19 years
after the genocide perpetrated against the Tutsi in
Rwanda.
We have heard the statement made by our colleague
the French representative. He warned all of us of what
is going on in the Central African Republic, where
Muslims and Christians are killing each other. The
Council can imagine what having the FDLR in that
melting pot would mean.
Days ago, we all heard on the news that armed
groups from the Central African Republic carried
out an attack in Cameroon. That just proves the
dangers posed by those armed groups not only to the
countries they operate in, but also to neighbouring
countries. Therefore, we can never overemphasize
the need to eradicate those negative forces. Moreover,
it is unfortunate that, during the reporting period, as
highlighted by the current report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2013/671), the subregion was dominated by
the further deterioration of the overall situation in the
Central African Republic.
That being said, we commend the newly awakened
spirit of ownership and cooperation among regional
leaders. That was exhibited by the pledge of $50 million
in support of the efforts of the Economic Community
of Central African States (ECCAS) in the Central
African Republic made by the Heads of State at the
extraordinary summit of the Central African Economic
and Monetary Community (CEMAC), held on 14 June
in Libreville. It was also demonstrated by the outcome
of the 36th ministerial meeting of the United Nations
Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions
in Central Africa, held in Rwanda in August, which also
discussed the situation in the Central African Republic.
We take this opportunity to commend the efforts of the
African Union (AU), ECCAS and the United Nations,
through the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in the Central African Republic and UNOCA, in
the search for a lasting solution to the current crisis in
the Central African Republic.

13-57257

20/11/2013

Central African region

Rwanda further welcomes the decision of the
Heads of State of CEMAC to abolish visa requirements
for nationals of the six CEMAC countries, effective
1 January 2014. We believe that this is a major milestone
towards regional integration and economic cooperation.
If the people of the Central African region are to fully
benefit in a timely manner from that new development,
there is a need to stabilize the entire region, and
especially to curb the activities of all negative forces in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Central
African Republic.
The Secretary-General’s report reveals that despite
combined efforts, the Lord’s Resistance Army remains
a major security, humanitarian and human rights
threat. Although the figures released by the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs show
a decline in the total number of LRA incidents, the
related killings, abductions and massive displacement
of civilian populations remain concerning.
We strongly condemn the continued violations
committed against children by the LRA and its use
of rape, sexual slavery, sexual violence and forced
recruitment of child soldiers. We commend the
successful efforts of the African Union Regional
Task Force military operations to weaken the LRA.
In that regard, we congratulate the troop-contributing
countries, especially Uganda, on their efforts.
We remain gravely concerned by the humanitarian
situation of over 350,000 displaced persons in LRAaffected countries, and urge the international community
to maintain its support in favour of the displaced
populations. We call for increased humanitarian
assistance to those who are most vulnerable, and urge
the Central African Republic authorities to assume
their primary role in providing security and safety to
displaced persons. In that regard, we call on the Central
African Republic to allow and facilitate, as appropriate,
access by humanitarian agencies to those who have
been most affected.
Poaching in the Central African region has
increased to worrying levels. At the 36th ministerial
meeting of the United Nations Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa,
held in Rwanda in August, it was revealed that the
region had lost 70 per cent of its elephants in the past
10 years. It is worth noting that poachers and armed
groups use sophisticated weapons acquired from the
income generated from the illegal ivory trade to kill

S/PV.7065

innocent civilians and destabilize nations. That is
why the practice remains a serious security threat to
affected countries in the region and hence requires
increased determination on the part of regional actors,
in coordination with the countries of destination, which
are located mainly outside the continent.
Let me conclude by thanking the European Union
and the United States for their invaluable support of
the implementation of the AU Regional Cooperation
Initiative against the Lord’s Resistance Army. We also
welcome the pledges made by Luxembourg and the
United Kingdom towards the implementation of the
United Nations regional strategy. We call upon other
bilateral and multilateral partners to join regional
efforts in the fight against one of the most criminal
and brutal armed groups of recent decades. Rwanda
remains confident that with ongoing, sustained regional
and international efforts, the LRA and its notorious
commanders may be living their last days.
Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): I, too,
wish to thank Mr. Abou Moussa, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his briefing. I welcome
Ambassador Madeira, Special Envoy of the African
Union (AU) on the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA)
issue. We applaud the efforts of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) and its
commitment alongside the subregional organizations
to bolstering the security and institutional capacities of
the States of the region.
My country welcomes the joint and individuals
efforts undertaken by countries of the Central African
region to address multiple regional challenges. The
agreement made within the Central African Economic
and Monetary Community to waive visa requirements,
starting in January 2014, is an important sign of those
States’ willingness to collectively face security and
economic challenges affecting development.
Mr. Abou Moussa, in his comments, and the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2013/671) describe the
challenges to the region resulting from instability in the
Central African Republic and the spread of rebel groups
to the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo,
as well as the insecurity resulting from the situation
in the Gulf of Guinea and the Sahel region — all of
which demand a coordinated, urgent response of the
international community.
The situation in the Central African Republic
continues to unravel, especially at the security and

13-5725713/21

S/PV.7065

Central African region

humanitarian levels. There is a risk of dangerous
consequences affecting the country and the entire
region if the situation is not brought under control as
soon as possible. To that end, we welcome international
and regional efforts aimed at rapidly restoring stability
in the Central African Republic and the region.
The Economic Community of Central African
States (ECCAS) has played an exemplary role through
its efforts to mitigate the crisis in Central Africa at
the political and security levels by strengthening the
Central Africa Multinational Force. It is essential that
UNOCA continues to strengthen its cooperation with
ECCAS aimed at resolving the conflict in the Central
African Republic, especially concerning all issues
of common interest. In that context, we welcome the
meeting between Mr. Abou Moussa and Mr. Ahmad
Allam-Mi, whose nomination as Secretary-General
of ECCAS we applaud. Moreover, we commend the
efforts of UNOCA, as the secretariat of the United
Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security
Questions in Central Africa, in organizing the 36th
ministerial meeting of the Advisory Committee in
Kigali, in August.
The intensification of cross-border trafficking is a
further source of concern. There have been forty-three
incidents of piracy and armed robbery at sea recorded
in the past nine months, exceeding the number of such
incidents in the Horn of Africa, which is considered
to be the most highly-impacted region of Africa.
According to the International Maritime Organization,
it is also feared that piracy is spreading throughout
Africa’s Atlantic coast. We endorse the SecretaryGeneral’s call for the implementation of the Yaoundé
Declaration adopted in Yaoundé in June.
The level of trafficking and illicit trade in ivory in
the subregion is considered among the highest in the
region. According to the report of the United Nations
Environment Programme, revenue from such illegal
activity finances transnational criminal economy,
terrorist networks and rebel groups, including the Lord’s
Resistance Army. In that regard, we commend the
decision of the States members of ECCAS to carry out
intensive, coordinated action against poaching, which
will make it possible to cut off sources of financing to
rebel groups and to the LRA.
Security deficits in the Sahel region have also
impacted the Central African and Maghreb regions
as the firearms of terrorists and foreign combatants

14/21

20/11/2013

terrorism represent additional threats. In that
context, Morocco — which is linked by traditional
ties of cooperation and friendship with the countries
of the Central African region, the Sahel and West
Africa — organized on 13 and 14 November an
international ministerial conference on border security
in countries of the Sahel and Maghreb regions. The
conference concluded with the adoption of the Rabat
Declaration on establishing a cooperation network
linking border monitoring and security services of the
countries of the region, and on shareing experiences
in that sphere. The lessons learned in such exchanges
could be duplicated in the countries of Central Africa.
Morocco will also host the upcoming summit of the
Community of Sahelo-Saharan States, which will
provide an opportunity to strengthen subregional
cooperation and implement decisions taken at prior
summits.
With regard to the Lord’s Resistance Army,
while the reports of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) indicate a reduced
number of incidents, the numbers of people who
have lost their life and of kidnappings remained high
between January and September as compared to the
same period in 2012. LRA attacks have created a
worrisome humanitarian situation for thousands of
internally displaced persons, including 350,000 in the
Central African Republic, according to OCHA.
Morocco reiterates its condemnation of the
atrocities and violations of human rights committed by
the LRA and calls for coordinated cooperation efforts
at the regional and international levels to address those
plagues. In that regard, we welcome the role played by
UNOCA in implementing the United Nations regional
strategy for the fight against the LRA. My country,
which has long been committed to international efforts
in peacekeeping through the presence of its troops in
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic People’s Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) in that country, joins with international
and regional efforts to halt the scourge of terrorism
in Central Africa and the Sahel and will continue to
provide the necessary humanitarian and medical
assistance within the framework of the MONUSCO
mandate.
Finally, we would like to express our support for
UNOCA and Special Representative Abou Moussa for
their efforts aimed at preventing conflict in Africa.

13-57257

20/11/2013

Central African region

Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Abou Moussa for his briefing.
We agree with the concerns expressed today with
regard to the negative impacts of the armed conflict
in the Central African Republic on the situation in
the subregion. While it is true that the crisis in that
country stems, inter alia, from illegal flows of foreign
fighters and weapons through the porous borders of the
Sahel, we also see in it the clear impact of the Libyan
crisis. Undoubtedly, the normalization of the military,
political and humanitarian situation in the Central
African Republic is essential for peace, security and
stability in the subregion as a whole.
We welcome the intensification of cooperation by
interested countries and organizations in combating
piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf of Guinea. We
attach great importance to the practical implementation
of the decisions taken at the anti-piracy summit of
States of Central and Western Africa held in June.
Since the beginning of this year, we have noted
a general reduction in the activities of the Lord’s
Resistance Army (LRA). Under pressure from the
African Union (AU) Regional Task Force, LRA fighters
are keeping a low profile and have split into small
groups and staged essentially minor robberies. Among
the forms of progress we have seen, we would note a
drop from 440,000 to 350,000 refugees and internally
displaced persons that have resulted from the activities
of criminals in the region.
Nevertheless, bandits have once again reappeared,
taking advantage of the absence of State authority in
the neighbouring regions of South Sudan and a power
vacuum in the Central African Republic. The successful
combating of gangs depends first and foremost on
coordinated efforts by regional players themselves.
Along those lines, we welcome the deployment of the
more than 3,000 of the planned 5,000 troops for the AU
Regional Task Force.
However, settling this issue through military means
alone is impossible. There is a need for a comprehensive
approach, including measures to bolster the security
services of the countries of the subregion, to disarm,
demobilize and reintegrate fighters, to resolve pressing
social and economic issues, to provide humanitarian
assistance and to strengthen State authority.
In conclusion, we would like to note the contribution
of United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa

S/PV.7065

in collective efforts to ensure peace and security in
the subregion. We welcome growing cooperation
between the Office and regional partners in such areas
as preventive diplomacy, mediation, the provision of
good offices, peacebuilding and combating terrorism,
piracy and armed robbery on the high seas, as well as
the illegal spread of weapons.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank Mr. Abou
Moussa, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, for his briefing. We deeply appreciate the
valuable work being done by the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) under his
leadership.
The Central African subregion stands at a
crossroads today, facing many emerging challenges to
its security and stability. The region has been coping
with the negative consequences of the fragile security
situation in the Sahel, the proliferation of weapons and
terrorism, cross-border organized crime, piracy and
the threat posed for several years now by the Lord’s
Resistance Army (LRA).
The principal threat to the peace and stability of the
entire subregion emanates from the fast-deteriorating
security and humanitarian situation in the Central
African Republic. The near-total collapse of State
institutions in the Central African Republic, with the
resulting security vacuum, the perpetual and widening
cycles of reprisals and increasingly ethnic and religious
violence, has led to disastrous repercussions for the
country and its neighbours.
The serious problems in the Central African
Republic require a unified and well-coordinated
regional and international response in order to neutralize
the immediate security threats and build the capacity of
State institutions. UNOCA has an important role to play
in coordinating such regional and international efforts.
The Office should evolve with the changing situation in
the region. UNOCA’s vital role in preventive diplomacy
and mediation needs to be strengthened.
There has been a degradation of the LRA as a result
of the successful operations conducted by the African
Union Regional Task Force, but the fight against
the LRA is far from over, as the group continues to
brutalize and kill civilians in many areas. It is important
that the momentum against the LRA be maintained
through sustained political and operational support
to the Regional Task Force and through a broader
international strategy.

13-5725715/21

S/PV.7065

Central African region

The Regional Task Force continues to lack the
critical resources and enablers needed to sustain
pressure against the LRA. Those deficits must be
redressed as a matter of priority. The implementation
of the United Nations regional strategy to address the
threat and impact of the activities of the LRA will also
require more concerted efforts for resource mobilization
and coordination at the regional and subregional levels.
The international community also needs to step up
efforts to address the humanitarian situation in the
LRA-affected areas.
The primary responsibility for protecting civilians
against the threat posed by the LRA lies with the
regional States themselves. All international efforts are
meant to support their efforts and help them build State
security institutions.
Addressing the scourge of the LRA requires a
comprehensive approach to eliminating and bringing to
justice the remaining LRA leadership. In that regard,
it is important to continue to build the capacity of
the political institutions and judicial systems in the
States and areas within those States targeted by the
LRA. Political stability and strong national security
institutions in the LRA-affected region will prevent the
group from taking advantage of the security vacuum, as
demonstrated by the recent crisis in the Central African
Republic.
Pakistan remains strongly committed to the peace,
prosperity and long-term stability of the Central African
subregion. We hope that the region will continue to
receive the full political support and attention of the
international community to address the numerous
existing and emerging challenges in the region.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would also like to thank Mr. Abou Moussa, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
presentation of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/671).
At the outset, like my colleagues, I would like
to highlight the serious situation of insecurity in the
Central African Republic, where abuses and violations
of human rights are a daily and alarming reality, not
to mention the growing tensions and intercommunal
strife with religious connotations that is spreading
throughout the country.
The estimate of the United Nations Office of the
High Commissioner for Refugees shows that some

16/21

20/11/2013

400,000 people have been displaced from their homes
in itself constitutes a desperate plea for help. In
addition, the situation has already affected the entire
subregion. More than 63,000 people have had to seek
refuge in neighbouring countries, generating increased
humanitarian problems and needs and causing tensions
in bordering countries. While the deployment of the
African-led International Support Mission for the
Central African Republic is a positive development,
we must recall that the crisis is complex and requires a
broad and comprehensive solution that addresses more
than just the security situation. The Security Council
should consider without delay but in depth what steps to
take to stabilize the situation in the country if we wish
to avoid irreversible damage and human suffering and
loss of life.
With regard to illegal elephant poaching and the
trafficking of ivory, we share the Secretary-General’s
concerns that these activities fuel the international
criminal economy and finance transnational organized
crime and the many armed groups that are active in the
region, such as the Lord’s Resistance Army. I would
also point to the flow of arms and combatants across
porous borders from the Sahel region down towards
the Central African subregion. Given the information
received by Mr. Moussa, and as reflected in the report
of the Secretary-General on the existence of “a wellknown corridor for illicit trade, passing from Darfur to
the Central African Republic” (S/2013/671, para. 11), we
urge the authorities to take effective measures to close
this corridor. The arms embargo and sanctions pursuant
to resolution 1591 (2005) must be strictly enforced.
Mr. Michel Djotodia, head of the transitional
Government of the Central African Republic, has said
that he would take extraordinary measures to remedy
the critical situation of former Séléka fighters. I believe
that the Security Council should strive to understand
what such extraordinary measures would consist of.
Influential voices from a number of organizations and
States — including Mr. Dieng on 1 November at the
Council’s Arria Formula meeting — are describing the
situation as pre-genocidal.
Argentina welcomes the efforts of the African
Union and the Economic Community of Central African
States to fight the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA). We
commend the work of the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) in support of
regional efforts to prevent conflict, promote justice
and the rule of law, and strengthen peace and security

13-57257

20/11/2013

Central African region

in countries of Central Africa. We note the optimism
expressed in the Secretary-General’s report before us
(S/2013/671) about the decline in LRA attacks as a
result of the regional efforts led by the African Union
through the Regional Task Force. However, we must
recognize that a number of issues remain pending and
topical. Joseph Kony and other LRA leaders continue
to evade justice. Attacks, kidnappings and the killing
of civilians continue alongside human rights violations,
especially against women and children. Impunity
cannot be tolerated.
Finally, we call upon UNOCA to pursue its efforts
and in particular to support activities to disarm,
demobilize, repatriate, reintegrate and resettle LRA
elements and to cooperate in ending this threat once
and for all through a long-term solution.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa (UNOCA), Mr. Abou Moussa, for his
comprehensive briefing, including on efforts to counter
the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA).
Significant progress has been made in operations
against the LRA. However, the LRA continues to pose
a serious threat to the region, especially to civilians.
On 7 November, for the first time in nearly two years,
attacks were reported in South Sudan. We must
therefore redouble our efforts to implement the United
Nations regional strategy to counter the threat of the
LRA.
We also welcome the progress made in the
implementation of the Regional Cooperation Initiative
of the African Union against the LRA. Contingents of
the Regional Task Force from Uganda, South Sudan
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo are now
fully operational. We must now mobilize the resources
and materiel essential to the effective functioning of
the force. In that context, I would like to announce
that, following the meeting of the international
working group on the LRA in which we participated on
4 October in Brussels and at the request of the African
Union, the Luxembourg authorities have decided to
provide support for the operation of the headquarters
of the Regional Task Force located in Yambio, South
Sudan.
It is essential that the United Nations and the
African Union continue to work hand-in-hand. Joint
missions conducted in the Central African Republic by

S/PV.7065

the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
the Special Envoy of the African Union, Ambassador
Francisco Madeira, are good examples of the synergies
that can be created.
Member States of the region also have a role to play.
In particular, we encourage them to cooperate in the
execution of arrest warrants issued by the International
Criminal Court in July 2005 against Joseph Kony,
Okot Odhiambo and Dominic Ongwen. Accused of
war crimes and crimes against humanity — including
murders, rapes and the recruitment of children — these
main LRA leaders must be brought to justice.
Women and children are the main victims
of the LRA. In this context, I would stress four
recommendations contained in the conclusions on
the situation of child victims of the LRA, adopted on
19 April by the Working Group of the Security Council
on Children and Armed Conflict.
First, it is important that peacekeeping operations
and special political missions deployed by the United
Nations in the region have sufficient means to protect
children. Secondly, the African Union is encouraged to
include child protection measures in the activities of the
Regional Task Force. Thirdly, the armed forces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central African
Republic and South Sudan are encouraged to develop
standing instructions, similar to those adopted by the
Uganda People’s Defence Force, governing the care of
children rescued from the LRA and their delivery to
civilian child protection agencies. Fourthly, donors are
invited to mobilize resources needed, especially for the
reintegration of children formerly associated with the
LRA.
I turn now to the situation in the Central African
Republic, which is deteriorating continuously in every
way, eight months after the Séléka rebels took over. I
share the concern expressed by my French colleague.
Systematic and gross violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law continue to be
committed with impunity across the country. We are
also highly alarmed by the rising tensions and secterian
violence with religious overtones, which according to
some observers, are harbingers of genocide.
The Security Council must act to prevent the worst
and decisively support the efforts of the Economic
Community of Central African States and the African
Union in the Central African Republic. We welcome
the Secretary-General’s report of 15 November

13-5725717/21

S/PV.7065

Central African region

(S/2013/677) detailing the options available to support
the African-led International Support Mission for
the Central African Republic, including the option to
turn the Mission into a United Nations peacekeeping
operation. Luxembourg is ready to contribute actively
to discussions for the early adoption of a resolution that
could change the situation on the ground, especially
in the field of civil protection and the promotion and
protection of human rights.
Before concluding, I would like to acknowledge
the joint work done by UNOCA and the United Nations
Office for West Africa in the fight against piracy in the
Gulf of Guinea. This phenomenon is indeed a growing
threat to the economies of the States concerned and to
trade and international relations in the region. We are
therefore pleased that the regional summit of Heads of
State and Government on maritime piracy and armed
robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea, which took place
in Yaoundé on 24 and 25 June, was able to establish the
foundations for a joint regional strategy to combat that
scourge.
Finally, we encourage the Special Representative
to continue to support the fight against poaching
and ivory trafficking in the region. This is a case of
large-scale illegal activities whose proceeds, as the
Secretary-General’s report points out, are used to
finance transnational criminal networks and armed
rebel groups, including the LRA. They must be
combated effectively if we want to establish lasting
peace in Central Africa.
I conclude by commending the draft presidential
statement that has been prepared by the United
Kingdom. The statement provides the Council an
opportunity to reaffirm its determination to combat the
scourge of the LRA and to face the serious challenge
confronting the Central African region.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Our delegation would like to thank the Special
Representative and Head of the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa (UNOCA), Mr. Abou Moussa,
for his updated presentation of the latest events in the
subregion. We also thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2013/671).
It is obvious that the Central African Republic
and the potential impact of the crisis on neighbouring
countries are at the centre of our concerns in this
region, as evident in the reports of numerous violations
of human rights and ethnic and religious violence

18/21

20/11/2013

affecting the civilian population. We hope that, with the
adoption of resolution 2121 (2013), it will be possible to
start seeing some improvements on the ground.
Clearly, the consequences of the crisis are being
experienced at the subregional level. We therefore
decisively support UNOCA’s efforts in support of the
Economic Community of Central African States and
the African Union in their efforts to plan for and deploy
the International Support Mission for the Central
African Republic. Moreover, we commend UNOCA’s
support to initiatives aimed at grappling other regional
challenges, specifically piracy and maritime insecurity
in the Gulf of Guinea. We think that the cooperation
extended by UNOCA for the summit of Heads of State
and Government on maritime piracy and armed robbery
at sea in the Gulf of Guinea, held in Cameroon in July,
was key.
We encourage UNOCA to redouble its efforts to
support the different Central African States to address
the problem of the illegal exploitation of natural
resources, specifically the illegal hunting of elephants.
That phenomenon has two alarming consequences
that need to be stopped: the poaching of elephants and
the use of the proceeds from those illegal activities
by international criminal networks and armed groups
to finance their activities — profiting from natural
resources, such as ivory, whose loss is irreparable. We
commend the measures taken by various subregional
Governments to end the problem, but they are not
enough. We hope that immediate measures will be
taken to tackle the issue.
Our delegation believes that it is important for
UNOCA to continue to coordinate efforts to build peace
in the region, especially in the areas of strengthening
institutions, electoral processes, mediation and good
offices for conflict prevention. We hope that the next
meeting of the United Nations Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa, to
be held in December, will be successful and that will
generate proposals to improve subregional security.
With regard to the ongoing threat of the Lord’s
Resistance Army (LRA), we condemn that criminal
group’s ongoing criminal activities in remote areas
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central
African Republic and South Sudan. We welcome the
operationalization of the African Union Regional
Task Force to whom some credit should be attributed
for reducing the number of LRA attacks. Despite its

13-57257

20/11/2013

Central African region

operational success and reports of weakening of the
LRA, efforts must be sustained to completely eliminate
this armed group, and especially to honour the arrest
warrants issued by the International Criminal Court
against Joseph Kony and the other commanders of the
LRA for war crimes and crimes against humanity.
We reiterate our support for the United Nations
regional strategy. Unfortunately, many of the projects
under the strategy do not have the requisite funding. We
hope that the international community will continue to
support those efforts. Indeed, the strategy includes a
tangible plan through which it is possible to address the
short and long-term needs of the people living LRAaffected areas.
To conclude, we would like to express our concern
about the humanitarian situation in LRA-affected
areas, including displaced persons and refugees.
We commend the work of UNICEF and national and
international non-governmental organizations to care
for boys and girls who have been rescued and separated
from the LRA.
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Francisco Madeira, Special
Envoy of the African Union for Lord’s Resistance Army
Issues, to participate in today’s meeting.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of China.
At present, the Central African region is
experiencing rapid economic growth. The process of
regional integration has made positive progress. The
situation in the Great Lakes Region has visibly improved,
and the fight against the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA)
has yielded positive results. Regional countries and
organizations have strengthened their willingness and
enhanced their capacity to maintain peace and stability.
China welcomes all those developments.
However, peace and stability in the Central African
region still faces many challenges. China is concerned
about the continued volatility in the Central African
Republic and the serious humanitarian situation
and hopes that the parties concerned in that country
will immediately cease all violence and resolve their
differences through dialogue and consultation.
Recently, the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo has made positive progress. We encourage
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the countries

S/PV.7065

in the Great Lakes region to seize the current positive
momentum, continue to strengthen cooperation and
work together towards restoring durable peace, stability
and development in the region.
China hopes that the international community,
on the basis of respect for the sovereignty of the
countries concerned, fully leverages the leadership and
coordination abilities enjoyed by the United Nations and
the relevant regional organizations, works in synergy
so as to jointly fight piracy in the Gulf of Guinea and
the terrorist and extremist forces in the Sahel region.
Furthermore, the international community should also
pay attention to the effect that the situation in other
parts of Africa might have on the Central African
region, strengthen coordination and adopt a holistic
approach in order to address the situation.
China strongly condemns the LRA, which has
continued to attack and harass civilians in several
countries and calls upon that group to immediately
cease its illegal activities, proceed to disarm and take
part in the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration,
repatriation and resettlement programmes.
We commend the efforts by regional countries
to fight the LRA forces and to support the ongoing
efforts of the African Union to implement the Regional
Cooperation Initiative. We welcome the fact that the
United Nations has taken the initiative to cooperate
with the African Union to fight the LRA and we hope
that the international community will be forthcoming
in providing financial assistance to the United Nations
and the African Union to ensure that the relevant
initiatives can be effectively implemented.
Since its inception approximately two years ago,
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA) has made tremendous efforts in terms of
coordination and facilitation to maintain regional peace
and stability and to fight the LRA. China expresses
its appreciation in that connection. We stand ready to
continue to support UNOCA and Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Abou Moussa to discharge
their mandate and to continue to play a positive and
constructive role in maintaining peace, stability and
development in the Central African region.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to Mr. Madeira.

13-5725719/21

S/PV.7065

Central African region

Mr. Madeira: Let me first of all thank you,
Mr. President, for allowing me to address this body. Let
me also thank all the members of the Security Council
for their unanimous support and encouragement for the
efforts that are being made to put an end to the activities
of the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA).
Further to my statement in the Council in June 2012
(see S/PV.6796) on the progress by the African Union
in the operationalization of its Regional Cooperation
Initiative for the Elimination of the Lord’s Resistance
Army, I would like to highlight for the Council the
subsequent progress made in the region by the African
Union (AU) in coordination with troop-contributing
countries, with the support of United States special
rorces, the European Union and the United Nations
offices and missions on the ground, very particularly
the efforts deployed by my colleague Mr. Abou Moussa
and the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa (UNOCA).
The Council may recall that, in January, the Joint
Support and Coordination Mechanism adopted the key
mission documents for the African Union Regional
Task Force, namely, the strategic directives, the
concept of operations, standard operating procedures
for the handling of persons suspected of involvement in
LRA activities, and the rules of engagement. Later, on
13 February, the Congolese armed forces handed over to
the Task Force a contingent of 500 troops, in a ceremony
that the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and I witnessed in Dungu. Those two events marked
the end of the first phase of the operationalization of
the Regional Task Force, the military component of
the AU-led Regional Cooperation Initiative for the
elimination of the LRA.
However, it was difficult to enter into the second
phase, which consisted of the commencement of a
military operation, due to serious logistical challenges
faced by the contingents, particularly those from the
Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and South Sudan. That left the Ugandan
contingent, supported by United States special forces,
to continue conducting counter-LRA operations in the
Central African Republic until July. They nonetheless
achieved several major successes, which included the
killing of 9 LRA fighters, the reception of 14 defectors
and the recovery of 17 modern fire arms, 4 traditional
weapons, 1,429 pieces of ammunition and 6 pieces of
ivory.

20/21

20/11/2013

That momentum suffered a major setback following
the coup d’ėtat that took place in Bangui on 24 March.
The then prevailing situation generated tension between
Séléka and the Regional Task Force, forcing the latter
and United States special forces to suspend operations
in the Central African Republic. Meanwhile the LRA
exploited the lull in operations to reorganize, step up
cross-border movements between Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Central African Republic and carry
out attacks on villages and displace civilians in the
Mbomou and Haut-Mbomou prefectures of the Central
African Republic.
The situation was further complicated by the attack
in Obo town on 24 May by a group of 87 armed Arrow
Boys from Tumbura,Western Equatoria state of South
Sudan. The Regional Task Force apprehended 42 of the
attackers and handed them over to the International
Committee of the Red Cross for repatriation to South
Sudan. By July, the Regional Task Force had repatriated
80 civilians, including the Arrow Boys.
The Obo situation regenerated the tension between
Séléka and the Regional Task Force, commanded
by the African Union, with the authorities in Bangui
agitating to deploy Séléka troops in the Obo, HautMbomou prefecture, which was being controlled by
the Regional Task Force. However, through my joint
diplomatic efforts with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, mutual trust and confidence were
built between the new leadership of the Central African
Republic and the African Union, and the tension was
diffused. We also obtained an official commitment
from the head of the National Transition Council in the
Central African Republic, Mr. Michel Djotodia, for the
continued implementation of the Regional Cooperation
Initiative, including the resumption of the Regional Task
Force military operations in the country. Meanwhile,
between July and August, the various contingents of
the Regional Task Force underwent retraining and
counter-LRA combat rehearsals, facilitated by United
States special forces.
On the diplomatic front, working in close cooperation
and coordination with the United States of America, I
managed to obtain a green light from the authorities of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo for the Regional
Task Force to conduct cross-border operations against
the LRA on Congolese territory — something that was
not happening before. That was a major breakthrough.

13-57257

20/11/2013

Central African region

I am happy to inform the Council that the
developments to which I have referred, together with
the extension of United States training and logistical
support to all the Task Force contingents, paved way
for the resumption of its military operations in the
Central African Republic on 9 August, as well as the
operationalization of the Congolese and the South
Sudanese contingents in September.
Henceforth, the Task Force, with a current total
strength of 3,114 men, made up of 29 headquarters
staff, 2,000 Ugandan soldiers, 500 South Sudanese,
500 Congolese, and 85 Central Africans who are not
members of the Séléka, resumed operations against
LRA in the Central African Republic on 9 August.
The operations are ongoing, on a high tempo and with
intense intelligence collection, including the destruction
of LRA camps and denying them permanent bases in
all sectors.
The current military pressure has kept the LRA
on the run, including its leader Joseph Kony. That
heightened pressure has forced the LRA to try his
time-tested tricks of buying time by duping the
authorities of the Central African Republic into
negotiations to purportedly allow Kony and his LRA
to surrender and resettle in Nzako. According to Task
Force reports we have received, Kony only used that
window of opportunity to move many of his fighters
and relocate them further up to the north-eastern part
of the Central African Republic. The Regional Task
Force will therefore not relent on the military pressure

S/PV.7065

against the LRA until Kony and his top commanders,
particularly those wanted by the International Criminal
Court, surrender or are removed from the battlefield
and taken to the Court.
The current momentum needs to be sustained with
adequate funding and logistical support to enhance
our objective of eliminating the LRA. I am happy to
know that all the members of the Security Council
have stressed that aspect. Funding and equipping
the Regional Task Force headquarters with robust
communications remains a critical requirement in
facilitating its ability to effectively plan, coordinate and
monitor the ongoing operations in all sectors. I would
like to take this opportunity to thank Luxembourg
for its very generous gesture to help the headquarters
become more operational.
I would also like to take this opportunity to convey
the appreciation of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, Ms. Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma,
to the LRA-affected countries, the United States
Administration, the European Union and the United
Nations for their active engagement on ensuring success
on the LRA issue.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Madeira for his statement.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

13-5725721/21
