S/PV.7783

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7783rd meeting

Thursday, 6 October 2016, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Zagaynov . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Xu Zhongsheng
Mr. Moustafa
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Okamura
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Taula
Mr. Seck
Mr. Gasso Matoses
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Bermúdez
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to Security Council resolution 2240
(2015) (S/2016/766)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-31181 (E)
*1631181*

S/PV.7783

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.

Abstaining:
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)

Adoption of the agenda

The President (spoke in Russian): There were 14
votes in favour and one abstaining. The draft resolution
has been adopted as resolution 2312 (2016).

The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security

I shall now give the floor to those members of
the Council who wish to make statements following
the voting.

Report of the Secretary-General pursuant
to Security Council resolution 2240 (2015)
(S/2016/766)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus,
the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,
Kazakhstan, Latvia, Libya, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, the Netherlands, Norway, Palau, Poland,
Portugal, Romania, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia and
Sweden to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/766, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General pursuant to Security Council
resolution 2240 (2015).
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2016/838, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan,
Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Malta, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Poland,
Portugal, Romania, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Ukraine and the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. I
shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Angola, China, Egypt, France, Japan, Malaysia,
New Zealand, Russian Federation, Senegal, Spain,
Ukraine, United Kingdom, United States, Uruguay
2/7

06/10/2016

Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the adoption of resolution 2312
(2016), which renews the mandate of the European
Union’s Operation SOPHIA for an additional 12
months. I am proud of the United Kingdom’s role as
penholder, and I am grateful to those Security Council
delegations that supported the resolution today.
It is a vital renewal. The migration crisis remains
one of our greatest shared challenges. Thousands have
perished crossing the Mediterranean and thousands
more continue to risk their lives to find a safer future.
So many, perhaps all of them, have been exploited — by
gangs, at the darkest points in their lives, with no regard
for their safety, with no respect for anything other
than profit.
In October last year, we took a stand against these
traffickers. We authorized all European Union member
States contributing to the Operation to interdict these
gangsters and their boats on the high seas. Since that
adoption, the brave men and women of Operation
SOPHIA have directly apprehended 90 suspected
smugglers and have put over 300 smuggling vessels
beyond use. In doing so, we have sent a clear signal
that smugglers can no longer operate with impunity in
international waters.
The European Union’s efforts have also saved
lives — over 26,000 are estimated to have been rescued.
But the smuggling networks have not been defeated.
Therefore, through this renewal today, let us recommit
our support to Operation SOPHIA as it continues its
vital work to arrest smugglers and seize their boats.
And let us be clear in this open meeting that Operation
SOPHIA is only targeting smugglers and empty boats.
Migrants encountered as part of the Operation will be
taken to Europe as part of existing procedures. The
European Union will do all that it can to protect the
rights of those who need that protection.
Action against smugglers on the high seas is a key
part, but only part, of the solution to addressing the
16-31181

06/10/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

mass movement of people. We need to do more to tackle
the root causes, including poverty, conflict and human
rights violations and abuses. We must also do more
to support countries that are hosting refugees from
neighbouring countries and help reduce the secondary
movements, which pose so many dangers for migrants
and refugees.
While we recognize the benefits of migration
to source and destination countries, as well as to the
migrants themselves, the process must be managed.
All States have the right to control their own borders
in line with international law, but also in line with the
obligation to accept the return of their nationals. We
therefore need a comprehensive approach to the mass
movement of people. Resolution 2312 (2016) is one
part of that effort and an important part of the wider
solution to the crisis.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela abstained in the voting on resolution 2312
(2016), which extends for an additional year the mandate
of resolution 2240 (2015), on the illicit smuggling of
migrants and human trafficking in the Mediterranean
Sea. We did so because we believe that the reasons that
led our delegation a year ago to take the same decision
have not changed significantly. We are thus consistent
in maintaining our position as it was expressed in 2015.
We reiterate our doubts that the resolution is
an adequate instrument to comprehensively and
appropriately address the tragedy being lived out by
thousands of human beings — which is a consequence
of the tragedy of war, political instability, poverty,
terrorism and widespread violence that are plaguing
major regions of Africa and the Middle East — who
are desperately trying to reach safe havens even at the
risk of their own lives, while becoming the victims of
criminal organizations that benefit from the smuggling
in and trafficking of human beings.
The report (S/2016/766) of the Secretary-General
submitted in accordance with resolution 2240 (2015)
expresses deep concern in paragraphs 59 and 3,
respectively that
“the number of men, women and children who
die or go missing in the Mediterranean Sea has
not fallen,

S/PV.7783

“[and that] national and regional efforts have
not resulted in an immediate improvement in
the situation”.
In accordance with statistics of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) for the month of August, there were 3,177
deaths and disappearances in the Mediterranean Sea.
The number of unaccompanied or separated minors
who reached Italy via the Mediterranean also has
significantly increased as compared to 2015 —by
approximately 116 per cent for the period from January
to July.
The complexity and multidimensional nature
of the phenomenon requires a comprehensive
approach that goes beyond a merely military and
security-oriented approachk, including recourse to
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, as
some States within this organ claim to encourage.
Venezuela once again therefore rejects the securityand criminalization-oriented approach to the issue of
asylum seekers, refugees and migrants. We have to ask
ourselves whether the flow of asylum seekers, refugees
and migrants towards the shores of the Mediterranean
has been reduced or is merely an issue of containing
them on land? Is it perhaps the case that the existence
of criminal organizations linked to human trafficking
and smuggling is the root cause of the flows of refugees
and migrants from Africa to Europe?
We could find answers to those questions, if we
began by acknowledging that this human tragedy has
worsened in recent years as the political, economic
and social situation in the Middle East and North
Africa — the result of foreign interference, military
interventionism and war — has continued to worsen in
tandem. Those who promote destabilization and crisis in
legal and legitimately constituted Governments should
bear in mind that the significant increase in the flows
of migrants, asylum seekers and refugees is primarily
a consequence of the terrible, violent conditions and
social disintegration that have fomented armed conflict
and military aggression in countries such as Libya,
Syria and Iraq, among others, as well as poverty and
social exclusion affecting the poorest countries.
For Venezuela, today’s resolution addresses only
a tiny part of this complex problem, and we believe
that it is essential to consider and adopt measures
in connection with the underlying causes, which
are forcing thousands of people to undertake such

16-311813/7

S/PV.7783

Maintenance of international peace and security

dangerous maritime journeys, as well as the reasons
that lead them to become victims of human trafficking
and smuggling.
The report of the Secretary-General also states in
paragraphs 4 and 6, respectively, that,
“increasing control over some routes ... may have
led to more frequent use of other routes
“[a]s controls tighten and in the absence of
commensurate safe and regular pathways, irregular
crossings become more difficult, leading to a
growing market for the services of smugglers”.
It is not by building walls or invoking Chapter VII
of the Charter that we must address the underlying
causes for the flows of asylum seekers, refugees and
migrants towards other regions, including Europe. It
seems that, beyond the argument of fighting against
criminal gangs, the purpose of such resolutions is
simply to prevent these poor and desperate human
beings from reaching safer destinations, as can be seen
by the increasing number of restrictive and exclusionary
policies that have proliferated in some European
countries with regard to asylum seekers and migrants
seeking shelter, which have moreover spread racist and
xenophobic feelings in the region, thereby undermining
governance in receiving countries.
According to several studies, to date, 70 walls have
been built or are under construction around the world.
Through measures such as these, we are gradually
heading towards a world in which the countries of the
North will be surrounded by walls that will, rather
than respond with the solidarity and human and moral
responsibility called for by the situation, prevent them
from seeing and becoming sensitized to the terrible
reality of the people plagued by wars, most of which are
encouraged and promoted by the centres of power. We
cannot forget, as during other periods in history, how
Latin America and the Caribbean — and especially
Venezuela — opened their doors to millions of citizens
who sought security, peace and opportunities in
our countries.
We wish to furthermore point out that the
implementation of international measures to alleviate
this human tragedy must be carried out in a concerted
and coordinated manner. The issue requires broadbased and democratic forums for discussion, such as
the General Assembly, to ensure the full participation
of all Member States, with the involvement of
4/7

06/10/2016

countries of origin, transit and destination. Similarly,
it is also fundamental that there be coordination and
the generation of synergies between these countries
and the various entities of the United Nations having
competence in the area and the existing regional and
subregional mechanisms.
To conclude, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
reiterates its unequivocal commitment to fulfilling
the obligations under the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime and the
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking
in Persons, Especially Women and Children, and
other international legal instruments and resolutions
related to the issue of human trafficking, as well as to
the inescapable principle of shared but differentiated
responsibility, which should be borne in mind in
addressing this issue.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay is aware of the alarming migration and refugee
situation at the global level. According to data of the
International Organization for Migration, between
1 January and 28 September approximately 302,486
migrants and refugees entered Europe by sea and
3,502 men, women and children died or disappeared.
We often see heart-breaking images of the dead from
North Africa and the Middle East who, while trying
desperately to escape from the wars and the conflicts
that have brokenout there, cross the Mediterranean Sea
under inhumane conditions, while putting their lives at
risk.
Uruguay voted in favour of renewing the provisions
of resolution 2040 (2012) by way of today’s resolution
2312 (2016), for we are aware of need to address and
provide responses to the smuggling of human beings
by criminal organizations that are benefiting from
the difficult situation being experienced by thousands
of people who are willing to risk their lives by going
to sea in search of a better life. For Uruguay, it is
essentiala that the work of EUNAVFOR Med Operation
Sophia continue in full concordance with international
humanitarian law and while taking into consideratiton
the extreme vulnerability of the refugees and migrants
who cross the Mediterranean Sea. In that regard,
the measures mentioned in the resolution should be
implemented in accordance with the purposes of
principles of a Charter of the United Nations, as well
as international law, international humanitarian law,
refugee law and international human rights law.
16-31181

06/10/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

Allow me to point out one aspect that is
extremely important for my country, namely, the
non-criminalization of migration. In that connection,
we are concerned by the inclusion, in the seventeenth
preambular paragraph, of the following reference to
illegal migration:
“the need for effective international action to
address both the immediate and long-term aspects
of illegal migration and human trafficking towards
Europe”.
My delegation would like to recall that it is not
a crime to migrate, and States should therefore not
develop policies that are aimed at criminalizing
migrants. Moreover, it is important to point out that
implementing resolution 2312 (2016), which we just
adopted, does not affect the human rights of migrants
and asylum seekers aboard vessels who are subject to
the measures set out in the text.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I think
I can agree with one point made by the representative of
Venezuela, which is that this is indeed a human drama,
and a tragic one at that. Over 130,000 people have set
off from the North African coast to attempt to reach
Italy this year alone; more than 3,000 of them did not
survive that journey. Just last week, more than 250
people — including children as young as 4 — drowned
after their boat sank just 12 miles from the Egyptian
shore. It has been reported that last week alone more
than 11,000 migrants had to be rescued off the Libyan
coast.
Our work today is one part — just one part — of
what is needed to save lives. All told, more than 10,000
souls have been lost at sea since 2014 after travelling
untold miles to escape conflict and extreme poverty,
and migrant smugglers and human traffickers have
exploited a desperate situation. To stop these smugglers
and stem such senseless deaths at sea, the member
States of the European Union (EU), coordinating with
Libya’s Government of National Accord, took action
last year through the EU Naval Forces Mediterranean
Operation Sophia. Since last October, the Operation has
assisted in saving over 37,000 people. For that reason,
the United States fully supports renewing resolution
2240 (2016) to extend the Council’s support for the EU
Pperation.
We are pleased that the EU has decided to expand
its Operation’s mandate to assist in the training of
Libyan coast guard and navy. The United States is

S/PV.7783

likewise providing capacity-building assistance to the
new Libyan Government, and urges the international
community to fully support Libya’s Prime Minister
Serraj, its Presidency Council and civil society efforts,
which are helping Libyans establish a democratic,
representative political system, strengthen the capacity
of critical Libyan institutions to deliver services,
secure Libya’s territory and build effective, civilian-led
national security institutions.
We must also address the abuses facing refugees
and other migrants, lest efforts to shut down
people-smuggling have the unintended consequence
of trapping those seeking asylum, with no options to
flee violence and conflict. We urge the EU and the
Government of National Accord to ensure that the
human rights and fundamental freedoms of those
migrants who are rescued are respected, in accordance
with applicable international law. We must also continue
to work to end the root causes of this crisis — the
conflicts and extreme poverty that drive people from
their homes to attempt the very dangerous journey
across the Mediterranean.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2312 (2016),
which extends for 12 months the mandate on which the
EUNAVFOR Med Operation Sophia is based, to fight
against migrants on the high seas off the coast of Libya.
I thank the British penholder for the very effective
work done on this issue. Throughout the negotiations,
the resolution enjoyed the full support of the European
Union members of the Security Council.
Every day more men and women, often
accompanied by children, risk their lives attempting to
cross the Mediterranean Sea in the hands of smugglers
who cynically exploit their distress. The European
Union EUNAVFOR Med Operation Sophia has saved
more than 25,000 individuals since the beginning of the
year. These are all lives that were saved. This is only
part of the response to the overall crisis of migrants,
but it remains useful and necessary nonetheless. The
effectiveness of the EUNAVFOR Med Operation
Sophia is based to a large extent on the mandate
provided by the Council, which allows it to have at
its disposal the necessary resources to effectively
combat the trafficking in migrants. It strives to do so
in the framework of more general cooperation with the
Government of National Accord, led by Prime Minister
Serraj, which will soon involve the training of Libyan
coast guards by the European Union.

16-311815/7

S/PV.7783

Maintenance of international peace and security

As was the case with resolution 2240 (2015), this
new text precisely defines the conditions under which
the use of force is allowed in facing up to traffickers
and smugglers. It also includes robust guarantees for
the protection of the rights of migrants and refugees
aboard the ships in question. Nothing has changed on
that decisive point, and therefore our demands remain
the same.
France considers it crucial that the United Nations
continue to mobilize to come up with a comprehensive
solution to the migrant crisis in the Mediterranean and
the tragic situations it leads to. This text, in our view, is
part of the answer. Our belief is that the Council cannot
remain on the sidelines in silence in the tragic context
of the situation in the Mediterranean right now.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your assumption of the presidency of Security Council
for this month. We are fully confident in your ability
to conduct the work of the Council successfully and
skilfully. Let me thank the Permanent Representative
of New Zealand for his successful presidency of
the Council last month. Allow me also to thank the
delegation of the United Kingdom for its valuable
efforts to achieve agreement on resolution 2312 (2016),
which was just adopted.
The phenomenon of immigration is an old one.
Throughout history, it has been characteristic of the
development of humankind as people have sought
better lives of dignity and security. However, the world
today is experiencing an unprecedented phenomenon
as waves of people are migrating, and the issue has
become a priority of our contemporary world.
The Mediterranean region is no exception when it
comes to this phenomenon — for a number of reasons,
including instability, strife, conflict, the spread of
terrorism, deteriorating economic and development
prospects, increasing poverty and worsening climactic
conditions. My country is at the very centre of that wave.
Our geographic location has made Libya a crossing
point from which thousands of people from the African
continent, and elsewhere, traverse the Mediterrranean
Sea to reach Europe. They risk their lives in the hope
of escaping the insecurity and extreme poverty in their
countries, only to drown in the Mediterranean.
6/7

06/10/2016

This is an unprecedented human tragedy, one in
which migrants have fallen victim repeatedly. They
are either victims of the conditions that force them to
emigrate and risk their lives, or of the gangs that traffic
and exploit people and take advantage of the weakness
of Libya’s security institutions that is the result of
political division. We therefore stress the importance
of cooperating with Libya’s security institutions,
especially our coast guard, which has been able to save
hundreds of migrants despite its limited means.
We greatly appreciate the readiness the European
Union has demonstrated to lessen the dangers to
migrants on the Mediterranean and save thousands of
lives, including the important role played by its military
operation in the Southern Central Mediterranean.
However, as we stated here in the Council when
resolution 2240 (2015) was adopted (see S/PV.7531),
we continue to believe that the phenomenon of illegal
migration cannot be dealt with by security means alone,
including the proposal made by a senior official from
a European Union member State to build a migrant
city in Libya, which would be a violation of Libya’s
sovereignty. Other proposals, such as abrogating laws
on residency and migration, cannot resolve the issue
either, as they would only evade the root causes.
A comprehensive approach to address the issue must
focus on the situation in source countries by providing
assistance with a view to promoting and strengthening
conflict resolution mechanisms and improving their
ability to fight terrorism. Furthermore, such an approach
must establish an agreement between the United
Nations and source, transit and destination countries for
developed countries to support development projects
in source countries, within the framework of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development.
While we truly appreciate the efforts of the
European Union to save the lives of thousands of illegal
migrants as they cross the Mediterranean, national and
regional efforts have yet to lead to any improvement in
the situation, as stated in the report of the SecretaryGeneral. Therefore, we require a long-term strategy
in which the European Union would have a major role
in addressing the root causes of illegal migration. In
tandem, it is imperative that we develop short-term
actions to save the lives of thousands of illegal migrants,
including through ongoing consultation with the States
concerned, in particular Libya, as well as the African
Union and the League of Arab States.
16-31181

06/10/2016

Maintenance of international peace and security

In conclusion, I do not think that anyone would
object to any international efforts — in keeping with the
principles of international law, particularly respecting
the sovereignty of all States and non-interference in

S/PV.7783

their internal affairs — aimed at avoiding the loss of
more lives in the Mediterranean and putting an end to
this humanitarian crisis.
The meeting rose at 3.35 p.m.

16-311817/7
