United Nations

S/PV.5168

Security Council

Provisional

Sixtieth year

5168

th meeting
Monday, 25 April 2005, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Wang Guangya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (China)

Members:

Algeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Benin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Greece . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Philippines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Romania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United Republic of Tanzania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Baali
Mr. Mayoral
Mr. Adechi
Mr. Sardenberg
Ms. Løj
Mr. De La Sablière
Mr. Vassilakis
Mr. Oshima
Mr. Baja
Mr. Motoc
Mr. Denisov
Sir Emyr Jones Parry
Mr. Mahiga
Mr. Holliday

Agenda
Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council
Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals and entities
Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)
concerning counter-terrorism
Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

05-32005 (E)

*0532005*

S/PV.5168

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Expression of sympathy in connection with the
railway accident in Japan
The President (spoke in Chinese): At the outset,
I should like to take this opportunity, on behalf of the
members of the Security Council, to express our
profound condolences in connection with the tragic
train accident in Amagasaki, Japan, which has taken
the lives of at least 50 people and has injured over 400.
The Security Council expresses its sympathy and
condolences to the victims and their families and to the
Government of Japan. On behalf of the Council, I
should like to request the representative of Japan to
convey those sentiments to his Government and his
people.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the
Taliban and associated individuals and entities
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004)
The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Australia, Chile, Cuba,
Liechtenstein,
Luxembourg,
Morocco,
Spain,
Venezuela and Viet Nam, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

2

At the invitation of the President, the
aforementioned representatives took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend invitations under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Ambassador César
Mayoral, Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities; Ambassador Ellen Margrethe
Løj, Chairperson of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)
concerning counter-terrorism; and Ambassador Mihnea
Ioan Motoc, Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004).
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
I wish to draw the attention of members to
document S/2005/266, containing the text of a letter
dated 21 April 2005 from the Chairman of the CounterTerrorism Committee transmitting the Committee’s
fifteenth 90-day work programme.
At this meeting, we will hear briefings by the
Chairpersons of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) and the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004).
I now give the floor to Ambassador César
Mayoral, Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities.
Mr. Mayoral (spoke in Spanish): It is an honour
for me to brief the Security Council on the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban at a meeting in
which I shall share the floor with the Chairpersons of
the Council Committees established pursuant to

S/PV.5168

resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004), Ambassadors
Løj and Motoc, respectively.
I am delivering my 120-day briefing pursuant to
paragraph 12 of resolution 1526 (2004). As this is my
first briefing in my function as Chairman of the
Committee, I should like to thank the members of the
Council for the trust they have shown me in selecting
me to chair that important Committee.
I should also like to thank my predecessor,
Ambassador Heraldo Muñoz of Chile, who is with us
here today. Thanks to his diligent leadership, the
Committee has solidified its role as one of the most
active sanctions committees. The past three months
have been a real learning experience for my delegation,
and I would like to express my gratitude to
Ambassador Muñoz and the Chilean mission, who have
generously shared their accumulated experiences with
my delegation. I have been encouraged in my work by
the proactive approach of all members of the
Committee and, in particular, those who are new to it.
I wish first to refer to the Committee’s activities.
Let me note that the Al-Qaida and Taliban Committee
was the first of the counter-terrorism committees to be
created by the Security Council. It has, since 1999,
accumulated a broad and fruitful experience in dealing
with its specific mandate: making the operations of AlQaida and the Taliban more difficult worldwide. Today,
its sanctions regime is being implemented throughout
the world and, in particular, thanks to submissions of
Member States, its consolidated list of individuals and
entities associated with Al-Qaida and the Taliban is
updated periodically. During the reporting period, the
Committee delisted one individual at the request of a
Member State and accepted exemptions pursuant to
resolution 1452 (2002).
On the last day of 2004, Ambassador Muñoz
submitted to the President of the Council the
Committee’s written assessment of reports submitted
by Member States pursuant to resolution 1455 (2003).
That important assessment, contained in document
S/2004/1037 and available on the Committee’s website,
details the Committee’s substantive evaluation of
reports submitted by Member States and contains the
more specific analysis of Member State reports
provided by the Monitoring Team to the Committee. I
strongly encourage Member States that have not
already done so to read it. I also take this opportunity
to stress the obligation of non-reporting States to

submit their reports as a matter of urgency. As the
written assessment clearly demonstrates, the reports
from Member States provide the Committee with an
important tool in assessing the strengths and
weaknesses of the implementation of sanctions
measures.
During the reporting period, the Committee met
15 times, mostly in informal meetings, which has been
the practice for the work of the Committee for many
years.
On 11 January, the Committee met a senior
delegation from the United States and was briefed by
Mr. Juan Zarate, Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for
Terrorist Financing and Financial Crime, and Mr. E.
Anthony Wayne, Assistant Secretary of State for
Economic and Business Affairs. The Committee was
informed in detail of current United States efforts to
implement the sanctions against Al-Qaida and the
Taliban imposed by the Security Council. I consider it
important to note that the Committee was honoured by
the presence of the three Chairmen of the other
counter-terrorism committees and working groups.
I encourage Member States to follow the example
of the United States by making use of the opportunity
to meet with the Committee, since that is a very useful
way for the Committee to evaluate the state of
implementation of the Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions
regime, its strongest areas and its shortcomings.
During the first months of this year, the
Committee has been considering in great detail the
second report of the Monitoring Team submitted last
December pursuant to resolution 1526 (2004). I thank
the Monitoring Team for the recommendations
contained therein, which proved a useful basis for
discussion in the Committee. The report is, of course,
the work of independent experts and does not
necessarily reflect the views of the Committee. The
Committee
has
also
been
analysing
the
recommendations contained in the report, mainly with
a view to further improving the Al-Qaida and Taliban
sanctions regime.
I expect that several of those recommendations
will have a great influence on the Council’s upcoming
consideration of a draft resolution to be adopted
pursuant to paragraph 3 of resolution 1526 (2004). The
Committee supports increased cooperation with
Interpol, which is among the most important of those
recommendations. I should note that, in the fight

3

S/PV.5168

against Al-Qaida and the Taliban, it would be
beneficial for all Member States to become members of
Interpol. The Committee also supported the Team’s
recommendation that Interpol members make use of
the Interpol database on stolen travel documents. The
Committee recently held an informal meeting with the
Interpol representative in New York, Mr. Ulrich
Kersten, to discuss potential specific areas of
cooperation between the Committee and Interpol.
With respect to the activities of the Monitoring
Team, I have dealt in some detail with the contribution
made by the Team through its December report
(S/2005/83, annex). The Monitoring Team has
continued to strive to improve the quality of the
consolidated list. By contacting a number of Member
States, in accordance with the Committee’s guidelines,
the Monitoring Team has been able to propose more
than 500 additional pieces of identifying information
concerning individuals and entities already on the list
and has actively encouraged Member States to submit
new names for inclusion on the consolidated list.
The Monitoring Team has undertaken 11 trips,
including to Africa, the Middle East and Europe, to
discuss sanctions implementation and how to make the
sanctions regime more effective. Those trips raised the
Committee’s profile and have promoted a proper
understanding of the purpose and the importance of the
sanctions regime. Following each trip, the Team has
submitted written reports to the Committee. As well, a
member of the Team will accompany me on my
upcoming visits to the States selected. The Monitoring
Team has established contacts with regional and other
international bodies, including the European Union,
Interpol, the International Atomic Energy Agency, the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
The Team has also participated in several important
conferences, helping to increase international
awareness of the Committee’s work.
The Monitoring Team continues to hold regular
meetings with the experts supporting the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC) and has formed a close
link with the new Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, sharing the information it has
collected and ensuring that, before visiting States and
attending conferences, the Team is aware of the
interests and the concerns of the CTC experts. It has
also held informal discussions with the experts of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to

4

resolution 1540 (2004), and the Coordinator has
briefed the working group established pursuant to
resolution 1566 (2004). The Committee expresses its
appreciation for the outstanding contribution made by
the Team in that regard and encourages the Team to
maintain its leading role.
With respect to the future activities of the
Committee, I firmly believe that we can achieve further
progress in the coming months: by introducing further
quantitative and qualitative improvements to the lists;
by involving Member States in a fruitful dialogue with
the Committee, encouraging them to meet with the
Committee and share their successes, challenges,
problems and frustrations; by increasing the level of
cooperation with other United Nations bodies involved
in the fight against terrorism, such as the CounterTerrorism Committee and the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), as well as with specialized bodies such as
Interpol, in order to enhance the United Nations
capacity for coordination in the fight against terrorism;
and by reviewing the Committee’s guidelines for the
conduct of its work.
I intend also to travel soon to a number of
countries, including in Europe and in the Middle East,
to continue to promote the Committee’s activities,
gather first-hand impressions in those countries’
capitals of the status of the implementation of the
sanctions regime and receive suggestions on how we
can work to improve it.
Finally, as mandated in paragraph 3 of resolution
1526 (2004), by July this year the Security Council
must adopt a new resolution to assess the
implementation of the sanctions regime against AlQaida and the Taliban and improve it. With that in
mind, the Committee will shortly begin actively to
work on a new draft resolution to be submitted to the
Council.
To conclude, last year in this Chamber, my
predecessor aptly noted that there were no quick or
easy solutions in the fight against terrorism. Rather, the
fight requires systematic and results-oriented work,
persistence and patience and an unyielding
commitment to our mission.
In the coming months, the Committee will
examine how States are implementing sanctions with a
view to identifying those areas that require additional
effort so that current measures can be improved.

S/PV.5168

Moreover, I am confident that members of the
Committee will genuinely welcome suggestions from
Member States about how the Security Council can
improve the current sanctions regime. After all, who
better than States can tell the Committee whether
established sanctions measures are indeed effective?
The counter-terrorism sanctions regime, first of all,
involves accurately targeting the right individuals and
entities and requires the political will of States to make
that regime effective through the strict implementation
of sanctions.
At the moment, it is difficult to envision a world
completely free from terrorist threats. Nevertheless, we
all share the common mission of effectively preventing
such threats from materializing. Today, all three
Committees have distinct and crucial roles in that
mission. I therefore wish to state that I shall continue
to work closely with Ambassador Løj, Ambassador
Motoc and, of course, Ambassador Baja, Chairman of
the working group established pursuant to resolution
1566 (2004), in order to further enhance the efforts of
the Security Council and the entire United Nations in
this mission.
The President (Spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ambassador Mayoral for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Ellen Margrethe Løj,
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counterterrorism.
Ms. Løj: In my capacity as Chair of the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC), I would like to brief the
Security Council on the activities carried out by the
Committee during the past three months and submit the
Committee’s fifteenth work programme covering the
period 1 April to 30 June 2005 (S/2005/266).
I had the honour to assume the chairmanship of
the CTC on 1 April 2005. I would like to express my
gratitude to the previous Chairman of the Committee,
Ambassador Andrey Denisov, for his excellent work
and leadership. Much of what I will be reporting today
took place under his chairmanship, and, together with
his colleagues at the Russian Mission, he deserves
much credit for the many new initiatives taken during
that period. Let me also take this opportunity to thank
the Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED), Mr. Javier
Rupérez, and his team, as well as the CTC secretariat

staff, for the valuable support they have provided the
Committee over the past three months.
Security Council resolution 1535 (2004) set the
stage for revitalizing the CTC and improving the
dialogue with Member States. Based on that and other
resolutions with relevance to the work of the
Committee, the CTC has more effectively discharged
its mandate to monitor the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). The following key activities
took place.
The dialogue with Member States was
strengthened, including through a first visit to a
Member State. New methods were introduced for
determining technical assistance needs. The dialogue
with
international,
regional
and
subregional
organizations was strengthened, for the purpose of
encouraging them to help their members implement
resolution 1373 (2001). Work continued to strengthen
the CTED’s practical capabilities. Work on a set of best
practices related to work against the financing of
terrorism was initiated.
As part of its dialogue with Member States, the
Committee continued to respond to incoming national
reports. More than 580 reports have so far been
received, and many States will soon be submitting their
fifth reports to the Committee. However, not all reports
are equally comprehensive, and 75 States are currently
late in submitting their reports. This delay appears to
be due to a lack of available technical capacity in the
States concerned but reportedly also to “reporting
fatigue”. Responsibility for the preparation of reports
as well as for implementation of the other provisions of
resolution 1373 (2001), rests with Member States.
However, the CTC has offered to facilitate the
provision of technical assistance to help States in
writing their reports. The CTC has reminded late
submitters to send in their reports. Another part of the
CTC’s dialogue with Member States has been to
initiate country visits, which help bring the CTC and
the CTED closer to States and allow for in-depth
dialogue on specific challenges facing a State.
The first such visit, to Morocco, took place from
14 to 18 March. The World Customs Organization, the
Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering,
Interpol and the European Union took part in the visit.
A fruitful dialogue took place with the Government of
Morocco and its various entities during the visit. The
visit permitted joint problem identification and a

5

S/PV.5168

discussion of how best to overcome the problems that
were observed. The key to the success of this visit, as
will be true for all visits, is follow-up. The CTC plans
similar visits to Albania, Kenya and Thailand in the
near future. The Committee encourages Member States
to welcome country visits by the CTC, including the
CTED, with a view to enhancing their efforts in the
fight against terrorism.
With regard to technical needs assessments, a
methodology has been developed and agreed upon for
how they should be prepared and reviewed by the
Committee. So far 51 such assessments have been
prepared and 11 have been endorsed by the Committee
and have been forwarded to Member States for their
review. Unless a Member State objects, the results of
such assessments will be shared with potential
assistance providers. The Committee has further
engaged with international, regional and subregional
organizations so as to encourage them to help their
members implement resolution 1373 (2001).
From 26 to 28 January 2005, the fourth special
meeting with those organizations was organized by the
CTC and the Commonwealth of Independent States in
Almaty, Kazakhstan. It was attended by 40
international organizations, as well as by 36 Member
States.
Over the past three months the CTC has also
received briefings from the Council of Europe, the
United Nations Office for Drugs and Crime and the
Collective Security Treaty Organization. In addition,
the Committee has cooperated closely with the
Counterterrorism Action Group created by the Group
of Eight, as well as with Interpol, the European Union,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) and NATO. Cooperation has also been
close with the other terrorism-related subsidiary bodies
of the Security Council, namely the 1267 Committee,
the 1540 Committee and the 1566 working group. A
joint briefing of the CTC and the 1267 and 1540
Committees for Member States took place on
24 February.
In his speech in Madrid on 10 March 2005, the
Secretary-General referred directly to the central role
of the CTC and its CTED in the fight against terrorism.
Unfortunately, for technical reasons, the CTED has not
yet become fully operational. This seriously limits the
CTC’s ability to sustain the various types of dialogue
with Member States on which it has embarked. Many

6

reports from Member States, for instance, still require
response from the Committee. A lack of experts has
prevented such responses from being drafted.
Further, the CTC, in accordance with the request
contained in resolution 1566 (2004), has initiated
development of a set of best practices to assist States in
implementing the provisions of resolution 1373 (2001)
relating to the financing of terrorism.
Finally, the CTC has taken major steps towards
its revitalization, as set out in Security Council
resolution 1535 (2004). The Committee has been
equipped with valuable instruments needed to reinforce
its practical work.
I would now like to briefly present the
Committee’s work programme for the next three
months. The work programme has been distributed to
members of the Council in document S/2005/266.
During the next three months the Committee will
continue its efforts to complete the revitalization
process. In particular, it looks forward to having a fully
functional CTED in the shortest possible time. Let me
also add that this, to a large degree, will depend on the
timely finalization of recruitments for the CTED. The
dialogue with Member States on the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) will continue, guided by the
principles of cooperation, transparency and equal
treatment. That dialogue, based on Member State
reporting and CTC replies, will be underpinned by
CTC technical needs assessments and visits to Member
States in order to monitor the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001).
In addition, the Committee will continue to
improve cooperation with international, regional and
subregional organizations, and will encourage them to
seek to develop further ways to help States implement
resolution 1373 (2001). Finally, the CTC will begin to
consider, where appropriate, the development of best
practices in other areas with relevance to resolution
1373 (2001).
The CTC remains a crucial instrument of the
international community in its fight against terrorism,
based on dialogue and assistance to States. Its task
remains vital and urgent. The support of Member
States remains crucially important, and the Committee
is grateful for the support it has received and will
continue to count on it in the future.

S/PV.5168

The President (spoke in Chinese) I thank
Ambassador Løj. For her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Mihnea
Motok, Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established to pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).
Mr. Motok: Allow me, Mr. President, to start by
expressing gratitude to you for arranging for this
special joint briefing by the Chairs of the three
Committees called upon to report to the Council.
I would like to salute the activities and
achievements of my colleagues the Permanent
Representatives of Argentina, Mr. César Mayoral, and
of Denmark, Ms. Ellen Løj, Chairpersons, respectively,
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) and of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC). Having been a member of the Council last year
too, I would also like to take this opportunity to
commend the dedicated work and leadership of
Ambassador Muñoz of Chile and Ambassador Denisov
of the Russian Federation, their predecessors at the
helm of those two landmark subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council.
Ambassador Lauro Baja of the Philippines does a
wonderful job in steering the working group
established pursuant to resolution 1566 (2004) towards
its expected goals. A special word of appreciation also
goes to the Executive Director of the CounterTerrorism
Committee
Executive
Directorate,
Ambassador Javier Rupérez.
I have the honour to brief the Security Council on
the progress achieved by the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) in its work over the
past four months and to submit the Committee’s first
programme of work covering the period 1 April to 30
June 2005. I would also like to introduce briefly the
elements of the first programme of work of the
Committee.
With regard to the examination of national
reports, since my previous report to the Council in
December last year, the Committee has concentrated its
work mainly on fine-tuning its methodology and tool
kit for considering national reports submitted by States
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). Committee experts
have developed a matrix to be used as an internal tool
in the process of examining national reports. It is a
living document built upon the provisions of resolution
1540 (2004).

I am very pleased to report to the Council today
that the 1540 Committee has already entered the
substantive stage of its work and has begun examining
national reports, with a view to monitoring States’
efforts to implement resolution 1540 (2004). The
Committee believes that it needs additional
information from States in order to better determine
implementation efforts, and it will reach out to them,
with the support of its experts, both in New York and
in capitals.
We must pursue this process with the same sense
of urgency that contributed to the adoption of
resolution 1540 (2004). The Committee has been given
a two-year mandate by the Security Council. The
Committee should consider at least 40 national reports
within each remaining trimestrial programme of work,
thus completing the processing of first national reports
by the end of 2005.
In one year’s time, the Committee will need to
provide the Security Council with sufficient
information about States’ implementation efforts to
enable the Council to assess the progress that States
have made in implementing the resolution. In
considering national reports, the Committee will start
examining possible sources of technical assistance for
States that have requested such assistance in order to
implement resolution 1540 (2004). Discussions on
where assistance is already being provided and on
facilitating necessary technical assistance will form
part of the examination process.
With respect to reporting, Security Council
resolution 1540 (2004) calls upon all States to present
to the Committee a first report, not later than 28
October 2004, on steps that they have taken or intend
to take to implement the resolution. The status of
reporting is presented on the web site of the
Committee, and is kept up to date.
As of today, 115 States and one organization have
submitted reports to the 1540 Committee. I would like
to use this opportunity to renew my call to States that
have yet to submit their first report as called for by the
Council in resolution 1540 (2004). Their reports will
enable the Committee to present to the Council, by the
end of its mandate, an objective picture of what has
been achieved in terms of implementation and of what
should be done going forward.
I assume that some countries may encounter
difficulties in drafting their national reports or in

7

S/PV.5168

enacting appropriate legislation to fulfil the
requirements of resolution 1540 (2004). Informing the
Committee of such difficulties will help it to identify
and respond to requests for assistance from those
States lacking the legal and regulatory infrastructure,
implementation experience or necessary resources.

including through common briefings with the
Chairmen of the CTC and of the Committee dealing
with Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions. The 1540
Committee will keep its dedicated web site updated as
an additional source of information on issues related to
resolution 1540 (2004).

In my capacity as Chairman of the 1540
Committee, I have continued to raise the issue of
further reporting through briefings with Member
States, informal contact at the United Nations with the
coordinators of regional groups and sending reminders
to those that have yet to report. I remain committed to
pursuing such endeavours in the future work of the
Committee, on its behalf. I am also very encouraged
that the issues of improving further reporting and late
submissions will be considered in a coordinated
manner by the various Committees.

The Committee will also continue to inform
organizations outside the United Nations about our
work, through attendance at international, regional and
subregional meetings and conferences. I will also make
full use of such opportunities to continue to address the
issue of further reporting.

On
the
interaction
with
international
organizations, I am pleased to report that, on 13 April
2005, the Committee was briefed in a formal meeting
by Mr. Rogelio Pfirter, Director General of the
Technical Secretariat of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, and by Mr. Gustavo
Zlauvinen, Director of the International Atomic Energy
Agency Office at the United Nations, on ways in which
those organizations can support the work of the
Committee and contribute to the process of
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). The
Committee has also received letters from other
organizations, such as the Nuclear Suppliers Group and
the Zangger Committee, expressing willingness to
assist in the work of the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004).
As the process of examining national reports
evolves, the Committee will interact and cooperate, as
appropriate, with relevant international, regional and
subregional organizations in order to facilitate the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Working
relationships with such organizations will be
developed, as appropriate.
In the same vein, the Committee will maintain
close relations and cooperation with the CTC and the
Al-Qaida/Taliban sanctions Committee, as provided for
in resolution 1566 (2004).
Transparency has been, and continues to be, an
important objective of the work of the 1540
Committee. The Chairman and the Vice-Chairmen will
reach out on a regular basis to Member States,

8

As a final point on transparency, I encourage
Member States to designate points of contact for
resolution 1540 (2004) and to make direct contact with
the Committee’s members and its experts to seek any
necessary clarification on the issues covered in their
correspondence with the Committee or on matters
related to resolution 1540 (2004) in general. In
addition, the Committee, with the support of its
experts, may, when it is deemed appropriate, contact
States to seek further clarification from them on issues
arising from their reports.
In conclusion, on behalf of the Committee, I look
forward to the cooperation of all States as the
Committee goes forward with its work in the months
ahead. I also look forward to comments and queries
that colleagues in the Security Council and
representatives of other States Members of the United
Nations might have with regard to the briefing that I
have just given.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ambassador Motoc for his briefing.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than five minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.
Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to congratulate Ambassador Ellen Løj,
Chairperson of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)
concerning counter-terrorism, Ambassador César
Mayoral, Chairman of the Security Council Committee

S/PV.5168

established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities, and Ambassador Mihnea
Motoc, Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), on their
briefings today. We also thank them for their tireless
efforts to conduct the work of their respective
Committees in a dynamic and effective manner.
Cooperation among the three Committees —
whose mandates share many complementary aspects —
is essential for proper coordination of the international
community’s efforts in this area. We support the
initiatives already carried out, and we urge even closer
cooperation. In that connection, Brazil agrees with the
text of the presidential statement to be read out at the
conclusion of this meeting.
Brazil has reaffirmed its commitment to the fight
against terrorism and its repudiation of terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations as an extremely grave
threat to international peace and security. We are
prepared to continue to work to find increasingly
effective ways in which to combat that threat.
The debates on United Nations reform promoted
by the Secretary-General once again offer us an
opportunity to establish a definition of terrorism and to
identify coordinated, expanded and integrated actions
to be taken by the international community to confront
this problem. We welcome the suggestions made by the
Secretary-General in his report “In larger freedom”
(A/59/2005), and we consider them to be a good basis
for broader discussion of the subject in the General
Assembly.
Brazil welcomes with satisfaction the General
Assembly’s adoption of the International Convention
for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism
(General Assembly resolution 59/290), and we are now
considering the possibility of ratifying it as soon as
possible. Brazil believes that the threat of catastrophic
terrorism, although undoubtedly very important, should
not be our sole concern in confronting threats to peace
and security that are caused by terrorist acts.
With regard to the Security Council, we support
the current process of reforming the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED). We hope
that that body can soon become completely
operational. We wish to help make the transition period
as brief as possible. In our opinion, the CTED is
intended, above all, to protect those States that wish to

cooperate but, for various reasons, are unable to do so.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee and, by extension,
the CTED do not have the role of a sanctions
committee, as members are well aware.
The activities of the working group established
pursuant to resolution 1566 (2004) should be
developed in the framework of the structure established
in resolution 1373 (2001), resolution 1535 (2004) and
resolution 1566 (2004) itself. Given the sensitivity of
the issue of international terrorism, working with the
participation of Member States is more important than
trying to force decisions that might not necessarily
reflect the various legitimate concerns that may arise.
Many countries have doubts about the
appropriateness of resorting to lists to confront the
problem of international terrorism. In the end, such an
approach could put unnecessary limitations on our
consideration of the ultimate causes of violence. Many
problems could be created. For example, contacts with
certain armed groups might become more difficult,
which would make negotiated solutions to conflicts
less likely.
Questions related to the inclusion or deletion of
names on sanctions committee lists have not yet been
adequately resolved. On various occasions, we have
recalled the need to develop precise and uniform
procedures to update, correct and improve the lists of
individuals subject to sanctions. With regard to the
1267 Committee, we reaffirm that it must develop such
procedures and methods, in addition to continuing its
practice of conducting periodic reviews of the lists of
individuals and entities associated with Al-Qaida and
the Taliban, with a view to the possible delisting of
names. As we have previously stated, adopting
measures to refine the consolidated list and clarifying
list management procedures are the main ways in
which the 1267 Committee can provide an incentive
for contributions by Member States to the List.
Without a consensus definition of terrorism, it is
not appropriate to consider — as envisaged in
resolution 1566 (2004) — possible practical measures
regarding individuals, groups or entities involved in
terrorist activities not covered by resolution 1267
(1999). Resolution 1566 (2004) reflects negotiated
language that contains a clear and important political
message, but it does not constitute a conceptual
definition of terrorism and cannot be interpreted as
such.

9

S/PV.5168

Furthermore, under the Charter of the United
Nations, the General Assembly has the functions and
powers enabling it to define subjects such as terrorism.
In the absence of a common definition, the compilation
of a consolidated list of individuals and organizations
classified as terrorist could lead to the undue
politicization of a committee. Hence the importance of
the appeal made by the Secretary-General in his report.
The work of the 1540 Committee is now entering
an important phase. More than 110 Member States
have submitted their reports, in accordance with
paragraph 4 of resolution 1540 (2004) and with the
specific guidelines drawn up by the Committee. We
urge those Members that have not yet submitted their
national reports — including requests for technical
assistance when necessary — to do so as soon as
possible.
The Committee recently began to consider the
reports with the support of a group of experts. Our
intention is that that work be carried out in a manner
commensurate with the urgency required by the threat
of non-State actors gaining access to weapons of mass
destruction.
In our opinion, the final outcome of the work of
the 1540 Committee should be a framework for
national and international efforts to confront the threat
posed by non-State actors, particularly terrorists. The
Committee could also facilitate the provision of
technical assistance to States that request it, in order to
help them build their capacities in the relevant areas.
Such efforts must always be developed in cooperation
with Member States, with full respect for the integrity
of
multilaterally
negotiated
instruments
and
international law, particularly the rights and obligations
of Member States.
Brazil continues to believe that a world free of
weapons of mass destruction would be a safer world
and that the very existence of nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons, in the possession of either nonState actors or States themselves, is a threat to
international peace and security. Effective, irreversible
and verifiable disarmament by States possessing such
weapons would be a clear sign of their commitment to
that cause.
While terrorism is completely unacceptable, it is
nonetheless widely recognized that certain situations,
usually related to social, political and cultural
oppression as well as to severe economic inequalities,

10

have the potential to create an environment conducive
to the development of extremism. Brazil believes that
our strategies to fight terrorism must also tackle, in an
appropriate manner, the roots of terrorism, as this is the
most effective long-term method of creating
alternatives for individuals that might move them away
from the use of this form of violence.
The President (spoke in Chinese): Before I give
the floor to the next speaker, I wish to remind
representatives once again to limit their statements to
five minutes.
Mr. De La Sablière (France) (spoke in French): I
wish at the outset to thank the Chairpersons of the
three Committees for their briefings, and I commend
you, Mr. President, for having convened, for the first
time, a meeting at which we can take stock of the work
of the three Council Committees involved in combating
terrorism. Although their mandates differ, it is
important to have a comprehensive overview of the
Council’s work in this area.
Furthermore, our entire Organization must act
within the framework of a comprehensive strategy,
which the Secretary-General outlined at Madrid. We
support his approach and agree with the importance he
attaches to respect for human rights, which is not only
an obligation on the part of States but also an
instrument for the prevention of terrorism.
We share the Secretary-General’s view that the
international community must urgently agree on a
definition of terrorism. We very much hope that an
agreement will be reached during the September
summit that will pave the way for the rapid adoption of
a comprehensive convention. The General Assembly
would thereby add a new element to the normative
framework in that area, as it has just done through the
adoption of the Convention on the Suppression of Acts
of Nuclear Terrorism.
The Council has shown the importance of its
contribution to combating one of the most serious
threats to international peace and security. Its CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC) has recently taken some
important steps under the leadership of Ambassador
Denisov and now Ambassador Løj. France is
particularly pleased that the first visit on the ground
fully met our expectations, thanks to outstanding
preparations and full cooperation on the part of the
Moroccan authorities.

S/PV.5168

The CTC has also been developing some best
practices to combat the financing of terrorism. It is our
hope that it will soon endorse the recommendations of
the Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering
on this subject.
In order for the CTC fully to meet the
expectations of Member States, it is more than ever
critical that its Executive Directorate, created almost a
year ago, be provided with all of the experts it requires.
We endorse that statement made this morning by the
Chairperson of the CTC in that respect.
With respect to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), we see two major
areas where improvements might be made. The first
has to do with the Committee’s list. All Member States
should undertake to provide to the Committee
additional names and entities, giving the necessary
information to identify them and establishing their link
with Al-Qaida or the Taliban. The Committee’s
methods must also be improved in order to give rise,
after a case-by-case analysis, to a more effective delisting procedure.
The second area is that of fine-tuning the
sanctions themselves. In a few weeks the Committee
will begin to consider a draft resolution on this
question. The Committee will be working on the
interesting proposals made by the follow-up team
experts. It could also suggest to the Council that it
begin to focus on new issues in order to strengthen the
combat against terrorism — for example, better
oversight of MANPADs or of the Internet, or increased
cooperation with Interpol.
The Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) has filled a gap in the existing multilateral
machinery by addressing the risk of access by terrorists
to weapons of mass destruction. The Committee does
not intend to substitute for the responsibilities of
States, but it does create an obligation for States to
adopt the necessary legislative measures in many areas,
such as border control, export control and the
criminalization of proliferation.
The Committee is up and running, and experts
have begun to consider States’ reports. We will
therefore soon obtain information that will allow us to
progress in this crucial area.
Finally, I should like to emphasize that we
believe that the three Committees and their experts

must strengthen their coordination in areas of common
interest and do a better job of exchanging information
and experience. They are confronted with common
questions: how to ensure that States meet their
obligations; how to build States’ capacities; and how to
cooperate effectively with other international and
regional organizations.
Joint reflection on this issue can only enhance the
effectiveness of our actions. My delegation will
continue to work within these three Committees with
the following objectives: increased effectiveness in the
combat against terrorism, with full respect for human
rights; compliance with those obligations that are
incumbent on every Member State; and full
cooperation on the part of all in the combat against a
scourge to which no one can remain indifferent.
Mr. Baja (Philippines): My delegation welcomes
this initiative to hold a joint open briefing by the
Chairpersons of the three Committees of the Security
Council dealing with the issue of counter-terrorism,
and we thank them for their informative briefings.
We share the view that global counter-terrorism
efforts will be more effective if the efforts of these
subsidiary bodies in pursuing their specific mandates
profit from the enhanced cooperation among them.
In recognition of such synergy, resolution 1566
(2004) specifically called on these bodies to enhance
cooperation with one another. I am particularly
gratified that this call is being seriously heeded, as the
work of the working group established pursuant to
resolution 1566 (2004) will benefit from the wealth of
experience of those three Committees.
As Chairman of that working group, I would like
to acknowledge with warm appreciation the offers of
cooperation by Ambassadors Mayoral, Løj and Motoc
to the working group.
Allow me also to take this opportunity to express
my delegation’s appreciation for the exemplary work
of the previous Chairmen of the Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1373 (2001); to offer my delegation’s full cooperation
to the new Chairpersons, Ambassadors Mayoral and
Løj, respectively; and to reiterate our support to
Ambassador Motoc, Chairman of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).
My delegation also pays tribute to the respective
groups of experts that assist the Committees in their

11

S/PV.5168

work. The expertise and objective perspective they
bring to the consideration of the national reports
submitted to the Committees are invaluable to the work
of the Committees in drawing conclusions on how to
make global counter-terrorism efforts more effective.
There is a lot to be learned from the sanctions
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and
associated individuals and entities, as it is the
Committee with the longest lifespan. Starting with
resolution 1267 (1999), the sanctions regime directed
at that time against the Taliban has undergone
subsequent fine-tuning in response to the evolution of
the modus operandi of Taliban and Al-Qaida terrorists.
Terrorist operations continue to evolve, and
terrorist groups continue to mutate. Now Al-Qaida
functions like a venture capital firm, providing
funding, contacts and advice to many groups or
individuals throughout the world. Such groups and
individuals act in the style of Al-Qaida and follow its
precepts and methods, but are only very loosely part of
Al-Qaida.
My delegation looks forward to the negotiations
on a new draft resolution to respond to this
phenomenon. However, in drawing up the new draft
resolution, it is also important to bear in mind not only
reactive responses for more effective measures against
those changes in modus operandi, but also the need to
be more proactive and to examine the root causes of
terrorism. Examining and addressing those root causes
could have longer-term effects.
We welcome the adoption of the fifteenth work
programme of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), under the able chairmanship of Ambassador
Løj. In that regard, given that the effectiveness of the
Committee in performing its mandate of assessing the
compliance of Member States with the requirements of
resolution 1373 (2001) depends, to a great extent, upon
the full organization of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee’s Executive Directorate (CTED), which we
hope can be completed as soon as possible.
The CTC also needs to explore other creative
means by which to monitor compliance with resolution
1373 (2001) as it contends with “report fatigue” and
the lack of expertise and capacity of some Member
States to respond to highly technical questions. With
respect to report fatigue, it is useful for the three
Committees to exchange and share information and

12

study the possibility of creating a common reports
database. Common information requested by different
resolutions can be identified and obtained from a report
already submitted by a Member State. That could limit
the repetition of questions to which States are required
to respond.
My delegation is pleased that the much-awaited
substantive consideration of national reports by the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) has commenced. We are all aware that
resolution 1540 (2004) has given the Committee a twoyear mandate within which to determine how Member
States comply with the requirements of the resolution.
Fulfilling the mandate of resolution 1540 (2004) to
monitor the global effort to prevent nuclear, biological
and chemical materials that can be used as weapons
from falling into the hands of non-State actors to be
used for the purposes of terrorism is important, but it
could be complicated. In that regard, we hope the vital
element of technical assistance provided for in
resolution 1540 (2004) will be facilitated by the
Committee, led by its dynamic Chairman, Ambassador
Motoc, as soon as possible, in order to maximize its
usefulness for Member States that need such
assistance. In that way, the global capacity to prevent
nuclear, biological and chemical weapons and their
means of delivery from falling into the hands of nonState actors to be used for the purposes of terrorism
could be enhanced. That is true as well with regard to
the facilitation of technical assistance by the CTC in a
wider counter-terrorism perspective.
Various aspects of the war on terrorism have had
some significant success. Continued international
cooperation among intelligence organizations and
increased national security budgets have made it harder
for terrorists to successfully organize and execute
attacks or to move their funds across borders to finance
those attacks. However, if countries are to win the war
on terror, they must deny terrorists the support of local
populations. They must combine the component of
force with the component of cultural, social and even
emotional aspects. They must limit an all-out war
against the threat of terror in such a way that it does
not violate human rights or seriously impinge upon the
daily lives of citizens.
Finally, my delegation would like to see the
incorporation of the activities of these subsidiary
bodies within the comprehensive counter-terrorism
strategy proposed by the Secretary-General.

S/PV.5168

Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I
would like to begin by associating myself with the
comments to be made subsequently by the Ambassador
of Luxembourg on behalf of the European Union.
I would like to welcome and congratulate the
Chairpersons of the Al-Qaida/Taliban sanctions
Committee, the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee. I thank them for their briefings. I would
also like to welcome Ambassador Baja’s role, as well
as his contribution this morning.
Terrorism and the risk of weapons of mass
destruction (WMD) falling into terrorist hands remain
ever-present threats — if you like, the ultimate
nightmare. The Security Council, rightly, continues to
put a sustained effort into that area. This morning’s
joint briefing is therefore indeed very welcome and
demonstrates the range of ongoing work. Those
Committees, and the work of their experts, share
important common themes. It is worth ensuring that
our work forms a coherent whole-Council effort. For
instance, information submitted to each Committee
must form part of a greater whole. It should amount to
a single database of knowledge that States are sharing
with the Council. Equally, the Council’s relationship
with States — through reporting and visits — must be
mutually reinforcing between Committees, and not
confusing to States or wasteful of scarce time and
resources.
There are some clear messages that come out of
the work of each of these Committees, and I think they
are worth emphasizing.
The first is that the fight against terrorism
requires an effort from every Member State. Terrorists
prey upon States in the developing world as much as in
the developed world. They move their money and they
move themselves. They try to acquire the deadly tools
of their trade. They identify weak links. The locations
of recent terrorist atrocities demonstrate that all too
well. Protecting States and individuals must be effected
nationally. A huge amount of progress has been made
in recent years, but we must not let up. The work of the
Council and the Committees provide real assistance.
The second is that the Council recognize that
many States will need help with this effort. It is a longterm effort requiring changes in domestic legislation
and procedures. We may have be working on it for
some years since the establishment in 1999 of the

Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) and the Counter-Terrorism Committee in 2001.
But we must strengthen the sense of urgency and effort
and ensure that the provisions of those resolutions are
implemented fully by all Member States. There is no
shortcut. Those of us with the ability to do so must
stand ready to help others. Committees are always keen
to hear from States that need assistance, to enable us to
facilitate its provision. The United Kingdom is also
providing bilateral assistance.
The third is that international, regional and
subregional bodies are good places for the
establishment of centres of expertise and advice. Many
international organizations have specialized knowledge
and are already helping States with this challenge. The
Council and its Committees have developed good
working relations with many of those organizations,
enabling the Council to draw on their expertise and
experience in the various aspects of the task in front of
us. All regional organizations should also be building
up their expertise, so that they too can help their
members.
The fourth is that the Committees can fulfil their
monitoring mandates properly only if they receive the
full cooperation of Member States. The required
reports from States form a crucial part of the Council’s
information-gathering effort to enable us to monitor the
overall state of the international community’s readiness
and ability to tackle terrorism and to help us identify
where we collectively have to do more. We need
information. Without it key parts of the international
architecture to defend against terrorism may never be
implemented. The willingness of Member States to
share information with the Committees is therefore an
earnest of their commitment to the full implementation
of the Security Council’s resolutions.
Lastly, a word on the recent General Assembly
debate on freedom from fear. Today’s meeting is
exactly about how United Nations Members can help to
put in place the architecture to help their people feel
more safe. The United Kingdom supports the
Secretary-General’s proposals to put in place a
comprehensive United Nations strategy against
terrorism to run across the entire United Nations
family. In that context, we welcome the recent adoption
of the International Convention for the Suppression of
Acts of Nuclear Terrorism and look for early progress
on the comprehensive convention.

13

S/PV.5168

In particular, however, we agree unconditionally
with the Secretary-General’s statement that terrorism is
unjustified in any place, at any time and for any reason.
Terrorist acts undermine the causes they purport to
support. There is no plausible justification for acts of
terrorism. We find this to be a simple statement of fact
and unarguable. We hope very much to see heads of
State underline that at the September High-level
Meeting.
Mr. Holliday (United States of America):
Following your guidance, Sir, I will submit a fuller
statement to be circulated as a document of the
Council. I would like to highlight a few key points.
First, I would like to thank all three Chairpersons
for their presentations. Each Committee is engaged in
important work to fight terrorism and the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction. The fact that we are
holding this meeting in this format demonstrates
genuine progress towards enhanced coordination and
cooperation among the Committees and their staffs —
a factor crucially important to achieving the Council’s
counter-terrorism and counter-proliferation goals.
Regarding the Counter-Terrorism Committee, let
me begin by thanking Ambassador Denisov and his
staff for their able conduct of Committee business.
Under Ambassador Denisov’s chairmanship and the
able stewardship of Ambassador Ruperez, the CounterTerrorism Committee and its Executive Directorate
have made important progress towards enhancing
monitoring of the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001). The first site visit occurred and was a notable
success. Building on that success will require follow
up. We are confident that Chairperson Løj will
continue to lead us successfully in those efforts.
We look forward to the Counter-Terrorism
Committee’s producing best-practices guidelines to
assist States in the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001). We hope that the Security Council will soon be
able to endorse the Financial Action Task Force
(FATF) special recommendations on terrorist financing
and money-laundering as best practices, which States
should consider following in taking action against the
financing of terrorism.
That point relates also to the work of the 1267
Committee. Fundamentally, the best way the CounterTerrorism Committee can contribute to the struggle
against terrorism and help those on the front lines of
that fight is by helping States to implement resolution

14

1373 (2001) and by holding those that fail to do so, or
that will not do so, accountable.
Regarding the 1540 Committee, we commend
Chairman Motoc for his leadership and the work of his
delegation as well. The 1540 Committee plays an
important role in efforts to stop the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. Reporting to the
Committee in a timely and complete fashion is
important to its success. We and other States are ready
to help those Governments needing assistance in that
area.
Regarding the 1267 Committee, we thank
Chairman Mayoral for his leadership and would
highlight that the United States is devoting substantial
resources to combating terrorist financing. We again
emphasize the importance of the FATF best practices as
guides for all States in that endeavour. We encourage
States to submit names for inclusion on the
consolidated list and remind States that they need to
provide identifying and background information
demonstrating the association of individuals or entities
with Al-Qaida or the Taliban.
In conclusion, let me emphasize what we all
know. None of our collective counter-terrorism efforts
will succeed unless States make implementation of the
resolutions the high priority it must be. We need a
standard of accountability and compliance against
which the efforts of individual States can be measured.
Many States and organizations are ready and willing
provide assistance to States needing help, and none
should hesitate to ask for such help.
Mr. Denisov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, I wish to thank you, Sir, for
organizing today’s meeting and Ambassadors Ellen
Margrethe Løj, César Mayoral and Mihnea Motoc for
their in-depth and substantive reviews of the work of
the Committees which they chair.
We are pleased to note that, today, we have a
clear definition of the sphere for practical interaction
between the related Committees, including an increase
in the reciprocal exchange of information, cooperation
among the expert groups, and the coordination of
planned visits to Member States. We have taken steps
to develop coordinated working methods aimed at the
timely submission by States of their national reports on
their compliance with obligations under the relevant
resolutions. It is important in principle for us that the
Security Council committees focus on close

S/PV.5168

cooperation
with
international
and
regional
organizations and that they use their experience and
potential to strengthen their dialogue with States.
I take this opportunity to thank Ambassador Ellen
Margrethe Løj and other speakers for their favourable
assessment of the 10-month Russian chairmanship of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC).
Thanks to joint efforts, the CTC has made
important progress in the reform of the Committee,
pursuant to resolution 1535 (2004), and in organizing
new forms of dialogue with States. The CounterTerrorism Executive Directorate (CTED) has now been
established and is working. Procedures and
methodologies have been developed that have allowed
us to launch the process of country visits. We have
implemented new methods for expert assessments of
States’ needs for technical assistance, with the active
involvement of potential donors. Finally, we have laid
the basis for the qualitative expansion of the dialogue
and practical interaction of the CTC with international
and regional organizations.
We welcome the Danish chairmanship’s focus on
the ongoing further development of those approaches
in the CTC’s work. At the same time, we share the
concerns regarding the delay in the staffing of the
CTED. That unfortunate situation, as we see it, is due
ostensibly to a number of reasons, but it must be given
particular attention. The staffing of CTED will
determine, to a critical extent, how effectively we will
be able to implement all of the plans scheduled for that
body.
The Russian Federation attaches great importance
to the work of the 1267 Committee on sanctions
against Al-Qaida and the Taliban. We favourably assess
the work of the analytical support and sanctions
Monitoring Team. We believe that its second report
generally establishes a positive basis for the
Committee’s ongoing work and will enable us in the
near future to prepare a new draft resolution under
paragraph 3 of resolution 1526 (2004). It is important
that we all share the general understanding that we
cannot underestimate the scope or degree of the threat
that Al-Qaida still poses to peace and stability.
The year that has passed since the Security
Council adopted resolution 1540 (2004) has confirmed
the timeliness of that initiative. An important step was
taken towards strengthening the international legal
basis in that area on 13 April, when the General

Assembly adopted the International Convention for the
Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism. We
favourably assess the work of the 1540 Committee,
which currently enjoys all the requisite authority and
expert capabilities for the resolution’s implementation.
We attach great significance to the establishment of
contacts and cooperation between that body and the
CTC and other international non-proliferation and
expert oversight mechanisms.
We believe that the practice of holding such
Security Council meetings as today’s on the work of its
subsidiary counter-terrorism bodies must be pursued.
We are taking only the initial steps to coordinate
the work of the Committees. The Council’s ongoing
attention will be instrumental for overseeing and
facilitating this important process.
I note that my statement took exactly five
minutes.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank the
representative of the Russian Federation for using only
five minutes.
Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): I too hope to follow the
rule that you have set, Mr. President. I will distribute a
longer written version of my statement.
At the outset, I would like to thank you, Sir, for
organizing today’s meeting, and I would like to express
our satisfaction at today’s joint briefing by the Chairs
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), the AlQaida/Taliban sanctions Committee and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). I thank
them very much for their precise and most informative
presentations of the work of their respective
Committees.
Greece fully associates itself with the statement
to be made later in the debate by the Permanent
Representative of Luxembourg on behalf of the
European Union.
Briefings such as today’s reinforce interaction
and cooperation among the three Committees and their
groups of experts and provide information and
transparency with respect to their work, thus enhancing
the Security Council’s legitimacy in the fields of
terrorism and weapons of mass destruction.
Greece strongly supports the development of a
comprehensive United Nations strategy to combat
terrorism that ensures strict consistency with

15

S/PV.5168

international law, due process and human rights
standards and that addresses all factors that contribute
to terrorism. Furthermore, the adoption by the General
Assembly of a comprehensive convention against
terrorism that contains a definition of terrorism would
help worldwide efforts to combat terrorism in a most
effective manner. The General Assembly’s adoption
this month of the Convention for the Suppression of
Acts of Nuclear Terrorism (General Assembly
resolution 59/290) is, in our view, a strong political
signal from Member States that the General Assembly
is the most appropriate forum for the elaboration of
consensual legal standards for the global fight against
terrorism.
The Al-Qaida/Taliban sanctions Committee has
recently made many efforts to improve the sanctions
regime, and we believe that Member States should
fully cooperate with the Committee and its Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team, in particular
through the submission of reports and new names of
individuals and entities to be added to the Committee’s
list. In our view, the names of individuals and entities
should be placed on the Committee’s list only if they
are accompanied with identifying information and
background information demonstrating that those
individuals and entities are associated with Osama bin
Laden or with members of Al-Qaida or the Taliban, as
noted in resolution 1526 (2004).
Greece welcomes the new Chair of the CounterTerrorism Committee, Ambassador Ellen Margrethe
Løj, and wishes her every success in carrying out her
most demanding and difficult task. We also express our
gratitude to the previous Chairman of the Committee,
Ambassador Denisov, for the outstanding job he did
during his chairmanship.
Over the past three months, the CTC has carried
out some new activities aimed at improving
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) by means of
an enhanced direct dialogue with Member States. Onsite visits have already been initiated by the CTC
Executive Directorate (CTED), pursuant to Security
Council resolution 1535 (2004), with the consent of the
States concerned. Those visits are an important way of
assessing the further needs of the visited State in its
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). The first
such visit, to Morocco, was a most useful one. In that
respect, we are thankful to the Executive Director, Mr.
Rupérez, and to his team for all their work and efforts.

16

We would also like to thank the Moroccan authorities
for their openness and cooperation with the CTED.
Another positive development in recent months
has been the CTC’s elaboration of new methods to
determine the technical assistance and other needs of
States in order to improve their counter-terrorism
capacity. We support the Committee’s programme of
work for the next three months (S/2005/266) and the
priorities that it sets out.
The proliferation of nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons and their means of delivery
constitutes one of the most serious threats to
international peace and security. Security Council
resolution 1540 (2004) reinforces the non-proliferation
regime and aims at preventing non-State actors from
gaining access to nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons and their means of delivery.
We support the quarterly programme of work of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) and the activities that it sets
out. In that respect, we welcome the recent recruitment
of four experts of the Committee, who will begin
examination of the first State reports.
Mr. Oshima (Japan): First allow me to thank
you, Mr. President, for the kind words of sympathy and
condolences that you expressed at the start of the
meeting, and on behalf of Council members, in
connection with the tragic train accident that occurred
yesterday in western Japan. Your words and the words
of Council members will be conveyed to my
Government and to the families affected.
My delegation would like to express its
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for convening this
important meeting for a joint briefing, and I thank
Ambassador
Mayoral,
Ambassador
Løj
and
Ambassador Motoc for effectively guiding their
respective Committees. I also wish to express our
appreciation to Ambassador Denisov for the important
contribution he made as the Chairman of the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC) through March of this
year, as well as to his staff.
Today, the scourge of terrorism is a matter of
increasing concern to the entire international
community. The threat of terrorism continues to grow,
as does the awareness of the need to fight it effectively.
Hence the importance of a comprehensive counterterrorism strategy. In that connection, Japan welcomes

S/PV.5168

the strategy outlined in the Secretary-General’s speech
in Madrid, described succinctly as the five “D”s. We
also welcome the General Assembly’s 13 April
adoption of the International Convention for the
Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism (General
Assembly resolution 59/260). We expect that Member
States will join and implement all the related
international conventions and protocols, which now
total 13, as soon as possible.
Recalling the numerous tragedies caused to date
by Al-Qaida and the Taliban, we fully support the work
of the Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions Committee. My
Government appreciates the various activities
undertaken by the Monitoring Team led by Mr. Richard
Barrett, including the submission of its reports. We
have actively participated in the work of the
Committee to find ways and means of establishing
more effective sanctions measures, and we intend to
continue our active involvement. In particular, it is
important that the contents of the consolidated list
prepared by the Committee be expanded and improved
so that the list can be of greater practical use to
Member States in implementing sanctions measures.
One year after the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED) was established, my
delegation would like to express its hope that it will
become fully operational under its Executive Director,
Mr. Javier Rupérez, with the completion of the
selection of qualified experts as soon as possible. We
wish to take this opportunity to extend our appreciation
to all those experts who have contributed a great deal
to the work of the CTC to date and who have recently
departed from the Committee.
Visits to Member States by the CTC — the first
was to Morocco in March — represent progress in the
work of the Committee, and we welcome that. Such
visits are useful in strengthening the dialogue between
the international community and the visited States,
particularly for counter-terrorism capacity-building.
We hope that more States will agree to receive visits by
CTC missions in the future.
The role of the CTED as a clearing house for the
provision of technical assistance should be
strengthened. We hope to see, for example, the further
development of cooperation between the CTED and the
Counter-Terrorism Action Group of the Group of
Eight.

Preventing terrorists from gaining access to
weapons of mass destruction and their means of
delivery is a matter to be tackled with urgency, and
Member States need to put in place or strengthen the
appropriate domestic legislation and law enforcement
systems in implementation of Security Council
resolution 1540 (2004).
National reports submitted to the Committee
provide important materials to gauge the state of
implementation in each State, and we welcome the fact
that the Committee has begun its work in a substantive
way by examining the national reports. Those Member
States which have not yet submitted their national
reports are called upon to do so as soon as possible.
Technical assistance should be extended to those
Member States, as required, in order to implement the
resolution. My Government is engaged in focused
efforts to strengthen the non-proliferation system in the
Asian region through various cooperation and dialogue
initiatives, such as export controls seminars and the
Asian Senior-Level Talks on Non-Proliferation. We
intend to continue to strengthen such efforts.
It is important to ensure that there is good
coordination among the three counter-terrorism
Committees in their respective activities, such as visits
to Member States and needs assessments for technical
assistance. This joint briefing today is therefore a
welcome step.
My Government also attaches importance to
cooperation with the working group established
pursuant to resolution 1566 (2004) under the
chairmanship of Ambassador Baja. Japan is determined
to continue to extend full cooperation in this critically
important area.
Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Ambassador César Mayoral, Ambassador
Ellen Løj and Ambassador Mihnea Motoc for their
excellent briefings, and to commend them for their
efforts as Chairs of their respective Committees. And I
would say that my delegation fully subscribes to the
objectives of the three Committees, whose efforts are
making an undeniable contribution to freeing mankind
from the fears generated by terrorist threats.
With respect to the Al Qaida and Taliban
sanctions Committee, I would like to once again point
out the dynamic leadership of Ambassador César
Mayoral and his team in accomplishing the mandate of
the Committee. We would also like to commend

17

S/PV.5168

Richard Barrett and his team, as well as the other
members of the Secretariat for their work and for the
assistance that they have provided to the Committee.
We agree with Ambassador Mayoral that States
that have not yet submitted their reports should do so
as soon as possible.
We are pleased that the Committee has begun an
in-depth analysis of recommendations contained in the
second report of the Monitoring Team (S/2005/83,
annex), and that some of these will, I am sure, find
their way into the new draft resolution, whose
objective will be to further strengthen the current
sanctions regime.
We support the Committee in implementing its
mandate and in carrying out the tasks before it. We
encourage it to pursue dialogue with Member States to
ensure that the sanctions regime is implemented. In this
regard, Ambassador Mayoral should make full use of
the effective tool of visits to selected countries to bring
about this high-level dialogue.
We would also like the new draft resolution,
which will probably be adopted next July, to take into
consideration the recommendations of the Monitoring
Group, so long as they are in conformity with the
Committee’s mandate.
With respect to the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), I would like to commend Ambassador Løj for
the proactive way in which she has conducted the work
of the Committee. I would like to take this opportunity
also to thank the Executive Director of the CTC
Executive Directorate (CTED), Ambassador Javier
Rupérez, his team and the other members of the
Secretariat for their support to the work of the CTC.
We note that the CTC has taken some positive actions,
including the following: strengthening dialogue with
Member States; introducing new methods to determine
States’ needs for technical assistance, the first letters in
which regard have been examined by Subcommittee C,
which I chair; engaging in the dialogue with
international, regional and subregional organizations;
making efforts to strengthen the practical capacity of
the Executive Directorate; and initiating best practices
relative to the issue of the financing of terrorism.
We note that, in spite of the sizeable number of
reports presented, 75 States are late in submitting their
reports due to a lack of technical capacity, or, it must
be said, to “report-fatigue”. We urge the CTC to pursue

18

its dialogue with these States and to continue to be
proactive with respect to increasing the awareness of
the regional organizations to which those countries
belong. Here, we are pleased that the first visit of the
CTED was to Morocco, our neighbouring country.
Other visits are scheduled in the near future for Kenya,
Albania and Thailand.
In this respect, we hope that States members of
the Council, and thus of the CTC, will invite the CTED
to visit their countries, because, in our view, these
visits are an important tool for assessing
implementation of the provisions of resolution 1373
(2001) by States.
We support the fifteenth work programme of the
CTC (S/2005/266); we would be very pleased to see
the Executive Directorate fully operational as soon as
possible so that it better carry out the missions
entrusted to it.
Considerable progress has been made since the
adoption of resolution 1540 (2004) in terms of the
international community’s efforts to confront the threat
posed by the acquisition of weapons of mass
destruction by non-State actors. The measures
proposed by that resolution are an effective response
that can save us from the proliferation of such
weapons. We are nonetheless convinced that the most
effective way to deal with the problem is to completely
eliminate weapons of mass destruction.
The establishment of the 1540 Committee and its
three subcommittees, as well as the adoption of
guidelines for its procedures and for the preparation of
national reports, are accomplishments which testify to
the momentum in implementing resolution 1540
(2004).
My delegation is pleased that States have
expressed their support for the process initiated by the
resolution by submitting national reports under
paragraph 4 of the resolution. We hope that countries
which have not yet submitted their reports will be able
to do so as soon as possible. In this connection, it
would be a good idea for the Committee to begin to
consider the possibility of providing assistance to
States that request it in complying with the provisions
of the resolution.
We also welcome the Committee’s decision to
recruit eight experts to assist it in meeting the mandate

S/PV.5168

given to it; and we will give them our full support and
our full cooperation.

could have incalculable consequences for the entire
international community.

Finally, we are pleased that the General Assembly
has adopted by consensus the International Convention
for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism
(General Assembly resolution 59/290), and we hope
that a draft comprehensive convention will be adopted,
also by consensus as soon as possible.

It is essential that all States become involved in
the Council’s work, especially with regard to the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Whether or
not they possess weapons of mass destruction, all
States should contribute to preventing the acquisition
or the production of such weapons and their delivery
systems by non-State actors. International cooperation
in this area as well remains the best way to fight
terrorism.

My delegation supports the draft presidential
statement that will be adopted at the end of today’s
meeting.
Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. President, for having organized this public
meeting, which gives us an overview of the activities
of the Security Council in the fight against terrorism. It
indicates the cooperation that exists among the Council
Committees that are following up the Council’s
resolutions regarding terrorism. This cooperation is
necessary in order to coordinate the work undertaken
by the Council. Exchanges among the Committees for
the pooling and sharing of information and of
experiences could indeed contribute to improving the
coherence of the Council’s action, which is
indispensable to ensure the effectiveness of the fight
against terrorism.
I want to thank Ambassadors Mayoral, Løj and
Motoc for their briefings, which clearly show that
concrete action has been undertaken in that direction,
and that it will continue in order to enable the United
Nations to remain in the forefront of the fight against
terrorism.
Among the initiatives taken by the Council, the
visits by Committee Chairmen to Member States are, in
our opinion, a very productive practice. We favour the
continuation of such visits, and we appreciate the
careful planning efforts being made by the Chairmen of
the Committees in coordination with the Permanent
Missions of Member States.
We urge the Committees and their expert teams,
in particular the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, to step up efforts with a view to
enhancing the effectiveness of measures aimed at
drying up the sources of terrorist financing and at
preventing weapons, especially weapons of mass
destruction and their delivery systems, from getting
into the hands of terrorists. There can be no doubt that
the acquisition and use of such weapons by terrorists

Regular contact among Council Committees
should also facilitate the granting of appropriate
assistance to Member States that need it in order to
strengthen their national counter-terrorism capacities.
In the vast majority of cases, that means helping them
to draft appropriate national legislation and to establish
national structures to monitor implementation. Such
measures can represent a real challenge for some
countries in terms of human resources, equipment and
investment.
In addition to the individual mobilization of
States, Council action to promote cooperation in the
fight against terrorism must extend to regional and
subregional organizations and specialized agencies,
such as Interpol, the International Atomic Energy
Agency and the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons, whose activities are decisive if our
objectives are to be achieved.
We welcome the advances that have been made in
this domain. They will make it possible for the Council
to broaden its field of vision, as well as its capacity to
mobilize the international community and keep it in a
state of constant alert in the face of the persistent threat
posed by terrorism.
In this context, we support the effective
implementation of the Declaration and Plan of Action
adopted at the fourth special meeting on cooperation
with regional organizations in the fight against
terrorism, held at Almaty in January 2005.
From another perspective, the global crusade
against terrorism must not be carried out to the
detriment of humankind’s achievements in the field of
human rights, which our Organization has a
responsibility to defend and promote. In this regard, we
strongly support the proposal made by the SecretaryGeneral in his recent report on United Nations reform

19

S/PV.5168

(A/59/2003) to appoint a special rapporteur on the
question of the compatibility of counter-terrorism
measures and the international obligations of States
with respect to human rights.
In this context, it is important that the various
counter-terrorism Committees continue with and step
up the implementation of clear and transparent
guidelines in carrying out their mandates, in order to
ensure increased credibility.
The Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) should, for its part, apply clear and
objective criteria in handling the list of individuals and
entities linked to Al-Qaida and the Taliban as regards
the inclusion and removal of names, as well as the
impact on the list of legal decisions taken by Member
States. That is indeed the substance of the question of
listing and delisting — a question that arises in general
terms with regard to the implementation of targeted
sanctions established by the Security Council. It is
important that that question be further considered at the
proper level in order to rationalize Council practice in
that regard.
In defining its action, the international
community cannot disregard the urgent need to resolve
problematic and dysfunctional situations within the
international system that serve as a pretext for
terrorism, because they are an obvious source of
frustration. The international community must tackle
social inequality, injustice, underdevelopment, dire
poverty and conflict, which fuel violence and
extremism.
At this time of debate about United Nations
reform, those questions must be accorded particular
attention as we assess threats whose elimination is
necessary if we are to arrive at genuine collective
security based on the rule of law in the service of
human dignity, peace and sustainable development of
all.
Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): I
should like, at the outset, to pay tribute to Ambassador
Andrey Denisov on the completion of his term of office
as Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC). Despite the brief time that we worked with him
in the CTC, we benefited greatly from his able
leadership. We congratulate Ambassador Løj on her
assumption of the chairmanship of the CTC.

20

We also welcome the comprehensive briefing of
Ambassador Motoc, Chairman of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), and
that of Ambassador Mayoral, Chairman of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999).
We are meeting following the adoption, two
weeks ago, by the General Assembly of the
International Convention for the Suppression of Acts
of Nuclear Terrorism (General Assembly resolution
59/290). We believe that that is another giant stride in
our effort to deny terrorists access to the most
dangerous of all weapons of mass destruction. That
action confirms the importance of multilateralism and
the collective response to shared threats and challenges
in the international community.
The task ahead of us is demanding. It will be long
and daunting. But we must persevere together in order
to prevail in the war against terrorism. We are in total
agreement with the Chairpersons of the CTC and the
1540 Committee on the need to finish the process of
the hiring of experts. It is imperative that the
Secretariat, working in close cooperation with the 1540
Committee, should give that matter the urgent attention
that it deserves and ensure that it is given the necessary
human resources to enable it to perform its work,
bearing in mind that the mandate of the 1540
Committee expires in 12 months’ time.
We are in agreement with the Chairpersons of the
three Committees that cooperation at various levels is
of the utmost importance and should be encouraged.
Just as cooperation with Member States is important in
the war against terrorism, cooperation between
Member States and the Committees, as well as between
Member States and international organizations, is
important and necessary in this endeavour.
It is gratifying to note that the 1267 Committee is
exploring diverse ways of combating terrorism by
enlisting the expertise of other institutions to
complement the work of the United Nations. My
delegation commends the current initiatives by the
Committee to develop cooperation with Interpol in
order to synchronize related collective strategies and
the exchange of information in dealing with the
scourge of terrorism.
Transparency is the key to any meaningful
cooperation between the Committees and Member
States. In this context, I would like to stress the need

S/PV.5168

for concerted efforts to make the work of the
Committees as transparent as possible, compatible with
operational requirements. Briefings by Committee
Chairpersons to Member States should continue and,
whenever possible, should be held jointly, as was the
case recently. We are also mindful of the need to
safeguard and respect human rights and civil liberties
while pursuing the war against terrorism.
In the case of the 1267 Committee, Member
States have benefited immensely from regular
interaction with the Committee’s Monitoring Team,
particularly in the preparation of their submissions and,
to a certain extent, in reducing reporting fatigue.
Dialogue should be maintained and technical assistance
extended so as to ease bottlenecks and delays in
reporting obligations.
Let me hasten to point out that the visit last
February of the Monitoring Team of the 1267
Committee to my country was extremely important and
helpful. The visit enhanced the operational
effectiveness of many Government departments and
their officials whose responsibilities include combating
the menace of terrorism. Such visits should be
encouraged in future for the purpose of building the
capacity of Member States, as clearly demonstrated by
the recent Monitoring Team visit to Tanzania.
As a victim of terrorism in recent years, Tanzania
is committed to fighting that scourge. The Government
has enacted legislation that conforms with resolution
1373 (2001) regarding the prevention and suppression
of the financing of terrorist acts. In that respect, we
support the adoption, as a set of best practices, of the
special recommendation on terrorist financing of the
Financial Action Task Force.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
China.
The Chinese delegation wishes to thank
Ambassadors Mayoral, Løj and Motoc for their
briefings on the work of the three Committees. We
appreciate their efforts to advance the work of their
Committees. On this occasion, I wish to make the
following comments.
First, over the past few months, the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and
associated individuals and entities, the Security

Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism and the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) have made positive progress in
their respective fields and have played irreplaceable
roles in ensuring the implementation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions. We express to them our
appreciation for that. At present, the international fight
against terrorism still faces an enormous task. As the
Security Council’s main mechanisms in the fight
against terrorism, the 1267 Committee and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) are entrusted
with important mandates. We support the strengthening
of the Security Council as the main forum for
international cooperation against terrorism.
Secondly, with regard to the next phase of our
work, we believe that, since the mandates of the three
Committees, though different, converge in some areas,
they should enhance their coordination and cooperation
in areas such as collecting, exchanging and sharing
information. We encourage the Committees to continue
their dialogue with the relevant international and
regional organizations and to improve their interaction
and communications with the working group
established pursuant to resolution 1566 (2004) in a
joint effort to enhance international counter-terrorism
cooperation.
Here, I wish to thank Ambassador Denisov for
his contributions as CTC Chairman and to congratulate
Ambassador Løj on her assumption of the
chairmanship. I am confident that, under her
leadership, the CTC will achieve even greater
accomplishments.
We welcome the adoption of the CTC’s fifteenth
90-day work programme (S/2005/266). We expect the
CTC to finish as soon as possible its consideration of
the reports submitted by Member States, to assist
Member States — particularly developing countries —
in carrying out capacity-building measures, to
formulate specific practical measures and to undertake
targeted actions to meet the needs of Member States.
It must be pointed out that, although more than a
year has passed since the adoption of resolution 1535
(2004), the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED) has yet to complete all its
preparations and to become fully operational. That
situation should change as soon as possible. We urge
the Secretariat to accelerate the relevant processes.

21

S/PV.5168

Thirdly, resolution 1540 (2004) is of great
significance in the promotion of international nonproliferation efforts. To date, more than 110 countries
have submitted their initial reports. That fully reflects
the importance that countries attach to the resolution as
well as their resolve to implement it. We expect the
1540 Committee to step up its consideration of the
reports submitted by Member States and to study ways
and means to provide assistance to those Member
States that need it to implement the resolution. China
will continue to take an active part in the work of the
three Committees, and we are prepared to join other
members in a constant effort to enhance the
comprehensive and effective implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
As a measure to optimize the use of our time, I
will not individually invite speakers to take seats at the
Council table or invite them to resume their seats on
the side of the Chamber. When a speaker is taking the
floor, the Conference Officer will seat the next speaker
on the list at the table. I thank members for their
understanding and cooperation.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Luxembourg, to whom I give the
floor.
Mr. Hoscheit (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union. The acceding countries Bulgaria and Romania,
the candidate countries Croatia and Turkey, the
countries of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Serbia and Montenegro and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, and the European
Free Trade Association countries Iceland and Norway,
members of the European Economic Area, align
themselves with this statement.
The European Union welcomes with satisfaction
this first joint briefing by the Chairpersons of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the
Taliban and associated individuals and entities, the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism
and the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). We attach great
importance to open Security Council debates on the

22

issues of counter-terrorism and the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction — particularly on the
Committees’ work in those areas. Such debates help to
strengthen the general acceptance of the Committees
by members of the United Nations family and help to
enhance the Committees’ legitimacy in their eyes.
Although the three Committees have different
mandates, the European Union believes that they can
further strengthen their cooperation — particularly at
the expert level — in monitoring the implementation of
their respective Security Council resolutions, in
sharing information and in coordinating visits to
Member States. Contacts should also continue with the
working group established pursuant to resolution 1566
(2004).
We are deeply concerned that a number of
countries are late in meeting their obligation to submit
reports to the three Committees. We strongly urge
those Governments that have not yet done so to finalize
their reports and to request help if necessary. In that
connection, the European Union invites the
Committees to explore in a coordinated manner the
issue of technical assistance and assistance needs
assessment. I should also like to recall the importance
of a broad and sustained dialogue with Member States
and with international, regional and subregional
organizations in order to strengthen counter-terrorism
capacities. The European Union, for its part, is actively
pursuing its relations with third countries — including
through visits and direct dialogue — and is
considering, inter alia, possible technical assistance.
The European Union welcomes the efforts
undertaken to improve the sanctions regime against AlQaida and the Taliban and encourages Member States
to cooperate fully with the 1267 Committee and its
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team,
particularly by providing information and names to add
to the consolidated list. If it is to be credible and
operational, the list must be precise and based on the
proper indicators. At the same time, the European
Union is convinced that there is an urgent need to
review the delisting procedures in order to improve
them.
The European Union unreservedly supports the
fifteenth 90-day work programme of the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC) (S/2005/266), particularly
with regard to formulating a set of best practices to
help States implement the provisions of Security

S/PV.5168

Council resolution 1373 (2001) related to the financing
of terrorism and to other important aspects of the
resolution. We are particularly pleased that the
Committee made its first visit to a Member State —
with the participation of the European Union — in
March and that three more visits are planned in the
near future. We strongly urge all components of the
United Nations system to act swiftly so that the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate can become
fully operational.
Given that terrorists have declared their
willingness to acquire nuclear, biological and chemical
weapons, the European Union underlines the crucial
importance of resolution 1540 (2004). In that context,
we welcome the fact that the 1540 Committee’s first
four experts have now been recruited and that the first
reports submitted by Member States are currently being
considered. The European Union supports the
Committee’s quarterly work programme and, in
particular,
the
Committee’s
interaction
with
international, regional and subregional bodies in the
area of non-proliferation with a view to strengthening
the international non-proliferation regime.
Before concluding, I wish to make two more
general observations.
As the Secretary-General rightly points out in his
recent report entitled “In larger freedom”, terrorism is
a threat to all the values that the United Nations stands
for, and our strategy to combat that phenomenon must
be comprehensive and multifaceted and encompass the
whole United Nations system.
The European Union fully supports the SecretaryGeneral’s call on Member States to agree, by the end of
the sixtieth session of the General Assembly, on a
comprehensive convention that includes a definition of
terrorism. The recent adoption of the Convention for
the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism
represents an important step in the right direction. The
European Union hopes that it will be signed and
ratified without reservation by as many States as
possible.
The EU is convinced that efforts to combat
terrorism must respect human rights and fundamental
freedoms. Counter-terrorism actions must at all times
be accompanied by the respect of due process and the
rule of law. There can be no trade-off between human
rights and effective security measures. Indeed, respect

for human rights must remain an integral part of any
global counter-terrorism strategy.
The EU also believes that, in order to be effective
in the long run, our response to terrorism must also
address its root causes.
Allow me to conclude by commending the
Chairpersons of the three Committees on their work
and by reiterating that the European Union remains
firmly committed to combating the continued threat of
terrorism through a comprehensive and integrated
approach that involves strengthening both national and
international cooperation, in accordance with the
principles on which the European Union is founded.
The President (spoke in Chinese): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Chile. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Muñoz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Mr.
President, allow me first of all to congratulate you on
your conduct of the work of the Security Council
during this month and on your initiative to present
jointly the reports of the Committees established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and
1540 (2004), respectively. This is an excellent sign of
transparency and coordination in the fight against
terrorism.
I believe that there is also agreement on the
importance of the contribution that can be made by the
Working Group established pursuant to resolution 1566
(2004), and I extend my best wishes to Ambassador
Baja with respect to the work that has just begun.
I wish to express my appreciation for the kind
words about the work that I did in chairing the AlQaida Committee for a period of nearly two years. As I
said before, this was not an individual effort, but,
rather, a question of teamwork, since the members of
the Committee and an efficient and professional
Secretariat team made a vital contribution to the
Committee’s success, and valuable assistance was also
rendered by the Monitoring Team.
I also extend my best wishes for success to the
Ambassador of Argentina, César Mayoral, and his
team. I am sure that they will continue to perform with
dedication the demanding work called for in resolution
1526 (2004). I wish to reaffirm my own personal
commitment and that of the Chilean Mission to support
him in any way needed.

23

S/PV.5168

As you can well imagine, I wish to refer first to
the Committee on sanctions against Al-Qaida and the
Taliban.
It should be recalled that, with the adoption of
resolution 1526 (2004), the Committee was given a
much more demanding substantive and conceptual
structure for the performance of its tasks. For the first
time, new methods and a new modus operandi were
introduced in the area of finances. Progress was made
in terms of definitions, the provision of data and
identification, and strengthened monitoring of the
implementation of sanctions in order better to
understand the needs and problems of States as well as
the challenges facing them and to more effectively
assist them in their work.
Visits to States by the Chairman of the
Committee provided opportunities for learning about
realities on the ground and for improving dialogue with
countries, clarifying doubts, and establishing ties of
confidence and communication with States. I am
therefore pleased to hear of the forthcoming visit to be
made by my successor to Europe and the Middle East.
I noted with satisfaction the holding of the first
meeting with a Member State earlier this year, in
accordance with the provisions of operative paragraph
11 of resolution 1526 (2004). I believe that this is the
beginning of a process of dialogue that can grow in
strength through the participation of an increasing
number of countries.
We must take into account, as has already been
stated here, that in June the Security Council will have
to reflect on the future mandate of the Committee. I
should therefore like to mention a number of points
that, in my delegation’s view, must be taken into
account.
First, we must continue to urge States to observe
international codes and norms for combating the
financing of terrorism. Individual States, regional
organizations and financial institutions such as the
Financial Action Task Force have created a pool of
international best practices, codes and norms that can
be helpful and that should be taken into account.
Second, more decisive action is needed to prevent
the abuse of non-profit organizations and of charitable
organizations, and to monitor informal or alternative
systems for the sending of remittances, perhaps by
moving from recommendatory to mandatory language.

24

Third, it is essential adequately to address other
new methods of financing for terrorist purposes, such
as the trans-border movement of foreign currency. It
would therefore be useful if States were required to
establish criteria and procedures for monitoring the
transport of currency.
Fourth, I believe that it is important to strengthen
the element of due process with respect to persons on
the list without detracting from the efficiency of the
implementation of sanctions. In that regard, I should
like to recall the offer made by Switzerland of
technical assistance in the form of software for the
immediate freezing of the financial assets of persons
and entities once the appropriate decisions are taken.
Fifth, it would be useful to explore the possibility
of creating incentives to increase the number of
individuals and entities included in the list. It is evident
that the 437 individuals and entities associated with AlQaida or the Taliban that appear on the list represent a
small fraction of those that should be included. This
should also be accompanied by qualitative
improvement, including, as the Ambassador of
Argentina mentioned, the status of deceased persons
who are still on the list.
Sixth, I believe that it is also necessary to take
into account the valuable recommendations made by
the Monitoring Team in its two reports last year and to
take into account many of the recommendations made
by the Secretary-General in his report entitled “In
larger freedom”, including the need to reach a
consensus definition of terrorism.
Seventh, it would be useful to have a strategy for
requesting selective and specific reports, with a view to
achieving greater effectiveness and preventing fatigue
on the part of States due to excessive demands for
reports.
Lastly, it is essential to address the vacuum that
exists regarding what to do with individuals who,
despite being on the list and the object of sanctions,
move freely within certain countries even though they
are wanted for terrorist acts in other nations. I think
that it is important to consider the advisability of not
granting political asylum to such individuals and to
cooperate in bringing them to justice before the
competent authorities in the countries in which they are
wanted.

S/PV.5168

I wish to associate myself with those who have
underscored the excellent leadership provided to the
Counter-Terrorism Committee by Ambassador Denisov
and his team and also to wish Ambassador Løj success
in her new functions.
We acknowledge the work that has been done to
complete the process of revitalization of this
Committee, especially the progress made towards
ensuring that the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate is fully operational. We appreciate the work
done by Ambassador Rupérez in the Committee, for
example, in identifying and tackling the problems
encountered by States in the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) and in contributing to
improving States’ counter-terrorism capacities, as well
as towards an increase in the number of accessions to
and ratifications of international conventions and
protocols.
We attach particular importance to the work being
done by the CTC in the area of technical assistance to
States. I have frequently noted the urgent need for such
cooperation.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee has also set an
example in terms of its ties with international, regional
and subregional organizations.
With the adoption of resolution 1540 (2004), the
Council decided that all States should establish
national controls to prevent the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, in particular for terrorist
purposes. This newest of the three Committees, under
the capable chairmanship of Ambassador Motoc, has
responded well to the demands of its mandate, and we
wish it all the best. We agree that the Committee is
complex and sensitive in nature, as it is operating in a
relatively new field. I commend the Committee on the
number of reports it has received and for the review
currently being carried out by the Committee experts.
In closing, I wish to reiterate my satisfaction with
the work done by the three Committees to implement
their mandates, and in particular with the excellent
spirit of cooperation they have demonstrated. Lastly, I
would like to say that in the fight against terrorism,
success in achieving objectives and the effectiveness of
sanctions ultimately depend upon the States Members
of the Organization. I think it will be a long struggle.
Unfortunately, terrorist attacks are dramatic reminders
that we must do much more through collective action
and cooperation to defeat terrorism.

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Bennouna (Morocco) (spoke in French):
First of all, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. We believe that the Council’s
deliberations will be successful thanks to your
experience and widely acknowledged wisdom. I would
also like to express our appreciation to the Permanent
Representative of Brazil for the excellent manner in
which he presided over our Council’s work last month.
I say “our” Council because it is the Council of the
Organization, of which we are a part.
Morocco attaches great importance to the work of
the Committees established by the Security Council
through resolutions on the subject of terrorism. We are
truly pleased with the President’s initiative to hold this
public meeting. That initiative now has a higher profile
thanks to the recent publication of the SecretaryGeneral’s report entitled “In larger freedom: towards
development, security and human rights for all”
(A/59/2005), in which the Secretary-General
emphasizes the need for the international community to
coordinate its efforts at all levels in order to confront
international terrorism in all its aspects. In that
connection, allow me to thank Ambassador Ellen Løj
of Denmark, Chairperson of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, Ambassador César Mayoral of Argentina,
Chairperson of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999), and Ambassador Mihnea
Motoc of Romania, Chairperson of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), for the
dynamism and inspiration they have brought to the
work of their respective Committees since taking up
their responsibilities.
We are mindful of the very serious threats posed
by international terrorism to international peace and
security — “new threats”, as they have been called. In
that regard, my country has always been resolutely and
unambiguously committed to combating terrorism,
which we condemn fully and regardless of its forms,
manifestations or motivations. Any deliberate attack
against innocent civilians that seeks to destabilize any
socio-political system or specific country cannot be
justified in any manner and must be condemned by the
international community and must be punished.
On 16 May 2003, my country was victim of
serious and barbaric terrorist acts that cast a pall over

25

S/PV.5168

the city of Casablanca and the entire Kingdom. Those
attacks did not shake our firm conviction to pursue the
building of a united and democratic society based on
solidarity and imbued with the values of tolerance and
respect for fundamental human rights. We are
convinced that those who wrought terror in
Casablanca, New York, Madrid and Riyadh are all of
the same ilk. Terrorism feeds on xenophobia,
intolerance and other forms of fanaticism. Terrorism is
not unique to any single country, religion or culture.
However, the very extent to which this new scourge
has been organized through a transnational network
makes it necessary to confront it in a spirit of
solidarity, by pooling our information and uniting our
efforts.
Combating international terrorism requires
determined action by the entire international
community, to which every country must contribute
actively. Only cooperation among States will make it
possible collectively to combat this scourge by
implementing a multifaceted and comprehensive
strategy. While States’ individual efforts to combat
terrorism indeed represent serious achievements, they
are nevertheless quite insufficient. Morocco has
therefore decided to build upon its national efforts by
adopting and strengthening a regional approach that
includes Euro-Mediterranean partners from our region,
sub-Saharan African countries and countries of the
nearby Middle East. Our approach to combating
terrorism converges with the approaches taken by all of
our other partners and strategic allies. It is built around
the concept of comprehensive security and respect for
shared values and international law.
We believe that, with its universal composition
and the jurisdiction conferred upon it by the Charter,
the United Nations remains the appropriate venue to
marshal energies to combat terrorism. I therefore
believe that the United Nations is irreplaceable. It is
the appropriate framework to express the consensus of
the international community and to develop a
coordinated response by all States in the fight against
terrorism while respecting the purposes and principles
of the Charter.
My country, which has the privilege of presiding
over the General Assembly’s Sixth Committee,
welcomes the Assembly’s consensus adoption of the
draft International Convention for the Suppression of
Acts of Nuclear Terrorism (General Assembly
resolution 59/290). That adoption reaffirms the

26

Assembly’s important role in developing norms of
international law, and thus strengthens respect for the
primacy of law. We also hope that there will soon be
agreement on the definition of the scourge of terrorism,
so that we can adopt a comprehensive convention on
terrorism as soon as possible.
With its unwavering commitment to international
legality, Morocco has acceded to almost all
international legal instruments on terrorism. We have
also taken a series of measures to give form to the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council, in
particular resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1373 (2001),
taking appropriate measures to incorporate them as an
integral part of our national legislation. In that context,
Morocco has complied with all the provisions of the
resolutions and has cooperated fully with the
mechanisms
established
to
oversee
their
implementation. Morocco has now submitted four
reports to the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), on
27 December 2001, 19 July 2002, 15 December 2003
and 20 October 2004. We also submitted a report to the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) on 24 July 2003, as well as a report to the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), on 28 October 2004. In accordance with
resolution 1526 (2004), my country has also provided
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) with all the information requested in a list
addressed to the Committee.
We have always fully and promptly cooperated
with the Committees, whose missions may differ but
whose objectives are the same. Indeed, on two
occasions, from 31 October to 4 November 2004 and 3
to 5 April 2005, Morocco received experts from the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
that reports to the 1267 Committee. Furthermore,
pursuant to resolution 1535 (2004), the CounterTerrorism Executive Directorate (CTED), led by
Ambassador Javier Ruperez, whom I welcome here
today, conducted its first assessment visit to Morocco
from 14 to 19 March 2005. It is a fact that, by choosing
our country as the destination of its first mission, the
CTC sought to pay tribute not only to Morocco’s
successful efforts to finalize its legislation and
strengthen
its
administrative
counter-terrorism
machinery, but also to our openness to international
cooperation in that field. In that regard, the Moroccan
authorities were gratified by the professionalism and

S/PV.5168

rigor which the CTED
throughout their mission.

experts

demonstrated

My country is satisfied with the mission’s
assessment of the reliability of the Kingdom’s
commitment to combating terrorism and our significant
efforts in that area, undertaken within the framework of
a comprehensive and integrated strategy for the social
and economic development of our country. We are,
moreover, determined further to improve the
effectiveness of our administrative and legislative
system, with the support of the international
community. On behalf of my country, I affirm that we
are at the disposal of the Directorate and the
Committee.
We thank the Executive Director, Ambassador
Javier Ruperez, and his team for the success of the
assessment mission and we encourage more such visits,
which we believe to promote direct and in-depth
dialogue between the Committee and the national
authorities of the countries visited, as well as the
assessment of their needs for technical assistance.
In conclusion, Morocco attaches great importance
to strengthening cooperation among the Security
Council committees working on the various aspects of
counter-terrorism. We welcome the progress made in
that area, and in that respect subscribe fully to the
provisions of resolution 1566 (2004), which explicitly
requests the 1267, 1373 and 1540 Committees to
enhance cooperation among themselves. Morocco
trusts that the working group established pursuant to
resolution 1566 (2004), chaired by Ambassador Lauro
Baja of the Philippines, will be able to have a positive
and synergistic impact on the three Committees.
The United Nations global strategy for fighting
terrorism, outlined in Madrid on 11 March, must be
further strengthened in order to meet the challenge of
the new threats confronting the international
community, and to do so — as we will continue to
insist — in full respect of international law and
universal norms on the protection of human rights.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now call on
the representative of Spain.
Mr. Yáñez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me at the outset, Sir, to express my pleasure at
addressing the Council on behalf of Spain in this
important debate under the presidency of China, a
country for which we have great admiration.

I endorse the statement made by the Permanent
Representative of Luxembourg on behalf of the
European Union. My remarks should therefore be
considered to be complementary to that statement.
I join in the congratulations offered to the
Chairpersons of the Security Council Committees —
Ambassadors Løj, Mayoral and Motoc — who, at this
meeting, have for the first time provided joint briefings
on the excellent work they are doing. I assure them of
Spain’s complete cooperation, whenever it is needed,
as they pursue their important functions.
Spain attaches the utmost priority to the fight
against terrorism within the framework of the United
Nations. That priority was underscored once again by
the fact that Madrid was the venue, from 8 to 11
March — precisely one year after the terrible terrorist
attacks in our capital — of the International Summit on
Democracy, Terrorism and Security. The conference,
organized by the Club of Madrid — an entity
composed of over 50 former heads of State and
Government of democratic countries — sought as its
main objective the specific goal of promoting a
democratic and coordinated response to the global
threat of terror.
In Madrid, with the assistance and participation
of heads of State and Government, high officials —
including the Secretary-General of the United
Nations — and other important personalities, as well as
experts from throughout the world, the so-called
Madrid Agenda was unveiled. While drafted under the
exclusive responsibility of the Club of Madrid, that
document constitutes a call to action on political
leaders worldwide and a programme of action for
Governments, institutions, civil society and citizens,
based on the inalienable principles at the very heart of
the United Nations Charter and democratic societies.
The recommendations of the Madrid Agenda are a
powerful tool for raising awareness of and commitment
to counter-terrorism. They deserve to be incorporated
into and to enrich international debate and action led
by the United Nations.
The Madrid Agenda, the distribution of which
Spain has requested as an official document of the
General Assembly and the Security Council, has also
been incorporated into the agenda of the Ministerial
Conference of the Community of Democracies, to be
held late this month in Santiago, Chile. The SecretaryGeneral expressly chose the Madrid Summit as the

27

S/PV.5168

occasion to outline the basic principles of the United
Nations global strategy for fighting terrorism, in line
with the suggestion made by the High-Level Panel on
Threats, Challenges and Change in its report entitled
“A more secure world”. In our view, the Madrid
strategy should be at the core of efforts to contribute,
inter alia, to improving the effectiveness and
coordination of agencies and organs of the United
Nations system, allowing an integrated approach to the
United Nations fight against terrorism.
In that regard, we believe that the current
momentum in the process of United Nations reform
should be exploited to take concrete and practical
steps.
We believe that, pending a restructuring of the
subsidiary bodies of the Security Council, it would be
appropriate to take the initial step of unifying the
administrative support structures of the three
Committees. The Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, when adequately strengthened,
could be responsible for providing all three
Committees with the necessary assistance, taking care
in each case to act in accordance with the mandate of
the Committee concerned.
In a few months, the Council must consider the
renewal of the mandate of the sanctions Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999). We
believe that would be the right moment for the Council
to request from the Committee a report identifying the
obstacles it has encountered, things that could be
improved and gaps in the Committee’s work in order to
improve and revitalize the Committee’s functioning,
thus enhancing its effectiveness.
Technical assistance in that area should be
strengthened because, we must not forget, many
Member States face serious difficulties in fulfilling
their obligations under the Council’s resolutions, not
due to any lack of political will but, in many cases,
simply as a result of a severe lack of resources. In that
context, we regret that the recent report of the
Secretary-General entitled “In larger freedom”
(A/59/2005) did not take up the recommendation of the
High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change to
provide such technical assistance through the work of
the Executive Directorate.
We should also briefly mention the importance of
resolution 1566 (2004), which remains to be promptly
and thoroughly implemented. With respect to the

28

working group established pursuant to that
resolution — to whose Chairman, Ambassador Baja,
we offer our fullest cooperation — we request that due
priority be given to providing the working group with
the technical support it requires. That task could also
be given to the Executive Directorate.
Finally, but most important, I cannot fail to refer
to the challenge described by the Secretary-General: to
pay greater attention to the victims of terrorism and to
ensure that their voices are heard. The international
community’s recognition of the victims and their
families and its solidarity with them must be one of the
pillars upon which the United Nations bases its
strategy as it works actively for the adoption of
international measures and mechanisms for protection
and assistance. It is also necessary to work to
strengthen civil society’s engagement in the fight
against terrorism by promoting the participation of
civil society groups, in particular victims associations,
at the national and international level. Making that
duty of solidarity with the victims of terrorism a reality
has already been suggested by the Security Council in
its resolution 1566 (2004) and by the SecretaryGeneral when he stressed that urgent measures must be
taken in that regard. It is our fervent hope that this will
be acted upon.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): I thank you very
much, Mr. President, for this opportunity to hear
briefings on the work of the three Security Council
Committees dealing with the issue of terrorism. Our
thanks also go to the three Committee Chairs who
briefed the Council and the membership as a whole this
morning.
The recent adoption by the General Assembly of
the International Convention for the Suppression of
Acts of Nuclear Terrorism (General Assembly
resolution 59/290) is but one sign that the work of the
United Nations in the area of counter-terrorism has
gained new momentum. Over the next few months, we
have to work hard to preserve and further develop that
momentum in the intergovernmental process. At the
same time, it is important to continue strengthening the
operational capacities of the United Nations bodies
involved. In that regard, we note with satisfaction
recent developments in all three Committees, in
particular the increase in expert capacity and

S/PV.5168

operational activities. While we join others in calling
for greater discipline by Member States in reporting,
we also underline that this must be accompanied by
quick and thorough expert analysis of the reports once
they are submitted in order to preserve the relevance of
the dialogue.
In the current discussions in preparation for the
summit in September, the fight against terrorism
clearly figures among the most prominent issues. We
believe that last week’s discussions on the clusters of
issues proved that there is strong momentum in that
respect.
We share the sense of urgency felt by many with
respect to the need to further strengthen our counterterrorism framework, and we have welcomed the
strategy of the five “D”s outlined by the SecretaryGeneral. Progress is necessary in particular in the
negotiations on a comprehensive convention on
terrorism designed to fill the gaps not addressed by the
13 sectoral conventions.
At the same time, we are concerned that due
process, human rights and humanitarian concerns are
not addressed in an equally urgent and thorough
manner. We have consistently held that the procedures
regarding the listing and delisting of individuals on
sanctions lists as well as procedures for humanitarian
exceptions must be reviewed in the light of
international legal standards of due process. That
implies a minimum degree of transparency and
independent review for decisions affecting the rights
and the obligations of individuals, depending in
particular on the gravity of the deprivation of rights.
Improving those procedures will, in our view, greatly
facilitate implementation of Security Council sanctions
by Member States and strengthen the legitimacy of
sanctions regimes. As a means of transparency, we
have therefore requested that the list of pending
requests for humanitarian exemptions in accordance
with resolution 1452 (2002) be made accessible to all
Member States.
Today’s meeting addressing the work of all three
relevant Security Council Committees is a clear sign
that our efforts are moving in the right direction, in
particular regarding coordination among the three
Committees and their experts. It is also a welcome step
towards a more comprehensive, transparent approach.
In that respect, we express our appreciation for the
scheduling of a meeting of the working group

established pursuant to resolution 1566 (2004) on 27
April — this Wednesday — providing interested States
with an opportunity to share their views on the future
work of the working group. Indeed, the inclusion of a
broad range of Member States in the Security Council’s
work on counter-terrorism is a crucial element for more
effective decision-making and better implementation of
its decisions. We thus look forward to continuing
cooperation on this matter with the Council and its
subsidiary organs.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I call next on
the representative of Cuba.
Mr. Requeijo Gual (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation wishes to thank the Chairpersons of the
Committees established pursuant to Security Council
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004)
for the information they provided at this meeting.
However, while we are here analysing actions to
fight international terrorism, Luis Posada Carriles, one
of the most monstrous terrorists of this hemisphere, is
in Miami, in the United States of America. The lawyer
representing him has even requested political asylum
for his client, given the services that he performed for
the United States for more than 40 years as a member
of the Central Intelligence Agency and the United
States armed forces.
In the name of the “war on terror”, the United
States Government has unleashed unilateral wars of
aggression, in violation of the Charter and the
principles of international law, in which thousands of
people have died and continue to die, including more
than 1,500 American young people.
Since last 11 April, the President of the Republic
of Cuba has publicly provided abundant and reliable
information on the criminal background of the terrorist
Luis Posada Carriles, on the means he used to enter
United States territory, and on those who, carrying out
instructions of the terrorist Cuban American National
Foundation, facilitated his voyage on board of the
shrimping boat Santrina from Islas Mujeres in Mexico
to Miami.
Therefore, my Government cannot understand
why the United States Government has not taken action
and has failed to conduct an in-depth investigation of
the most recent voyage of the Santrina, and why it did
not immediately detain and interrogate those who, like
the well-known terrorist Santiago Álvarez Fernández

29

S/PV.5168

Magriña, known as a Miami resident, know Posada
Carriles’s whereabouts and who helped him in his
illegal entry into the United States.
United States law is clear: to provide entry into
the United States of an avowed terrorist, particularly
someone as notorious as Luis Posada Carriles, is one of
the most serious crimes that can now be committed in
the country that was victim of the atrocities of
11 September 2001.
Resolution 1373 (2001), adopted by the Council
on the proposal of the United States, is also clear in
invoking Chapter VII of the Charter, categorically
establishing the obligation of all States to take effective
measures to prevent the transit of terrorists, to deny
refuge not only to terrorists, but also to those who
protect them, and to exchange information leading to
their detention.
Moreover, on 26 August 2003, the President of
the United States of America said: “If you harbour a
terrorist, if you support a terrorist, if you feed a
terrorist, you are just as guilty as the terrorists”.
Posada Carriles is not unknown to Washington.
He was trained and used by the Central Intelligence
Agency (CIA) to carry out terrorist actions against
Cuba for more than 40 years. He caused the in-flight
sabotage of a Cubana de Aviación civil aircraft, in
which 73 persons were killed, and a string of Havana
hotel bombings in 1997, causing the death of the
Italian tourist, Fabio Di Celmo. He has also planned
many assassination attempts on President Fidel Castro;
he was tried for one of them in Panama, but was
fraudulently pardoned by then President Mireya
Moscoso on 26 August 2004.
My delegation calls upon the United States
Government, particularly its President, as President
Fidel Castro has repeatedly been doing since last 11
April, to say whether or not it is aware of the presence
of the terrorist Posada Carriles on United States
territory, and to state the measures it is taking to locate
his whereabouts in Miami.
We would consider it very serious, both for the
actions being carried out by the United Nations against
terrorism, and for the credibility of the United States
Government in its self-proclaimed “war on terror”, if
Washington were to decide to harbour Posada Carriles
or were to resort to cunning legal arguments to permit
him to remain in the United States. Allowing this

30

avowed terrorist to move freely, enjoying total
impunity, while imposing long and unjust sentences on
five Cuban youths fighting terrorism, is immoral and
greatly irresponsible. It is an insult to all victims of
terrorism the world over and their relatives.
United States authorities are facing a serious
dilemma. Either they definitely align themselves with
terrorism by protecting this person, or they strike a
powerful blow, in compliance with their legal
obligations, by arresting Luis Posada Carriles and
extraditing him to Venezuela, where he escaped from
prison in 1985.
My Government reaffirms its willingness to
cooperate with the administration of justice by handing
over all the information it has on this terrorist and
urges the international community to remain alert to
the possibility that Posada Carriles might quit United
States territory with impunity or that he might be
eliminated by internal forces in the United States to
“solve” the dilemma in which he has dragged the
Government of that country by his presence. We do not
wish this man’s death. We only want justice to prevail,
and for him to pay for the horrendous crimes that he
has committed during his long terrorist career.
Once again, my Government reiterates its request
to the Security Council Counter-Terrorism Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) to
evaluate the information submitted by my country,
inter alia, in documents S/2002/15 and S/2004/753, in
the hope that its work can lead to putting an end to the
impunity enjoyed in the territory of the United States
by those who have committed, and still commit,
terrorist acts against Cuba.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Viet Nam.
Mr. Nguyen Duy Thien (Viet Nam): I shall
deliver a shortened version of my statement. The
delegation of Viet Nam highly appreciates the efforts
made by the 1267 Committee, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) and the 1540 Committee in
discharging the mandates entrusted to them by the
Security Council in order to enhance the effectiveness
of international cooperation in the fight against
terrorism.
Pursuant to the relevant provisions of the
resolutions concerned, Viet Nam has already submitted
four reports to the CTC, one report to the 1267

S/PV.5168

Committee and one report to the 1540 Committee,
providing necessary information relating to the efforts
undertaken by Viet Nam in combating terrorism. We
wish to assure the three Committees of Viet Nam’s
continued support and cooperation.
My delegation reaffirms the position of Viet
Nam, which is to denounce every act of terrorism.
Given the nature of present terrorist acts, more than
ever the fight against terrorism requires a
comprehensive approach, collective efforts and
international cooperation, in which the United Nations
should play a key role, with due attention paid to the
root causes of terrorism.
To be effective this fight should be conducted in
accordance with the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and international law. Viet Nam is a
party to eight international instruments on counterterrorism. Necessary steps are being taken in preparing
for accession to the other instruments with the support
of the CTC and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime.
Last November, Viet Nam successfully organized
a national workshop on accession to and
implementation of international instruments on
counter-terrorism. The competent authorities of Viet
Nam are in the process of completing internal
procedures for Viet Nam’s accession to two other
international conventions, the International Convention
against the Taking of Hostages and the International
Convention for the Suppression of Terrorist Bombings.
Viet Nam is continuing its cooperation on
counter-terrorism in both bilateral and multilateral
forums, including within the framework of the
Association of Southeast Asia Nations, the AsiaEurope
Meeting,
the
Asia-Pacific
Economic
Cooperation forum and the Asia Pacific Parliamentary
Forum. It joined the General Assembly consensus in
adopting the International Convention for the
Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism on 13 April
2005.
Once again, my delegation would like to reaffirm
Viet Nam’s commitment to fully cooperate with the
international community in general, and the Security
Council and other relevant United Nations bodies in
particular, in our common fight against terrorism.

The President (spoke in Chinese): The next
speaker is the representative of Venezuela, on whom I
now call.
Ms. Núñez de Odremán (Venezuela) (spoke in
Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, in
speaking today on the subject of terrorism, would like
to reiterate its condemnation of that perennial global
scourge. We have expressed our categorical
condemnation of such acts, whether acts of State
terrorism or other types of terrorism committed by
non-State actors. Likewise, we have made clear our
firm position of making a distinction between terrorism
and the legitimate resistance of peoples to invasion and
foreign occupation.
In accordance with our resolute commitment to
fight terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has ratified many
multilateral, regional and bilateral agreements on the
subject, and has implemented resolutions adopted in
the framework of the United Nations.
At the national level, we have developed a broad
set of laws to combat terrorism and created a special
administrative institution, as the national authority in
this field, headed by the Deputy Minister of Citizen
Security, within the Ministry of the Interior and Justice.
We have done so in order to fulfil the commitments
undertaken by the Republic to combat terrorism.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela is
participating in today’s Security Council meeting in
order to highlight one act of terrorism that shocked the
world, in particular the people of Latin America and
the Caribbean: the shooting down in 1976 of a Cubana
de Aviación aircraft. As we know, that crime was
committed against 70 young Cuban athletes and people
of other nationalities. They boarded the flight in
Venezuela, but never reached their final destination,
Cuba, because they fell victim to a terrorist attack.
Many years have passed since that horrendous act, yet
one of those responsible — Luis Clemente Posada
Carriles, a Venezuelan national — remains unpunished.
The Venezuelan justice system found that terrorist,
Luis Clemente Posada Carriles, guilty of homicide,
arms production and treason. He escaped from the
Venezuelan prison where he was serving his sentence,
later resurfacing in the Republic of Panama. The
Government of Venezuela requested his extradition,
but to date it has been denied by the Panamanian
Government. Subsequently, after having been pardoned

31

S/PV.5168

in 2004 by that Government, the terrorist left the
country.
Now, statements to the press made by the
terrorist’s lawyer, Eduardo Soto, make it clear that the
terrorist is in the United States of America and that he
has requested political asylum from the United States
Government. Providing political asylum to that
terrorist is not permissible under international law. It
would also constitute non-compliance with paragraphs
2(c) and 3(g) of resolution 1373 (2001) of 28
September 2001, which prohibits States from offering
refuge to those who commit acts of terrorism and
which does not recognize political motivation as
grounds for refusing requests for the extradition of
terrorists.
The Government of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela hopes that the extradition requests made by
our Government will be given due attention and
processed by the Government of the United States, in
accordance with the extradition treaty between the
United States and Venezuela and in conformity with all
other applicable norms of international law. In this
regard, we hope that justice will be done with regard to
the handing over of Luis Clemente Posada Carriles to
the Government of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, so that he can continue to serve his
sentence in accordance with the Venezuelan penal
code.
Mr. Dauth (Australia): I learned a long time ago
that it was a very dangerous thing to come between
Security Council members and their lunch, so I will be
very brief.
This meeting gives us a valuable opportunity to
highlight the importance of the three Committees
operating in a coordinated manner, given the
interconnected and complementary nature of their
work.
The tasks facing the Committees reflect the
serious challenge that the international community
faces in addressing the threat to our peace and security
from both terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, as well as the very real danger of a
terrorist attack involving chemical, biological, nuclear
or radiological devices. The General Assembly’s
adoption earlier this month of the International
Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear
Terrorism (General Assembly resolution 59/290) is a
welcome and concrete response to one aspect of that

32

threat. It is a further example of the important role that
multilateral instruments and regimes play in
underpinning global counter-terrorism and counterproliferation efforts.
In the face of a persistent and evolving — and I
stress “evolving” — terrorist threat, it is absolutely
vital that Member States, United Nations bodies and
other international institutions work together to meet
the challenge. Australia welcomes, in this context, the
Secretary-General’s
comprehensive
strategy
on
fighting terrorism and its recognition of the need to
harness various elements of the United Nations
machinery to address terrorism, including its chemical,
biological, nuclear and radiological dimensions, in a
coordinated and strategic way. Australia encourages
ongoing efforts to ensure that the relevant United
Nations mechanisms are best configured and equipped
to meet this challenge, and to maximize the
contribution that Member States can make nationally
and regionally to countering terrorism and the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
Cooperation and capacity-building at the regional
and bilateral levels are crucial to international counterterrorism efforts. Australia is active in its own region,
including in taking forward the outcomes of the
February 2004 Bali Regional Ministerial Meeting on
Counter-Terrorism. Co-chaired by Australia and
Indonesia, the meeting established working groups on
law enforcement and legal issues to promote practical
counter-terrorism cooperation among Governments of
Asia and the Pacific. It is a model. The legal issues
working group is doing important work to promote and
assist implementation of United Nations counterterrorism instruments and more effective international
legal cooperation. The Jakarta Centre for Law
Enforcement
—
another
Australia-Indonesia
initiative — was opened in July 2004 and is already
proving to be a valuable resource, developing regional
capacities to fight terrorism and transnational crime.
The
Counter-Terrorism
Committee,
the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) and the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) can be assured of Australia’s
continuing strong support in their coordinated efforts to
confront terrorism and address the threats posed by the
spread of weapons of mass destruction.
The President (spoke in Chinese): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list.

S/PV.5168

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.
“The Security Council welcomes the
briefings by the Chairmen of the AlQaida/Taliban sanctions Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), the CounterTerrorism Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) on
the work of the three Committees.
“The Security Council reaffirms that
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
constitutes one of the most serious threats to
peace and security and that any acts of terrorism
are criminal and unjustifiable, regardless of their
motivations, whenever and by whomsoever
committed.
“The Security Council also reaffirms that
the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons, as well as their means of
delivery, constitutes a threat to international
peace and security, as stressed in resolution 1540
(2004). The Security Council recalls its grave
concern at the risk posed by non-State actors that
attempt to develop, acquire, manufacture,
possess, transport, transfer or use nuclear,
chemical and biological weapons and their means
of delivery.
“The Security Council welcomes the
adoption by the General Assembly on 13 April
2005 of the International Convention for the
Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism, by
consensus.
“The Security Council stresses the different
mandates of the three Committees. The Security
Council reaffirms its call for enhanced
cooperation among the Committees, as well as
their respective groups of experts, in monitoring
States’ implementation of provisions of the
Security Council resolutions relevant to the three
Committees, and invites the Committees,
including their respective groups of experts,
further to strengthen their cooperation through
enhanced information sharing, coordinated visits
to countries and other issues of relevance to all
the three Committees. The Security Council also
invites the three Committees to continue

cooperation with the working group established
pursuant to resolution 1566 (2004).
“The Security Council recalls the obligation
of Member States to report to the three
Committees in a timely manner on steps they
have taken or intend to take to implement
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540
(2004) and related resolutions, and encourages
the three Committees to consider, if appropriate,
how to deal with late submission of reports to
these Committees in a coordinated manner.
“The Security Council reaffirms that the
responsibility for implementing the Security
Council resolutions relevant to the mandates of
the three Committees, including preparation of
reports to the respective Committees, rests with
the States. The Security Council encourages
international,
regional
and
subregional
organizations to enhance their efforts to further
their members’ implementation of these Security
Council resolutions, and further encourages such
organizations, as well as States, where
appropriate, to provide technical assistance to
enhance the capacity of States to implement these
resolutions.
“The Security Council welcomes the
important contribution made by relevant
international,
regional
and
subregional
organizations in the fight against terrorism and to
ensure that non-State actors do not develop,
acquire, manufacture, possess, transport, transfer
or use nuclear, chemical and biological weapons
and their means of delivery. The Security Council
encourages the three Committees to further
strengthen
the
cooperation
with
such
organizations.
“The Security Council further welcomes the
important contribution made to the work of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) by the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team established pursuant
to Security Council resolution 1526 (2004) in
application of its mandate annexed to that
resolution; to the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) by
its experts; and to the work of the CounterTerrorism Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) by the Counter-Terrorism

33

S/PV.5168

Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
established by resolution 1535 (2004), and notes
with satisfaction the completion by the CTED of
its first field mission to a Member State as
contemplated by resolution 1535 (2004).
“The Security Council invites the CTC to
pursue its agenda as set out in the work
programme for the CTC’s fifteenth 90-day period
(S/2005/266). It encourages all parts of the
United Nations to do their utmost to ensure that
the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate becomes fully operational in the
shortest possible time.
“The Security Council also invites the 1540
Committee to pursue its undertakings as provided
in its first trimestrial programme of work,
approved by the Committee on 22 April 2005.
The Security Council welcomes the submission
by 113 Member States of reports so far on steps
they have taken or intend to take to implement

34

resolution 1540 (2004) and calls upon States that
have not yet submitted such a report to do so as
soon as possible. The Security Council welcomes
the recruitment of experts of the Committee and
notes that they have begun to support the
Committee in the consideration of the first
reports submitted by Member States pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004).
“The Security Council invites the three
Committees to continue reporting on their
activities at regular intervals and, where
appropriate, in a coordinated manner.”
This statement will be issued as a document of
the
Security
Council
under
the
symbol
S/PRST/2005/16.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.30 p.m.
