United Nations

asdf

Security Council

S/PV.7052 (Resumption 1)
Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

7052nd meeting

Tuesday, 29 October 2013, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Musayev . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Azerbaijan)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Araud
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Lee Kyung Chul
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. M’Beou
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council (S/2010/507)
Security Council Working Methods
Letter dated 16 October 2013 from the Permanent Representative of Azerbaijan
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2013/613)

13-53647 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1353647*

S/PV.7052 (Resumption 1)

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

The meeting resumed at 3.05 p.m.
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Sudan to participate in this
meeting.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their statements
to no more than four minutes, in order to enable the
Council to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations
with lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate
their texts in writing and to deliver a condensed version
when speaking in the Chamber.
I now give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I would like to thank
you, Sir, for holding this important meeting and to
congratulate you on Azerbaijan’s successful conduct of
the presidency of the Security Council.
Ukraine considers the Council’s effectiveness
and efficiency, coupled with its openness and
transparency, as the pillars of the overall activity of
this body. Therefore, we broadly share the priorities
for today’s debate stemming from the concept paper
(S/2013/613, annex), namely, strengthening the
Council’s transparency; enhancing its interaction with
non-Council members, other United Nations bodies and
regional and subregional organizations; and ensuring
increased informative and analytical annual reporting
to the General Assembly.
Ukraine welcomes the Council’s continuous efforts
aimed at streamlining and improving its procedure as
showcased by the 2010 presidential note (S/2010/507),
which is under discussion today. Among such positive
steps during 2013, I would like to point out the increased
number of public meetings, the active revisiting of the
practice of wrap-up meetings and monthly informal
briefings at the end of presidencies and the increased
use of video-teleconferencing services.
There remains a number of significant issues to be
addressed, among which is the institution of the veto in
the Security Council. Ukraine supports the necessity
of creating conditions to gradually reduce the use of
the veto. In that regard, we took note, with interest, of
the relevant proposal of France. In our view, such an
initiative, along with other positive developments in the
domain of working methods, would demonstrate the
potential for ambitious change originating from within
the Council, in line with Article 30 of the Charter of the
United Nations.
2/21

29/10/2013

Fully cognizant that the Council is master
of its own procedures, Ukraine believes that this
body would benefit by taking on board, as it deems
necessary, innovative ideas of the wider United Nations
membership, as envisaged in Article 10 of the Charter.
The same relates to the accommodation of the legitimate
concerns of non-members of the Council.
Let me recall the long-standing position of Ukraine
on the necessity of providing a stronger voice in Council
decision-making processes to the United Nations States
Members that are directly involved in implementing
its decisions. First and foremost, such measures should
apply in cases involving troop-contributing countries
(TCCs) and police-contributing countries (PCCs).
From our experience of active participation in
United Nations peacekeeping operations, Ukraine
sees a continuous need to adjust the Council’s timing
of decisions on extending peacekeeping operation
mandates, so as to avoid placing the relevant TCCs
and PCCs in a difficult position. Taking such decisions
whenever feasible and well in advance of the target
date would provide TCCs and PCCs with more time to
align new or extended Council mandates with national
legislation. This especially concerns those countries
that, like Ukraine, by law require Parliament’s approval
for the deployment of their peacekeeping contingents.
Ukraine welcomes the emphasis of the presidency
of Azerbaijan on strengthening the partnership synergy
between the Council and regional and subregional
organizations, as evidenced by yesterday’s high-level
briefing by the Secretary-General of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation (see S/PV.7050).
Commitment to a strong, effective, efficient and
transparent Security Council was a cornerstone of
Ukraine’s only tenure in this body as an independent
State in 2000 and 2001. It is in keeping with and building
on this tradition that we intend to serve on the Council
if Ukraine is elected as a non-permanent member for
the term 2016-2017.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): Liechtenstein
is a member of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency (ACT) group and and aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the representative of
Switzerland. We would now like to raise a few specific
points relating to the Council’s work on accountability

13-53647

29/10/2013

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

and the veto, from the perspective of its working
methods.
During the past year, the Council has made
some progress in improving its interaction with the
International Criminal Court and on related issues.
The open debate of October 2012 on peace and justice
(see S/PV.6894), with a special focus on the role of
the International Criminal Court (ICC), was a good
opportunity for the wider membership to express its
views on the Council’s relations to that key institution
of international criminal justice. We also consider the
informal, interactive dialogue between the Council and
the ICC Prosecutor is also a useful format, allowing
for a more fluid exchange of information and a less
limited conversation. While we welcome these events
and thank the delegations that have initiated them, we
are disappointed about the lack of follow-up. As often
seems to be the case in the workings of the Council,
positive innovations are difficult to institutionalize.
The Council began this year well by expressing
its commitment to effectively following up issues of
cooperation with international tribunals, including the
ICC. Unfortunately, the Council has not lived up to this
promise so far. The Council still lacks the proper forum
for interaction with the ICC and on related issues.
One year ago, together with Costa Rica and Jordan,
we encouraged the creation of a new subsidiary body
or the re-tasking of the Informal Working Group on
Tribunals. Since then, the need for such a platform has
only become more pressing as requests to the Council
relating to ICC issues are in the headlines on a daily
basis. Partially due to this shortcoming, the Council
has again failed to take up the Court’s decisions of
non-cooperation in the Darfur situation. The failure of
the Council to effectively follow up its own referrals
undermines the credibility of both bodies.
We have seen the recent request by Kenya that
the Security Council defer the cases in the Kenya
situation for 12 months, pursuant to article 16 of the
Rome Statute — an issue that will be taken up by the
Council shortly. This should remind us of the need to
revisit the Council’s working methods in dealing with
such requests. The Council’s decision-making process
on article 16 deferrals should be informed and made
on the basis of a thorough discussion involving all
stakeholders. The implementation of article 16 of the
Rome Statute is as much a concern of all States parties
to the Statute as it is of the members of the Council. We
therefore encourage the Security Council to enter into a

S/PV.7052 (Resumption 1)

dialogue with States parties, especially on the question
of criteria to be considered in deciding whether to defer
cases before the ICC.
The situation in Syria, now in its third year, has laid
bare the Council’s shortcomings. The Council has been
unable to play its role on nearly all issues, save that
of chemical weapons. While we appreciate the efforts
of Luxembourg and Australia in drafting the recent
presidential statement on the humanitarian situation in
Syria (S/PRST/2013/15), we regret that the Council was
not able to adopt a resolution on this topic.
The Council has also failed in its responsibility to
promote accountability for the war crimes and crimes
against humanity that have been and continue to be
perpetrated by all sides in that conflict. Liechtenstein
was one of 58 States that had called on the Security
Council to refer the situation in Syria to the ICC. Nine
months later, we are still waiting for the Council to take
this issue up.
The Syria crisis also best illustrates that the use of
the veto and the extensive threat of its use continue to
stymie its work. The veto as such is part and parcel of
the Charter of the United Nations, which we have all
ratified, but it is essential that it not be used contrary
to the very purposes and principles contained in that
Charter, and that a minimum of accountability be
provided in this respect. We have repeatedly called on
the permanent members to commit to refraining from
the use of the veto in situations involving genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes. We welcome
the initiative of France to bring this topic to the attention
of the international community. Now is the time to
make concrete progress towards such a code of conduct.
We look forward to discussions among the permanent
members on this suggestion and will continue to work
through the ACT group to contribute to its success.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chile.
Mr. Gálvez (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Like many
States Members of the Organization, Chile follows the
issue of the working methods of the Security Council
with special interest, convinced that transparency
and inclusiveness will help to strengthen the capacity
and legitimacy of this main organ, and consequently
of the United Nations. This interest is reflected in our
participation in the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group, whose statement, delivered by the
representative of Switzerland, we endorse.

13-536473/21

S/PV.7052 (Resumption 1)

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

We appreciate this open debate organized by
Azerbaijan, the fourth consecutive annual open debate
on the subject. Clearly, it helps to consolidate a practice
that, trust us, will continue in the future.
The transparency and inclusiveness of the Council’s
work are the objectives that should guide our review
of the working methods. We welcome the adoption of
presidential note S/2013/515, under the presidency of
Argentina, and the commitments contained therein
to use and enhance the tools and mechanisms of
transparency and better coordination with other bodies
of the Organization.
The practice of holding the largest possible number
of open and public meetings, informal interactive
dialogues and Arria Formula meetings contributes both
to the legitimacy of the Council’s work and to its quality,
since the Council can benefit from understanding the
diversity of positions and visions of the States Members
of the United Nations. We believe that there is still
room to make better use of visions presented in these
instances, for example through a programme of work
that allows the Council to know these positions prior to
undertaking negotiations and adopting documents on
the matters in question.
We emphasize the complementarity of the work of
regional and subregional organizations with that carried
out by the United Nations, and Council in particular.
In this regard, we note the high-level open debate on
this matter held on 6 August (see S/PV.7015), which, in
addition to the participation of senior officials from our
region, included briefings by the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States and the Union of South
American Nations. The Council should continue to
deepen its consultations and cooperation with relevant
regional and subregional organizations, in line with
the distribution of functions under Chapter VIII of the
Charter.
Note S/2013/515 also addresses coordination with
other organs of the Organization, including in the
field of peacebuilding. This matter is of particular
relevance to the need to strengthen coherence and avoid
duplication among different organs. Strengthening
the joint work with the Peacebuilding Commission,
including the participation of its Chair and the chairs of
the different configurations, as appropriate, in meetings
of the Council is an important step.
We believe that the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations could expand its scope to

4/21

29/10/2013

address peacebuilding, establishing links with relevant
stakeholders in that domain. The consideration of
specific peacebuilding situations would take place only
when the Working Group deemed it necessary. That
measure would allow for the establishment of a working
relationship between the bodies that address these two
closely linked topics, while making progress in what is
required in the course of reviewing the Peacebuilding
Commission with regard to establishing a more fluid
and informal dialogue with the Security Council.
Further, it could allow us to explore strengthening the
interaction with the Economic and Social Council’s ad
hoc groups that are relevant to the work of this Council.
A fundamental element for achieving greater
inclusiveness and transparency is the availability of
and easy access to the Council’s documentation. We
recognize the progress made ​​in that area through the
content made available on the Council’s web page.
This includes background information on the monthly
programme of work and the repertoire of practice. We
value the efforts of the Secretariat in that area.
We believe that the Security Council should continue
to use all the means at its disposal to gather information
related to the implementation of its resolutions. In the
briefings of commissions and bodies of inquiry created
by the United Nations to look into situations on the
agenda, we urge the Council to explore mechanisms
that allow for a strengthening of interactivity, giving
priority to the opportunity to gather greater background
information on matters being addressed.
Finally, I should like recall the statement made by
the President of Chile in the recent general debate of
the General Assembly (see A/68/PV.5), in which he
joined the calls for the countries that have the veto right
to abstain from using it in situations of crimes against
humanity, war crimes, genocide or ethnic cleansing. He
also proposed leaving behind the logic of vetoes and
replacing it with a logic of special quorums, so that
the most relevant decisions, which inevitably affect
us all, will be adopted with resounding, broad and
representative majorities of the community of nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mrs. Anđelić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening an open debate on the important issue of
the working methods of the Security Council. It is the
fourth open debate organized to further discuss the

13-53647

29/10/2013

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

implementation of presidential note S/2010/507, as well
as to address issues of common concern and benefit in
regard to improving the Council’s working methods.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank
Ambassador María Cristina Perceval for her briefing
today and for her able stewardship as the Chair of the
Council’s Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions.
A former Chair of the Informal Working Group,
Bosnia and Herzegovina built upon the efforts of
the previous incumbents to further promote the
transparency and efficiency of the Council’s work,
including the implementation of presidential note
507. When we held the Chair, we especially raised
and promoted the issue of the periodicity of reporting
and mandate cycles so as to redistribute the Council’s
annual workload more more evenly and efficiently.
The subsequent Chairs of the Informal Working Group
continued those efforts. Moreover, the redistribution
launched in December 2011 has continued through 2012
and 2013, since the full cycle of redistribution needs 18
months to implement.
Taking into account the calls for enhanced
cooperation by the general membership, Bosnia and
Herzegovina raised the issue of further increasing
the transparency of the Council’s work. To that end,
it suggested to the members of the Informal Working
Group that they consider the idea of holding regular
briefings on the Council’s working methods for
non-Council Member States. We were and are of the
view that such exercises can be of common benefit.
Therefore we commend the end-of-presidency
wrap-up sessions and invite the Council members
to further intensify informal forms of dialogue with
non-members, particularly in the format of Arria
formula meetings. We call upon the Council members
to fulfil their commitments set out in the presidential
note in document S/2013/515, such as maintaining
regular communication with the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Chairs of the country-specific
configurations, enhancing cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations and encouraging the
subsidiary bodies to enhance transparency in their
activities. We encourage further improvement with
regard to briefings and consultations by the Council
with troop- and police-contributing countries in order
to implement peacekeeping mandates more effectively.

S/PV.7052 (Resumption 1)

With its experience as a member of the Security
Council in 2010 and 2011, Bosnia and Herzegovina is
mindful of the Council’s responsibilities in maintaining
international peace and security. It recognizes that at
a certain early, sensitive stage of work to resolve an
issue, efficiency necessitates closed consultations
among Council members before views and information
are shared with the general membership of the United
Nations. However, we would like to express our
concern regarding a recent setback in transparency in
the Council’s work and even within the Council itself.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has always been an advocate
of the Council’s efficiency and accountability, as well
as of its transparency.
In closing, I wish to reiterate the position of Bosnia
and Herzegovina that improving the working methods
of the Security Council should not be seen as an inherent
part of the overall reform of the Council, namely, the
increase of the permanent and non-permanent seats.
Working methods must improve notwithstanding the
Council’s reform process.
We remain committed to continuing our
engagement, together with Council members and the
Organization’s general membership, in initiatives
and dialogue, with a view to improving efficiency,
transparency and interactivity in the Council’s work for
the common benefit.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay;
Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to commend the Permanent Mission of Azerbaijan
for convening this open debate.
Uruguay aligns itself with the statement made this
morning by the representative of Switzerland on behalf
of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
(ACT) group. As a member of that group, I would like to
raise a few specific points on working methods related
to peacekeeping, which are shared by ACT members.
United Nations peacekeeping operations are
essential for the maintenance of international peace and
security and for helping countries make the transition
from conflict to sustainable peace. Those operations
rely on a particular association among the Council, the
Secretariat and the broader United Nations membership,
in particular the troop- and police-contributing
countries. In order to be effective, the relationship needs
to be very well maintained. Triangular cooperation

13-536475/21

S/PV.7052 (Resumption 1)

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

between the Council, the Secretariat and the troop- and
police-contributing countries is crucial in that respect,
even as enhancing the quality of that interaction and
making it consistently dynamic and substantial remains
a challenge. The current context of increasingly
complex and robust mandates, risky situations, limited
resources and high expectations raise the stakes of
United Nations peacekeeping operations and make
the Council’s working methods, including meaningful
engagement with the troop- and police-contributing
countries, even more important.
One of the first conclusions reached by ACT
members following a preliminary analysis of this issue
is that the problem is not a lack of tools or agreed
arrangements, but rather that these may not be deployed
regularly or consistently. The Charter of the United
Nations, Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolution 1353 (2001), and various presidential
statements establish or refer to many of those
mechanisms, including provisions on early consultation
with troop-contributing countries, to be held before
mandate creation and renewal; ad hoc meetings at any
stage, at the request of troop-contributing countries;
information sharing and thematic discussions.
However, there is plenty of room for improvement
in their utilization. Certainly, the Working Group
on Peacekeeping Operations is one of the key tools
available to improve the interaction between those who
establish mandates and those who implement them, and
to strengthen triangular cooperation. In that regard,
ACT members congratulate the Permanent Mission of
Pakistan, the Chair of the Working Group, on having
convened over the past few months three thematic
discussions, open to troop- and police-contributing
countries, related to very sensitive and critical
topics, such as safety and security, the use of modern
technology, and the transition and drawdown of
peacekeeping operations. The ACT group encourages
the continued development and use of that important
tool, the consideration of relevant thematic issues and
the convening of meetings on specific missions open to
troop- and police-contributing countries.
The timeliness and format of consultations with
troop-contributing countries are other important aspects
to which ACT members believe that improvements
have been made but on which further gains can be
achieved, for instance by increasing the regularity and
predictability of convening timely consultations with
troop-contributing countries before the creation or

6/21

29/10/2013

renewal of mandates. Further, it should be possible to
convene ad hoc meetings at any stage, at the request
of a troop- or police-contributing country, to address
topical concerns, especially in cases where the security
and protection of peacekeepers are at stake.
In addition, all actors involved should work towards
a more interactive and substantive consultation process.
Working methods play an important role in that regard.
The timing of and openness to information exchange,
including timely access to the Secretary-General’s
reports, are key ingredients of adequate preparation
for such consultations. More informal settings in
which relevant stakeholders can exchange their views
on a particular mission can also contribute greatly to a
better understanding of the main concerns at stake and
to finding solutions. Opportunities to listen directly
to views from the ground remain a very helpful and
valuable tool that should be used as often as possible.
Those are a few examples of how working methods
can continue to improve the quality of the discussions
and, ultimately, their outcomes as they relate to
peacekeeping and in the framework of the Security
Council. In that regard, ACT members welcome the
latest presidential note S/2013/630 on the enhancement
of consultations with troop- and police-contributing
countries, which is aligned with the ideas and objectives
that ACT promotes. ACT members will continue to
remain available and willing to engage in a constructive
dialogue on the matter.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Costa Rica.
Mr. Ulibarri (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): Costa
Rica thanks Azerbaijan for having organized today’s
debate. My delegation aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of Switzerland on behalf of
the 22 members of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency (ACT) group. We wish to offer additional
observations in our national capacity.
The premise established in Article 24 of the Charter
of the United Nations, pursuant to which Member
States acknowledge that the Security Council acts on
their behalf, should function as a two-way street. States
Members of the Organization must recognize in effect
that the Council acts on our behalf, but the Council
must also demonstrate that it acts on our behalf. That
responsibility is particularly important to its five
permanent members.

13-53647

29/10/2013

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

We live in an era in which the transparency of
decision-making processes and the accountability of
representatives to the represented have been established
as ever-more solid principles in all organizations,
independent of their nature. Presidential note
S/2006/507 and its update note S/2010/507, as well as
note S/2013/515 adopted in August, mark an important
milestone in the history of the Security Council, above
all in the area of transparency. I take this opportunity
to recognize the work of Argentina as Chair of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, and to welcome note S/2013/630,
adopted yesterday.
Note 507 encompassed many of the concerns of the
membership of the Organization and resolved several,
at least conceptually. Important progress has been made
in transparency and accountability after its adoption.
Nevertheless, an analysis of the Council’s practices
reveals that the challenge of implementing adopted
agreements in a consistent manner remains. Costa Rica
believes, for example, that the Council should take
even greater interest in the input of those who have a
legitimate concern or who would be directly affected
by its decisions. Despite the agreements achieved to
that end, significant shortcomings persist in practice.
In addition, more transparent, direct and clear
communication should take place between the Council,
its subsidiary bodies and the rest of the Organization.
Another subject that deserves greater attention is
the public aspect of the Council’s actions. Although it
is true that there has an increase in the number of public
meetings in comparison to other years, we are far from
the spirit of the norm, which establishes the rule that
every meeting of the Council should be public, unless
expressly decided otherwise. Without doubt, there are
situations that demand the utmost discretion, but we
disagree with a practice that has inverted the language
of the norm.
It is the Secretariat’s duty to facilitate transparency
and accountability by offering open formats for all
meetings as a first option in the proposed programmes
of work prepared by each Council presidency. It is then
up to the members of the Council to convince others
of the need for a private format, when necessary, as an
exception to the rule. In voicing these considerations, I
am pleased to say that Costa Rica and Estonia are leading
and coordinating a subgroup in the ACT framework to
promote transparency within the Security Council.

S/PV.7052 (Resumption 1)

I would like to highlight several recommendations
in that regard. First, we should develop an action
plan to implement note 507 in the context of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions.
Secondly, we should continue to improve
transparency in the preparation of the annual report
of the Security Council to the General Assembly
by engaging members in an informal, interactive
discussion, both as the report is being drafted and when
it is brought before the General Assembly.
Thirdly, briefings by United Nations officials to the
Council should, as far as possible, be made accessible
to all Members, while subsequent consultations may be
held in a private setting when necessary.
Fourthly, Costa Rica stresses the importance of
the draft resolution on special political missions being
considered by the Fourth Committee, one objective of
which is to improve transparency. We believe that, in
the context of special political missions, transparency
cannot and should not be limited to exchanges between
the Secretariat and the membership; it should should
include the Security Council, whose importance
is reflected in the simple fact that it decides the
overwhelming majority of mandates of special political
missions. We encourage the Security Council to
continue improving the provision of information to
Member States on special political missions.
I close by affirming that the implementation of note
507 requires the ongoing commitment of all members
of the Council and the active participation of the
General Assembly. Today’s important meeting, held at
the behest of Azerbaijan, represents a significant step
in the right direction.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative from New Zealand.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): We thank Azerbaijan
for convening this important debate, we congratulate
Ambassador Perceval on her chairmanship of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, and we note that this debate
has now become an annual fixture on the Council’s
programme. Having said that, we think that once a year
is not enough; working methods are too important to be
relegated to an annual discussion.
Over the past 12 months, we have seen occasions
when better working methods might have improved the

13-536477/21

S/PV.7052 (Resumption 1)

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

29/10/2013

quality and effectiveness of outcomes. The Council’s
engagement with troop-contributing countries while
establishing the Force Intervention Brigade in the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo could have been
much better. Its slow reaction to unfolding political,
security and humanitarian crises in Mali and in the
Central African Republic are further examples.

the representative of Costa Rica, but it must not become
a procedural fetter on the ability of the SecretaryGeneral or Council members to discharge their Charter
responsibilities to prevent conflict. Discussions on
emerging crises are often going to be very sensitive and
are therefore not always best suited to formal Council
meetings, and that reality could also be better reflected
in Council working methods.

We are pleased, however, to observe some minor but
positive changes. Presidential note S/2013/515 will be a
useful aid to transparency. Wrap-up sessions are now
convened with greater frequency, following Pakistan’s
lead in January. Last week’s briefings direct from Addis
Ababa and Entebbe were an obvious improvement in
the use of technology. But much more must be done
to enable the Council more effectively to perform
its most neglected Charter responsibilities — those
under Chapter VI, concerning conflict prevention and
peaceful settlement of disputes.

In that same context, it is necessary to find
better ways to engage with the States concerned.
New Zealand also sees potential for a greater role for
Council subsidiary bodies, particularly the Ad Hoc
Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution
in Africa, to help facilitate more active Council roles
in conflict prevention. That could lead the Working
Group to focus more closely on subregional or countryspecific challenges, or to act as a mechanism for
more meaningful interaction on conflict analysis and
preventive initiatives between the Council and regional
and subregional organizations.

As New Zealand stressed in this debate last
year, preventive initiatives are less costly in terms
of resources and lives than peacekeeping or peace
enforcement, and are more likely to deliver lasting
outcomes that address the root causes of conflict. The
Council’s attempts over the past year to better fulfil its
preventive function by resurrecting horizon-scanning
was an important recognition of a problem that must be
addressed.
We do recognize, however, that some States have
concerns about that format. We have a very open mind
on the name, format and modalities, which for us are
much less important than the underlying purpose of
enabling the Council to look ahead and assess emerging
threats to international peace and security, thereby
facilitating early and effective responses in supporting
or leading mediation and conflict prevention measures.
The case of Syria graphically underlines what happens
when there is insufficient attention to emerging
situations at early stages.
New Zealand also emphasizes that it is not just the
Security Council itself which has responsibility for
better using the available tools to facilitate effective
preventive action by the Council. Article 99 of the
Charter of the United Nations allows the SecretaryGeneral to bring emerging threats to the Council’s
attention — a power that should be used more often.
The Council’s monthly programme of work might be
a useful aid to transparency, as was just emphasized by

8/21

Similarly, advances in working methods are needed
to address wide concerns held outside the Council about
its working partnership with regional and subregional
organizations. They have an inherent advantage in
identifying emerging threats, they are better placed for
early threat identification, they often know the players,
and they have a greater stake in preventing conflict. The
Council would be much better placed to respond to such
threats if it had improved processes for engagement
with regional organizations, and we strongly urge that.
Much of what we achieve at the United Nations
relies on momentum, so we encourage Council members
to take to heart the many messages emerging from
today’s debate. The range of issues raised by Member
States indicates our widespread interest in and concern
about working methods. We know that takes time; we
know that it takes energy. But given the challenges
and expectations of today’s world, real and substantial
change is needed in the way the Council functions if it
is to deliver on its responsibilities; and that is what New
Zealand urges today.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium.
Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to address the Security Council on behalf of
the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Kingdom of
Belgium.

13-53647

29/10/2013

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

S/PV.7052 (Resumption 1)

First of all, I would like to thank Azerbaijan, as
President of the Security Council, for convening this
debate and for preparing the excellent concept paper
(S/2013/613, annex) before us.

to establish horizon-scanning meetings as an integral
part of our efforts with regard to preventive diplomacy.
Therefore, we encourage other Council members to
hold horizon-scanning meetings on a regular basis.

The Netherlands and Belgium attach great
importance to this open debate. It gives the wider
membership of the United Nations the opportunity to
interact with the Security Council on a topic that is not
merely a matter of internal procedure, but that has a
profound impact on the way we attempt to make our
universal Organization work.

Fourthly, the cooperation between the United
Nations and relevant regional organizations in the area
of peace and security has greatly improved and become
more diversified. We commend the Council in that
regard. Regional organizations should be heard even
more frequently in the Council, not only on thematic
issues, but in discussions of the situations in countries
in which they are involved. Furthermore, relations
between the Council and legal institutions, such as
the International Court of Justice and the Permanent
Court of Arbitration, could be strengthened, given their
potential role in conflict prevention and resolution.

Let me start by acknowledging that real progress
has been made over the past few years. The Netherlands
and Belgium commend both the permanent and
the successive elected members of the Council.
The commitments put forward in presidential note
S/2013/515, adopted in August, deserve not only our
appreciation but expedient implementation.
Nonetheless, further progress on the improvement
of the working methods of the Security Council
is desirable. It would help to enhance the Security
Council’s accountability towards other Member States,
and would further increase the transparency, legitimacy
and effective implementation of its decisions. The
concept paper prepared for this meeting contains an
interesting overview of the recent work and events on
the working methods of the Security Council. It lists
a number of good suggestions, virtually all of which
the Netherlands and Belgium are happily support.
Nevertheless, we would like to draw the Council’s
attention to some specific ideas.
First, we appreciate the fact that the chairs of the
country-specific configurations of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) are invited to brief the Council
when the situation in “their” country is being discussed.
However, we strongly believe that the Council’s work
would benefit from allowing the chairs of the PBC
country-specific configurations to participate in the
much more interactive closed consultations that usually
follow the public briefings.
Secondly, we welcome the monthly wrap-up
sessions, but believe they could also be much more
interactive and thus provide the opportunity for an
assessment based on a more analytical approach.
Thirdly, we commend the United Kingdom and
Australia for having organized a horizon-scanning
debate at the start of their presidencies. The Netherlands
and Belgium would favour building on that precedent

Lastly, the Netherlands and Belgium would
appreciate earlier notification of certain options
considered by the Council in cases where said options
have possible budgetary implications that affect
the entire membership. In that regard, the cost of
peacekeeping missions in particular comes to mind.
As I said, the Netherlands and Belgium value the
efforts that have been made so far to improve the working
methods of the Security Council. The suggestions in
the President’s concept paper deserve further careful
consideration. We count on the Security Council
members, in particular the permanent members, to join
their efforts with the wider membership to continue to
enhance the transparency, legitimacy, effectiveness and
interactivity of the Security Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Eler (Turkey): I would like to thank the
Azerbaijani presidency for organizing this open debate
on a subject that is of particular importance to the entire
membership of the United Nations, and for preparing
and circulating the concept paper (S/2013/613, annex)
on the implementation of note S/2010/507.
This debate has been very timely in terms of
re-addressing the issues on the working methods of
the Security Council, as we are fast approaching again
a time of change in the membership of the Council.
I would also like to express our appreciation to
Ambassador Perceval for her work and efforts in her
capacity as Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.

13-536479/21

S/PV.7052 (Resumption 1)

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

Turkey attaches great importance to the efforts to
improve the Council’s working methods, which is an
important component of the comprehensive reform of
the Council. We have long advocated that the Council
is in need of a change in terms of its structure and
representation, as well as its working methods.
The world is constantly changing and a number of
developments are unfolding before our eyes with each
passing day. That is why it is our sincere wish that
the Council adapt itself to the current realities of the
global political, security and economic scene. As it is
our common responsibility to maintain the credibility
of this body, we should spare no effort to enhance its
efficiency and transparency, and work sincerely to
ensure that its work is inclusive and effective. In that
sense, Turkey welcomes the steps taken in recent years,
particularly through the milestone presidential note
S/2010/507 and the subsequent complementary notes.
On the other hand, there is still much to be done in
terms of the implementation of the measures set out in
those notes.
First and foremost, Turkey believes that the
Council’s dialogue with non-Council members should
be further improved. The entire membership expects
more effective and frequent use of public meetings,
informal interactive dialogues and Arria Formula
meetings. That will enable better communication and
interaction, and provide more opportunity to the wider
membership to have more focused involvement in the
issues of common concern. With regard to enhancing the
transparency of the Council, we welcome the recently
increased use of wrap-up sessions and encourage all
members of the Council to hold such meetings at the
end of their presidencies. At the same time, we are
cognizant of the need for the Council’s to conduct its
own deliberations for decision-making.
Secondly, we need a better structured dialogue and
communication between the Council and other United
Nations bodies and regional organizations. A regular
and more substantive exchange of views among the
Council, the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council, and the Peacebuilding Commission
would not only enhance the efficiency of the United
Nations system, but also augment the transparency,
openness and inclusiveness of the Council itself. We also
think that the Council should expand its consultation
and cooperation with other international and relevant
regional organizations, such as the Peace and Security

10/21

29/10/2013

Council of the African Union, the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation and the League of Arab States.
Thirdly, we are of the view that the Council should
make better use of measures under Chapter VI of the
Charter of the United Nations. Without any prejudice
to its right to mandate measures under Chapter VII, the
Council, as the primary responsible organ of the United
Nations for the maintenance of international peace and
security, should give some thought to utilizing different
ways to reach a peaceful settlement of disputes. In that
sense, we welcome the horizon-scanning briefings
provided by the Secretariat. We believe that those
briefings are important in terms of conflict prevention
and wish to see such meetings in all upcoming
programmes of work of the Council.
Finally, I would like to touch upon an aspect
related to the Council’s internal practice, which is
again of particular importance. While taking note of
presidential note S/2012/937, Turkey believes that the
Council should act in due transparency and inclusivity
in the appointment of the chairs of the subsidiary organs
and the selection of the penholders.
While
fully
acknowledging
the
positive
developments related to the working methods of the
Security Council, we believe that there is always room
for further improvement. In the end, all Members of
the United Nations deserve a more democratic, more
transparent and more efficient Security Council, which
we believe is also a requirement for maintaining the
credibility of our Organization, the United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Austria.
Mr. Sajdik (Austria): I would first like to thank
the Azerbaijani presidency for convening today’s open
debate. Austria aligns itself with the statement made
earlier by the representative of Switzerland on behalf
of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
(ACT) group. The issues of accountability, coherence
and transparency of the Security Council, which the
group aims to enhance, are extremely important to my
delegation. As a member of the ACT group, Austria
will now limit this intervention to two specific points.
First, we believe that efforts to improve the
working methods of the Council must also focus on
strengthening the interaction between the Council
and the United Nations membership at large. This
applies particularly to United Nations peacekeeping

13-53647

29/10/2013

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

missions, which is the United Nations flagship activity.
Resolution 1353 (2001) and last week’s presidential
note S/2013/6130, on the enhancement of consultations
with troop- and police-contributing countries, among
other Council documents, provide a very good basis for
an intensified engagement of the Council with those
countries. We call on the Security Council to make
more frequent and effective use of those existing tools.
It is the contributing countries that have their boots on
the ground and that must implement the mandates of
the missions.
As practically all United Nations peacekeeping
operations
have
become
more
challenging
and multifaceted, the need for dialogue and
information-sharing has increased. Troop- and
police-contributing countries should be consulted
by both the Secretariat and the Council, not only on
a regular basis but also and particularly on an ad hoc
basis and at short notice, in the light of the sometimes
rapidly evolving developments in the respective areas
of operation.
Let me address a second point that has been very
dear to my delegation for many years — the rule of law.
Thirteen months ago, Member States at the High-level
Meeting of the General Assembly on the Rule of Law
at the National and International Levels recognized the
positive contribution of the Security Council to the rule
of law in discharging its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. On
that same occasion, the General Assembly encouraged
the Security Council to first ensure that sanctions
imposed by the Council are carefully targeted and,
secondly, to further develop fair and clear procedures.
That reflects a conviction that the implementation of
sanctions must respect the rule of law. Austria strongly
believes that the United Nations must practice what it
preaches. The rule of law must apply not only outside
the United Nations, but also within the United Nations,
in particular in situations in which actions by the United
Nations and its organs directly affect individual rights.
The United Nations in general and the Security
Council in particular should lead the way in this
regard. As former Chair of the Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities during
its term as a non-permanent member of the Council in
2009 and 2010, Austria worked hard to improve the
procedures under the sanctions regime of resolution
1267 (1999) in terms of due process. Resolution 1904

S/PV.7052 (Resumption 1)

(2009) of 17 December 2009, which established the
Office of the Ombudsperson, was a significant step
forward in improving the fairness and transparency of
the Al-Qaida sanctions regime and enhanced the rule
of law in the implementation of Council decisions. We
therefore reiterate our call on the Security Council to
continue on that path and extend the mandate of the
Ombudsperson, which has been further improved in the
meantime, to other sanctions regimes.
In concluding, I would like to emphasize that the
Council’s working methods have developed remarkably
over the years, yet they remain a work in progress.
As the work of the Security Council has to constantly
adapt to new challenges and changed circumstances,
so should the Council’s working methods. Engagement
with troop-contributing countries and respect for the
rule of law are thereby key to making the Council’s
work more effective and legitimate.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.
Mr. González de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke
in Spanish): We thank you, Sir, for having convened
this open debate on the working methods of the
Security Council. As stated in the concept paper that
quite rightly guides our debate (S/2013/613, annex),
this is an important matter of common interest. The
Security Council is a body of crucial importance to
the maintenance of international peace and security. It
is in everybody’s interest that the Council efficiently
exercise the functions assigned to it by the Charter of
the United Nations. We welcome the awareness of that
fact on the part of the members of the Security Council,
as reflected in the note by the President dated 28 August
(S/2013/515).
There is no doubt that the authority and influence
of the Security Council would be enhanced if there
were more opportunities to include the wider United
Nations membership in its work. Spain believes that
this objective must be the guiding light for the Security
Council’s activities.
In recent years, progress has been made in increasing
the Security Council’s permeability. The contributions
of such countries as Portugal, Belgium, Japan, Slovakia,
Panama, Bosnia and Herzegovina and India have been
of great help. Costa Rica, Jordan and Liechtenstein also
deserve to be mentioned for the role they have played
in encouraging that collective reflection. I also take
the opportunity to recognize the Republic of Argentina

13-5364711/21

S/PV.7052 (Resumption 1)

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

and its Permanent Representative, Mrs. María Cristina
Perceval, for the way in which she has led the work
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions.
The members of the Security Council have
committed themselves to implementing the measures
contained in presidential note S/2010/507. As we have
stated on previous occasions, we are reasonably pleased
with the implementation of measures concerning the
monthly programme of work of the Security Council,
such as the publication of the tentative forecast, the
briefings by incoming Presidents or the periodic updates
of the programme of work. We are perfectly aware of
the fact that, for reasons of urgency, sometimes the
most sensitive dossiers must be dealt with in meetings
that cannot be announced far enough in advance. The
Security Council must be able to react promptly to the
most urgent threats to international peace and security.
This year we have witnessed an updating of the
practice of holding a wrap-up session at the close
of the month. As stated by one representative of a
Council member, these sessions are like a two-faced
Janus, keeping the Council’s focus on the recent past
in order to draw lessons for the immediate future. We
thank Pakistan for resurrecting this practice, which
had hardly ever been used until this year. We also
heartily congratulate South Korea, Rwanda, Togo, the
United Kingdom and Argentina on having continued
this practice. In September, the Australian presidency
opted for an interactive end-of-month meeting with
representatives of States not members of the Security
Council. We believe that is also a valid option for
responding to the growing need for transparency.
Spain supports the practice of holding
horizon-scanning meetings at the direction of the
Secretariat. I would suggest that such meetings, which
are held at the beginning of a country’s presidency of
the Council, be conveniently opened to all Member
States.
The measures included in your concept paper,
Mr. President, have our principled support. Moreover,
I would like to highlight as a matter of particular
interest the need to continue to promote the following
measures: an increase in the number of public meetings;
the enhancement of a transparent and inclusive
process of negotiation within the Council; an increase
in the interaction between the Council and troopand police-contributing countries; and more time
dedicated to interaction and dialogue with regional and
12/21

29/10/2013

subregional organizations. The final goal, as already
stated, is to increase the transparency of the work of the
Security Council. The work of this organ must follow
procedures that contribute to reinforcing its authority
as a sine qua non for gaining the support of the entire
international community. The working methods should
therefore serve that higher goal; otherwise, they will
undermine the political and moral authority of the
Council.
I will conclude with on a sensitive question related
to the topic of today’s debate: the use of the veto. Spain
supports the limitation of its use. Specifically, we urge
that a practice be introduced whereby the reasons for
its use be explained when that occurs. More important
still, we advocate for members to refrain from its use
in cases of serious crimes such as genocide, ethnic
cleansing, war crimes and crimes against humanity.
We therefore welcome the call by France to develop
a code of conduct for moving towards that goal. The
Council can rest assured that we remain fully ready to
contribute to such measures.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have the
pleasure to speak today on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM). At the outset, I would like to convey
the Movement’s appreciation to Azerbaijan as President
of the Security Council for having convened this
important open debate to discuss the progress achieved
in the implementation of the measures set out in the
note by the President of the Security Council of 26 July
2010 (S/2010/507). This open debate could help us to
direct discussions towards enhancing the transparency
and efficiency of the work of the Security Council and
to meet the expectations of the general membership of
the United Nations.
This debate is the sixth debate on the working
methods of the Council. The increased frequency in
recent years of holding such debates is indicative of
the fact that Member States attach great importance to
this matter. The same interest has been shown by the
Non-Aligned Movement.
NAM has always emphasized the need for the
Council to increase transparency and take a balance
approach to interaction with non-members. Some
positive steps have been taken by the Security Council
pursuant to note 507. The Movement appreciates
the work leading to the note by the President of the

13-53647

29/10/2013

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

Security Council contained in document S/2013/515,
on enhancing efficiency and transparency as well as on
the interaction and dialogue with non-members of the
Security Council, and emphasizes the importance of the
efforts of Ambassador María Cristina Perceval, Chair
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions, which were eloquently
elaborated upon in her briefing today The points listed
in the note are very close to the position of NAM with
regard to the working methods of the Security Council.
NAM urges all States to uphold the primacy of,
and full respect for, the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations pertaining to the functions and powers of
the Assembly and calls on the Presidents of the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the
Security Council to conduct regular discussions and
coordination among themselves regarding the agenda
and programme of work of the respective principal
organs in order to establish increased coherence and
complementarity among those organs in a mutually
reinforcing manner, respectful of one other’s mandates
and with a view to generating mutual understanding
among them.
We believe that the Security Council should avoid
resorting to Chapter VII of the Charter as a tool for
addressing issues that do not necessarily pose a threat
to international peace and security. Rather, it should
fully utilize such means to settle disputes and prevent
conflict as negotiation, mediation, arbitration and
judicial decisions and other provisions of relevant
chapters of the Charter of the United Nations, including
Chapters VI and VIII, before invoking Chapter VII,
which should be a measure of last resort.
The Non-Aligned Movement welcomes the use
of wrap-up and informal briefing meetings, pursuant
to the note by the President contained in document
S/2012/922. However, NAM believes that the issues
discussed in the wrap-up meetings should be limited to
the items and issues discussed at the Security Council
within the programme of work of each month. It also
welcomes the commitment reiterated by Council
members to continue that practice and encourages all
efforts to sustain and improve such meetings, which are
of great relevance to the broader membership.
With regard to the reporting practice by the
Council, we welcome the informal meetings between
the presidency of the Council and Member States on
the preparation of the annual report of the Security
Council, which can help enhance the quality of such

S/PV.7052 (Resumption 1)

reports. We call on the Security Council to submit
a more explanatory, comprehensive and analytical
annual report to the General Assembly that assesses the
work of the Council, including such cases in which the
Council has failed to act, and the views expressed by its
members during its consideration of its agenda.
Furthermore, NAM calls on the Security Council
to elaborate on the circumstances under which it adopts
different outcomes, whether resolutions, presidential
statements, press statements or “elements” to the press.
It calls on the Security Council, pursuant to Article 15,
paragraph 1, and Article 24, paragraph 3, of the Charter
of the United Nations, to submit special reports for
the consideration of the General Assembly. It further
calls on the Security Council to ensure that its monthly
assessments are comprehensive and analytical, and
issued in a timely fashion. The General Assembly may
consider proposing parameters for the elaboration of
such assessments.
NAM welcomes the increase in the number of public
meetings and expects that the quantitative increase of
those meetings shall be associated with a qualitative
improvement by providing more opportunities and
meaningful exchanges of view to take into account the
contributions of non-Council members, in particular
those whose interests are or may be directly affected
by possible decisions of the Council. Furthermore,
concerned non-members of the Council should be
given an opportunity to express their views and
positions on such briefings. The general observations
and positions formulated by numerous non-members of
the Security Council during its debates or open debates
should be properly taken into account in any possible
outcome of those debates and should also be reflected
in the Council’s annual report. NAM appreciates the
convening of Arria Formula meetings as a practical way
to ensure greater interaction with non-members of the
Council and regional and subregional organizations.
We welcome the commitments to maintain regular
communication with the Peacebuilding Commission,
make more effective use of public meetings, and
invite the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission and
the Chairs of its country-specific configurations, as
appropriate, to participate in formal Council meetings
and informal interactive dialogues. NAM also welcomes
measures taken to improve consultations with troopcontributing countries (TCCs) and police-contributing
countries as part of the effort to plan and execute
peacekeeping operations more effectively and with

13-5364713/21

S/PV.7052 (Resumption 1)

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

clearer mandates, and expects the finalization of a
presidential note on the enhancement of consultation
with troop- and police-contributing countries. The
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations should
continue to involve TCCs frequently and intensively in
its deliberations through sustained, regular and timely
interaction. NAM appreciates the meetings of the
Working Group held this year.
The Movement believes that further steps are
needed, along with the necessary political will of
Member States, in particularly the permanent members
of the Council, to improve the working methods of
the Council through both the General Assembly and
the Security Council. Transparency, accountability
and consistency are the key elements that the Security
Council should observe in all its activities, approaches
and procedures. Every effort should be made to render
the Council more democratic, representative and
accountable. In that way, the Security Council will
be able to deal more efficiently and effectively with
its mounting workload and with the multiplicity and
complexity of the issues on its agenda in maintaining
international peace and security. The Non-Aligned
Movement stands ready to contribute to the achievement
of those goals.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Tommasi (Italy): I wish to join previous
speakers in thanking you, Mr. President, for convening
today’s open debate on the working methods of the
Security Council.
Today, more than ever, the international community
needs and expects an efficient and effective Security
Council that is able to take prompt action, in accordance
with its mandate, for the maintenance of international
peace and security. At a time of growing frustration
and concern within the international community over
the persistence of violent crises, improved working
methods are crucial to enhancing the Security
Council’s ability to carry out its primary responsibility
of maintaining international peace and security.
Transparency, openness, efficiency and interaction
with the rest of the Member States are needed to foster
a sense of ownership of the Council by the international
community and to avoid the misperception that the
Council is an autonomous body.
We appreciate the improvements that have already
been made to adapt the Council’s working methods to

14/21

29/10/2013

changing realities. I am referring, for instance, to the
increasing number of open debates, the organization
of informal briefing sessions by Security Council
Presidents on their monthly work, and the strengthened
cooperation with regional organizations. As a member
State of the European Union (EU), Italy commends
the attention dedicated to cooperation between the EU
and the United Nations. But more needs to be done to
enhance transparency on, access to and participation
in, the Council.
Some ideas for further improvements have already
been mentioned in the concept paper (S/2013/613, annex)
circulated before the meeting — for which I thank you,
Mr. President — and others have been brought up today
by colleagues.
I wish to draw the Council’s attention to
two commitments taken by the President of the
Security Council, namely, first, maintaining regular
communication with the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) and the Chairs of its country-specific
configurations, and secondly, improving consultations
with troop- and police-contributing countries (TCCs
and PCCs). We support the involvement of the PBC
and the Chairs of the country-specific configurations
in the formal meetings of the Council. The PBC has
the potential to play an increasingly supportive role in
the post-conflict processes of stabilization and has a
capacity for analysis of peacebuilding dynamics that is
useful to the Security Council. It is equally important
to strengthen the Council’s consultations with TCCs
and PCCs, especially when mission mandates are
being defined or renewed. A perspective from the field
is fundamental, especially from those who are being
called on to carry out the mandate.
Italy, a major contributor of troops to United
Nations peacekeeping, will lend its efforts, as always,
to giving TCCs a greater role. We therefore welcome the
commitments undertaken in the note by the President of
the Security Council issued yesterday (S/2013/630) and
we thank the Permanent Representative of Argentina,
Ambassador María Cristina Perceval, for her efforts as
Chair of the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions.
Improving working methods is part of the Security
Council reform process. It is one of the five pillars of
the intergovernmental negotiations on reform. As the
General Assembly agreed by consensus in its decision
62/557, we have pledged to deal with the five pillars
at the same time to achieve comprehensive reform. We
13-53647

29/10/2013

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

remain convinced that hurried and divisive piecemeal
approaches must be avoided. There is no alternative
to a comprehensive agreement. Partial solutions will
not lead to a genuine reform of the Security Council.
Only a comprehensive solution — including working
methods — can lead to a reform, shared by the whole
membership, that will yield a Security Council better
able to cope with the growing challenges of today.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Singapore.
Ms. Tan (Singapore): I thank Azerbaijan for
convening this meeting and for its concept paper on
today’s open debate (S/2013/613, annex). I also thank
Argentina for its work as the Chair of the Informal
Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions.
Improvements in the working methods of the
Security Council, especially in its transparency
towards the General Assembly, are important to small
States like Singapore. The reality is that small States
are unlikely to obtain a permanent seat in whatever new
configuration that might emerge from an overall reform
of the Council in the future.
In the current situation, it is also increasingly
challenging for small States to be elected as
non-permanent Council members. Campaigns for
contested and uncontested seats on the Council are
becoming financially exorbitant and resource-intensive.
Of the 70 States Members of the United Nations that
have never been elected as members of the Security
Council, 50 are members of the Forum of Small States.
The small States that are elected to the Council also
face constraints. Most small States can be elected to
the Council only once every several decades, given
resource constraints. By the time they have mastered
Security Council processes, their terms are over and
the next generation has to start from scratch when they
are elected.
Nevertheless, many small States continue to
experience first hand the consequences of the failure
to maintain international peace and security. The work
of the Council remains of profound importance to us.
Accordingly, reforms that increase the transparency of
the work and deliberations of the Council are critical to
small States.
We welcome the Council’s efforts to improve its
practices as outlined in the series of presidential notes
adopted since 2010, including convening more open

S/PV.7052 (Resumption 1)

debates, more Arria Formula meetings, consultations
with troop-contributing countries and monthly briefings
on the Security Council’s programme of work. Those
initiatives have helped to improve the transparency of
the Council with regard to the General Assembly.
However, the implementation of the recommendations
and proposals contained in the five presidential notes
(S/2010/507, S/2012/402, S/2012/922, S/2012/937 and
S/2013/515) has been limited, slow and vary from
presidency to presidency of the Council. For example,
notwithstanding their substantive briefings, which we
support, we also believe that non-members should have
more opportunities to provide input to the work of the
Council’s subsidiary bodies. Furthermore, some of
those initiatives have been implemented with an eye to
the letter rather than the spirit of the proposals. Many
of the briefings and reports are largely descriptive
of the Council’s work. While we thank the various
presidencies for convening wrap-up meetings, we also
note that such meetings have not been consistently held
and tend to comprise set statements by Security Council
members with general descriptions of meetings held
and resolutions adopted. In our view, the Council could
do more to increase interactivity, deepen the level of
analysis and foster greater critical reflection in its
engagement with the General Assembly.
A good place to start would be the forthcoming
annual report of the Council. Instead of simply being
a descriptive and voluminous compilation of data and
information on the work of the Council, we hope that
this year’s report will be more concise and analytical.
For example, it could include an evaluation of the
effectiveness of the Council’s decisions as well as
lessons learned.
Last month, we welcomed the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2118 (2013), on the elimination of
chemical weapons in Syria. But let us not forget the
deep unhappiness in the United Nations membership
and the wider world at the impotency of the Council
prior to that adoption in the face of the violence and
atrocities in the crisis in Syria.
The use of the veto is the crux of the problem.
Singapore therefore reiterates its request for the
permanent members of the Council to consider
refraining from using their vetoes to block Council
action aimed at preventing or ending genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity. In that regard, we
would be interested to hear the reactions of the other
permanent members to the proposals by the French

13-5364715/21

S/PV.7052 (Resumption 1)

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

President on a code of conduct on the use of the veto.
Furthermore, we urge the permanent members to explain
to the General Assembly their reasons for using the veto
or their intention to do so, in particular with regard to
its consistency with the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter and international law. That is
particularly pertinent at times when the veto is used to
block action intended to maintain international peace
and security.
The Security Council has been given the primary
responsibility by the Members of the United Nations for
maintaining international peace and security, and special
privileges have been given to the permanent members
to enable them to carry out that mandate. However, the
Council does not discharge its responsibility in isolation,
and it needs the support of the States Members of the
United Nations, notably for funding and providing
troops for the Council’s mandated operations. Given
that relationship between the Council and the wider
United Nations membership, it is incumbent upon the
Council to increase the transparency of its engagement
with the General Assembly.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Govender (South Africa): My delegation
is grateful to you, Mr. President, for convening
this important debate on Security Council working
methods and for developing the concept paper for this
debate (S/2013/613, annex). We thank you for your
constructive approach in maintaining a practice that
we hope becomes a permanent feature of this important
organ of the United Nations, which has yet to reform.
We would also like to thank Argentina, as the Chair
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions, for continuing to assess
the implementation of presidential note S/2010/507.
South Africa aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, and
wishes to add the following remarks in its national
capacity.
Like other delegations, we acknowledge the
progress made by the Security Council over the past
few years in improving its working methods and
attempting to make the Council more transparent and
inclusive with regard to those methods. In both our
recently completed terms as an elected member of the
Council, we consistently endeavoured to encourage
16/21

29/10/2013

the Council to engage more regularly with the broader
United Nations membership and regional organizations
when addressing its various agenda items. We are
proud of our modest achievements in that regard, which
include regularizing annual engagements between the
Security Council and the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union and — having served as Chair
of the Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention
and Resolution — involving the broader United Nations
membership and non-State entities in the Working
Group’s discussions.
But more must be done, and we believe that the
various proposals and recommendations made today
and at debates of this nature to come are intended to
be contributions of a constructive nature, designed to
enhance the effectiveness, transparency, inclusiveness
and credibility of the Security Council. The Council’s
adoption in August of presidential note S/2013/515 is
a step towards maintaining that momentum, with the
commitment made by Council members to the 10 steps
towards greater transparency outlined in that document.
In addition to those commitments, all of which
South Africa strongly supports, we wish to add
additional recommendations that can further contribute
to the Council’s more effective functioning in the
execution of its mandates. They include maintaining
the practice of field visits and even mini-missions
by the Council as well as its subsidiary bodies, in
order to enhance the Council’s understanding of the
situation on the ground and contribute to informed
decision-making; and spreading country-specific
files — otherwise managed as an exclusive domain
or prerogative of some permanent members — more
widely among elected members. Such exclusiveness
contributes to an inflexible approach to dealing with
Council resolutions, which are in fact a mandate for all
of those who serve on the Council. Engagement with
regional organizations should be based on the principle
of subsidiarity and done in a cohesive and organized
manner. We also recommend that such engagements
should be acknowledged and included in the SecretaryGeneral’s reports. And we suggest a longer lead time
on all Security Council reports provided to Council
members before consultations, especially at the time of
mandate renewals.
Predictability in the working methods of the
Security Council is integral to ensuring that there is
consistency in the way various matters are handled.
It has been an unfortunate reality in some cases that

13-53647

29/10/2013

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

the Council has been perceived as being selective
in addressing certain issues, which we ascribe to
inconsistency born out of the provisional nature of
the Council’s rules of procedure. Inextricably linked
to that is the notion of some members of the Council
approaching matters on the Council’s agenda on the
basis of narrow national interests, writ large against
the Council’s primary mandate for the maintenance
of international peace and security. That is reflected
in the Security Council’s inability to resolve certain
conflicts, Syria being the most recent case in point.
That unfortunate reality has furthermore resulted in
many Security Council decisions being either ignored
or flagrantly undermined.
The situations of Palestine and Western Sahara
are but two clear examples of how detrimental narrow
national interests can be in frustrating the lofty objective
of maintaining international peace and security. In
the case of Western Sahara, we have witnessed how
selective small groups, some of which are not even
Council members, have a greater influence on the text
of resolutions than the Council members themselves.
The subsequent weakening of the text of that annual
resolution has resulted in the Security Council not being
able to implement its own decisions. We have witnessed
a similar unfortunate approach in dealing with the
situation in the Middle East, Palestine in particular.
The Council has repeatedly failed to speak in unison
on that matter, thereby being unable to issue even a
media statement when the two parties to the conflict
resumed direct talks earlier this year. Since September
2000, the State of Palestine has written approximately
473 letters to the Secretary-General and the Presidents
of the Security Council and the General Assembly
regarding the ongoing crisis in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem, the most recent
of which was submitted on 17 October. In the absence
of any significant decision over the past two years by
the Council, whether in the form of a resolution or a
presidential or press statement, it is our consequent
assessment that the Security Council has unfortunately
not found it appropriate to reflect seriously on the
content of those hundreds of written testimonies by
one party to the conflict, namely, the State of Palestine,
highlighting numerous violations of international law
and obligations of States party to resolutions adopted
by the Council that go blatantly unheeded.
Such approaches unfortunately put in question the
Council’s credibility in discharging its clear mandate.
The debate on working methods is but one important

S/PV.7052 (Resumption 1)

part of the greater whole of the debate on Council
reform. We therefore remain convinced that greater
legitimacy and effectiveness, including in its working
methods, will prevail when the Council becomes more
representative.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Umemoto (Japan): I would like to start by
expressing my gratitude to you, Mr. President, for your
initiative in holding this debate on the working methods
of the Security Council.
We believe that Japan has been a leading contributor
to improvements in Security Council working methods.
When Japan was on the Council, we, as Chair of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions, issued presidential note
S/2006/507 in 2006, as well as its revision in 2010
(S/2010/507). We also issued a working methods
handbook, which included the presidential note and the
provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council.
Based on our proposals, the Council’s interaction with
troop- and police-contributing countries has increased.
We are proud of our country’s contribution to enhancing
the transparency of the Council’s working methods
through such efforts.
We are pleased that the Informal Working Group
has continued to hold discussions on improving the
Council’s working methods under the leadership of
subsequent Chairs, such as Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Portugal and Argentina. We can see progress in
efficiency in areas such as reviewing the mandate
cycles of the relevant Security Council resolutions.
In that context, I would like to voice my appreciation
to Ambassador María Cristina Perceval, Permanent
Representative of Argentina and Chair of the Informal
Working Group, for her contribution, including her
work on the presidential note issued this August
(S/2013/515).
However are those achievements enough? Are
the Security Council working methods transparent
enough? I am afraid that the answer is “not quite”.
For instance, many consultations in the Council are
still being held in a closed and exclusive format. We
even hear complaints from elected members of the
Council that they were not involved in the discussions
on the situation in Syria, which were conducted only
among permanent members. In that regard, I highly
appreciate the President’s initiative in taking on the

13-5364717/21

S/PV.7052 (Resumption 1)

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

topic of “Ensuring a transparent and inclusive process
of negotiation within the Council” in today’s debate.
While we remain strongly committed to improving
the working methods, there are, unfortunately, limits
to what can be done from outside the Security Council
to ensure a transparent process of internal negotiations
within the Council. In that regard, I sincerely hope
that the members of the Council, especially those
with permanent seats, will do more to enhance its
transparency.
Article 25 of the Charter of the United Nations
stipulates that we, the Member States, agree to accept
the decisions of the Security Council. Yet, that article
alone does not necessarily guarantee the legitimacy
of the Council’s decisions. Improving the Council’s
working methods is necessary, but insufficient in
enhancing the Council’s legitimacy. It is crucial that
the States Members of the United Nations accelerate
negotiations on Security Council reform to generate
concrete outcomes in the matter.
The Security Council as is currently composed
does not reflect the geopolitical realities of the century
and does not function as designed. The situation in
Syria has clearly demonstrated that dysfunction of the
Security Council.
Let us recall our leaders’ commitment made at
the 2005 World Summit and reflected in its Outcome
(General Assembly resolution 60/1) to achieve an
early reform of the Security Council. In that regard,
I appreciate the recent initiatives by His Excellency
Mr. John Ashe, current President of the General
Assembly, to promote proactively the reform process,
as he clearly stated in his letter of 22 October.
By 2015, when the United Nations marks its
seventieth anniversary, concrete outcomes in Security
Council reform will be necessary. I invite all Member
States to spare no effort towards that goal.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): As the issues on the agenda
of the Security Council become increasingly complex, so
do its day-to-day work and decision-making processes.
Other United Nations organs and institutions, regional
organizations and non-governmental organizations — all
of them — make important contributions to the work of
the Council and the fulfilment of its Charter-mandated
role. The media and wider public are also important,

18/21

29/10/2013

particularly in times of the Internet and Twitter. All of
that should be seen as an opportunity, not as a burden,
to the Council. It requires enhanced transparency and
efficiency of the Council as well as interaction with
the wider United Nations membership and the relevant
stakeholders.
The Council has come a long way, most recently
with the adoption of the presidential note contained in
document S/2013/515. The note contains many useful
aspects, including on the increased use of the Arria
Formula, closer involvement of the Peacebuilding
Commission and the use of wrap-up meetings by the
presidency. We encourage the members of the Council,
especially the permanent members, to ensure that
the commitment made in the note also translates into
action.
Other issues remain to be addressed. As that is
an ongoing process, improvements must be sought
on multiple fronts. In that context, we encourage the
States members of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group to continue their important efforts
in that regard.
We also highly appreciate the proposal made by
French Foreign Minister Fabius to refrain from using the
veto in situations of atrocity crimes. During Germany’s
recent Council membership, I witnessed first-hand the
deadlock in the Council caused by three double vetoes
and, more important, the terrible consequences they had
for the Syrian people. The French proposal is therefore
an important initiative of a permanent member of the
Council and should contribute to fostering the overall
discussion of the reform of the Security Council.
As important as the improvement of the Council’s
working methods may be, only comprehensive,
structural reform will enable the Council to more
effectively tackle the challenges of today’s world. Such
a reform is long overdue. As the United Nations nears
its seventieth session of the General Assembly in 2015,
the time has come for action.
We therefore welcome the initiative taken by the
President of the General Assembly, Ambassador John
Ashe, to task an advisory group with the drafting of
a negotiation text that adequately reflects current
positions on Council reform and provides options on
the way forward. We hope that such a text will finally
enable Member States to engage in real give-andtake negotiations. Germany stands ready to engage
constructively in those negotiations.

13-53647

29/10/2013

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ireland.
Mr. Donoghue (Ireland): Ireland aligns itself with
the comprehensive statement delivered by my Swiss
colleague on behalf of the 22-member Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency (ACT) group, a crossregional grouping of Member States established earlier
this year to press for a more accountable, coherent and
transparent Security Council. Ireland is pleased to be
a founding member of ACT. We care deeply about the
United Nations and how each of its institutions works.
And we believe that there is abundant evidence for
the proposition that the Security Council’s working
methods are in urgent need of improvement.
Among the points to which Ireland attaches
particular importance in the statement delivered on
behalf of the ACT are first, the welcome we give to the
proposal by France that the five permanent members
of the Council could voluntarily regulate their right to
exercise the veto in the case of mass atrocity crimes;
secondly, the appreciation we express for the greater
level of interactivity with the Council recently, which has
been achieved through, for instance, horizon-scanning
meetings.It is clearly desirable that briefings take place
regularly on situations where populations are at risk of
mass atrocities.
The ACT group was established in May to develop
proposals for concrete action to improve the Council’s
working methods and to build momentum around that
agenda. All United Nations States Members have a
legitimate stake in how the Security Council is run.
After all, the Council was established to ensure prompt
and effective action on behalf of the full membership.
We hope that we can persuade the United Nations
membership as a whole of the need for urgent action to
reform the Council’s method of operation and ways to
communicate and interact with the wider membership.
We want to work constructively and cooperatively
with the members of the Security Council in encouraging
a more businesslike and responsive approach. We could
accurately be termed — and have been termed — a
group of friends of the Security Council, supportive but
also frank and direct, the hallmarks of true friendship.
Just to be clear, we are taking no position on issues
relating to the reform, composition or enlargement of
the Council.
Improvements in relation to the Council’s working
methods are already under way, and we readily recognize

S/PV.7052 (Resumption 1)

them. We welcome the presidential note of 28 August
(S/2013/515), on transparency and improvement of the
Council’s dialogue with non-Council members and
bodies.
As a co-lead with Uruguay on the peacekeeping
dimension of the Council’s work, Ireland warmly
welcomes the commitments of the presidential note
contained in document S/2013/630, on the enhancement
of consultations with troop-contributing countries
(TCCs) and police-contributing countries (PCCs). The
challenge now is for Council members to ensure the full
and consistent implementation of that presidential note,
and other preceding resolutions, statements and notes
on peacekeeping working methods.
Ireland was pleased to respond positively this year
when we were asked to supply military personnel to
reinforce and stabilize the mission of the politically
sensitive United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force. As a significant peacekeeping troop contributor,
we are strongly of the view that a more dynamic,
interactive and meaningful partnership among Council
members, the Secretariat, TCCs and PCCs will benefit
all parties.
On peacekeeping and across a broad range of topics,
the ACT group will continue to work for constructive
and cooperative engagement with Council members on
practical steps that could improve the way in which the
Council does business.
Finally, we commend Azerbaijan for organizing
today’s debate as an important step in that process.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Maldives.
Mr. Sareer (Maldives): On behalf of the Republic
of Maldives, let me thank the Azerbaijani presidency
for convening this open debate on the working methods
of the Council. Let me furthermore thank Ambassador
María Cristina Perceval of Argentina for her briefing in
her capacity as Chair of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and other Procedural Questions.
The Maldives also thanks the presidency for its note
of 28 August (S/2013/515) and welcomes the continued
efforts at ensuring transparency and coherence within
the Council’s working methods.
The Maldives has the honour of associating
itself with the statement made by the representative
of Switzerland in its capacity as coordinator of the

13-5364719/21

S/PV.7052 (Resumption 1)

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group, a
cross-regional group made up of 22 member States.
According to Article 24 of the Charter of the United
Nations, the Council acts on behalf of all Member States.
That universal representation needs to be reflected in
fully transparent decisions and a process that leaves no
room for secrecy. It is only right that all Member States
have a clear understanding of the present current of the
Council — deviating from past practice. Business as
usual will leave us with the usual unsatisfying results.
There is a necessity for all Member States to be better
informed with regard to the Council’s deliberations. As
is the case with the General Assembly, the Maldives
believes that draft documents of the Security Council
should be made available to all Member States in a more
timely and appropriate manner. Further in line with the
Charter, we would welcome more frequent interactive
dialogues and presentations of special reports.
While we welcome the informational briefings at
the beginning of each presidency, the Maldives calls on
Council members to reflect on the month’s work in the
form of wrap-up meetings, critically and proactively.
Through honest reflection, we hope to see a more
equal distribution of work between the permanent and
non-permanent members of the Council. The prevailing
disparity remains a fundamental flaw of the Council,
which is constantly being illustrated. We have seen
it when negotiations are limited only to permanent
members and we have seen it when, similarly, briefings
have also been limited. Recently, the decision of the
Secretary-General to brief only the permanent members
with regard to the situation in Syria saw that failing
extend to the Secretariat, which is deeply disappointing.
Only a reform of the Council’s structure will
truly make this body more representative, transparent,
efficient and legitimate. In the meantime, we welcome
the proposal made by France suggesting that the
permanent members themselves could voluntarily
forego their right to exercise veto in reaction to crimes
of mass atrocity. We believe that this pledge would
contribute to a more effective response to crisis and to
a stronger implementation of the Council’s own agenda,
thereby promoting the establishment and maintenance
of international peace and security. We therefore call
for an open and engaging dialogue between the ACT
group and all the permanent members of the Council.
We would encourage other permanent members to
explore further the proposal made by France.

20/21

29/10/2013

The views of Member States have to be taken into
account in the decision-making process of the Security
Council. The use of the right to veto, or the intention
to do so, should have to be explained, in particular
with regard to its consistency with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
applicable international law. That would lead to a much
greater degree of transparency in the decision-making
process and make morally ambiguous and legally
inadmissable arguments less likely.
The Maldives sincerely hopes that both permanent
and non-permanent members commit not only in
word but also in action to practices that conform to
higher standards of accountability, coherence and
transparency.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Azerbaijan.
We commend the permanent representative of
Argentina, Ambassador María Cristina Perceval for
her dedicated efforts as Chair of the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions. We also commend former Chairs of the
Working Group for their valuable contributions. We
acknowledge the role that the Working Group is playing
to advance ways to further enhance the transparency,
accountability and overall efficiency of the Council’s
work.
The Security Council’s working methods continue
to raise great interest among the broader membership.
Today’s open debate is yet another illustration of the
priority attention given by Member States to that topic.
Almost one year has passed since the Council’s last
open debate (see S/PV.6870), which raised a number of
important issues that required more effort and resolute
steps towards a solution. Meanwhile, the Council has
continued to further implement the presidential note
contained in document S/2010/507 and has agreed
on several measures to enhance its efficiency and
transparency — in addition to its existing interaction
and dialogue with non-Council members and other
bodies, as reproduced in the two notes by the President
adopted earlier this year. More attention has been paid to
achieving broader participation by Council members in
the decision-making process by providing opportunities
to hear the views of the broader membership on the
working methods of the Council. The Council has also
discussed ways and means to enhance its interactivity

13-53647

29/10/2013

Implementation of the note by the President of the Security Council

with non-Council Member States and to promote its
responsiveness to their inputs and contributions, as
well as to improve Security Council communication
with the Peacebuilding Commission, troop- and
police-contributing countries and relevant regional and
subregional organizations.
Despite a slight decrease in the number of public
meetings of the Council in comparision with the same
period last year, the trend of holding more public
meetings, including in the form of briefings and
debates, is encouraging. At the same time, the quality of
such public meetings depends mostly on the Council’s
readiness to take into consideration the views and
contributions of non-Council Member States, including
through a reflection of their proposals and inputs in the
outcomee of public meetings. The holding of annual
open debates on the topic under consideration is a good
opportunity to further encourage the Council’s efforts
towards improving its working methods, reviewing the
implementation of note 507 and subsequent documents
adopted by the Council and identifying positive trends
and practices by proposing new ideas on enhancing
transparency and the efficiency of the Council.
A significant number of proposals were submitted
and discussed in previous years, in the course of both
open debates and deliberations within the Informal
Working Group on Documentation and Other
Prodecural Questions. Those discussions illustrate
the remaining obstacles and the need for more efforts
towards addressing existing differences. We hope that
the Council will initiate a process of genuine reforms
of the Security Council to meet the expectations of the
international community. It should be noted that the

S/PV.7052 (Resumption 1)

reluctance — and sometimes even unwillingness — to
change stereotypes by preserving existing practices
complicates the process of reaching agreement
on matters of importance to the United Nations
membership.
Another important issue that requires additional
efforts is the need for the Council’s review of the
implementation of its own decisions. It is unacceptable
when resolutions of the Security Council that
contain imperative demands for concrete action are
deliberately ignored, or interpreted in a way to avoid
their implementation. Needless to say, the silence of the
Security Council concerning the apparent disregard of
its resolutions on issues pertaining to international and
regional peace and security, and attempts to question
their validity, are dangerous and cannot constitute an
accepted practice of the Council’s working methods.
In conclusion, I would like to thank all Member
States for their active participation in today’s debate
and for their valuable ideas and recommendations. They
constitute essential food for thought and undoubtedly
deserve careful consideration with a view to enhancing
the transparency, effectiveness and interactivity of the
Security Council.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

13-5364721/21
