S/2002/369

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
10 April 2002
Original: English

Letter dated 10 April 2002 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit to you, enclosed herewith, the Joint Statement by
the Russian Federation, the United States, the European Union and the United
Nations on the escalating confrontation in the Middle East (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring this statement to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

02-32498 (E)

100402

*0232498*

S/2002/369

Annex
Joint Statement
The Secretary-General of the United Nations Kofi Annan, Minister of Foreign
Affairs of the Russian Federation Igor Ivanov, Secretary of State of the United
States Colin Powell, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Spain Josep Pique and High
Representative for European Union Common Foreign and Security Policy Javier
Solana met in Madrid today. We reviewed the escalating confrontation in the Middle
East and agreed to coordinate our actions to resolve the current crisis.
We express our grave concern about the present situation, including the
mounting humanitarian crisis and the growing risk to regional security. We reiterate
our shared condemnation of violence and terrorism, express our deep distress at the
loss of innocent Palestinian and Israeli life, and extend our deepest sympathy to the
families of those killed and wounded. Believing that there has been too much
suffering and too much bloodshed, we call on the leaders of Israel and the
Palestinian Authority to act in the interests of their own people, the region, and the
international community and to immediately halt this senseless confrontation.
In this regard, we express our grave concern about the most recent attacks
from Lebanon across the UN-determined Blue Line. The Quartet calls on all parties
to respect the Blue Line, halt all attacks, and show the utmost restraint. The conflict
should not be allowed to spread and threaten regional security and stability.
The UN, EU and Russia express their strong support for Secretary of State
Powell’s mission, and urge Israel and the Palestinian Authority to cooperate fully
with his mission and with their continuing efforts to restore calm and resume a
political process.
We reiterate that there is no military solution to the conflict and call on the
parties to move towards a political resolution of their disputes based on UNSCR 242
and 338, and the principle of land for peace — which formed the basis for the
Madrid Conference of 1991. We reaffirm our support for the objective expressed by
President Bush and spelled out in UNSCR 1397, of two States, Israel and Palestine,
living side-by-side within secure and recognized borders. We warmly welcome
Saudi Crown Prince Abdullah’s peace initiative, as endorsed in Beirut by the Arab
League, as a significant contribution towards a comprehensive peace, including
Syria and Lebanon.
To enable progress towards our shared goals, we reaffirm that UNSCR 1402
must be fully implemented immediately, as called for in UNSCR 1403. We call on
Israel to halt immediately its military operations. We call for an immediate,
meaningful ceasefire and an immediate Israeli withdrawal from Palestinian cities,
including Ramallah, specifically including Chairman Arafat’s headquarters. We call
on Israel to fully comply with international humanitarian principles and to allow full
and unimpeded access to humanitarian organizations and services. We call on Israel
to refrain from the excessive use of force and undertake all possible efforts to ensure
the protection of civilians.
We call on Chairman Arafat, as the recognized, elected leader of the
Palestinian people, to undertake immediately the maximum possible effort to stop
terror attacks against innocent Israelis. We call on the Palestinian Authority to act

2

S/2002/369

decisively and take all possible steps within its capacity to dismantle terrorist
infrastructure, including terrorist financing, and to stop incitement to violence. We
call on Chairman Arafat to use the full weight of his political authority to persuade
the Palestinian people that any and all terrorist attacks against Israelis should end
immediately, and to authorize his representatives to resume immediately security
coordination with Israel.
Terrorism, including suicide bombs, is illegal and immoral, has inflicted grave
harm to the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people and must be condemned
as called for in UNSCR 1373.
We call on Israel and the Palestinian Authority to reach agreement on ceasefire
proposals put forward by General Zinni without further delay. We commend the
efforts of General Zinni to date to achieve this objective.
The Quartet stands ready to assist the parties in implementing their
agreements, in particular the Tenet security workplan and the Mitchell
recommendations, including through a third-party mechanism, as agreed to by the
parties.
We affirm that the Tenet and Mitchell plans must be fully implemented,
including an end to all settlement activity. We affirm that there must be immediate,
parallel and accelerated movement towards near-term and tangible political
progress, and that there must be a defined series of steps leading to permanent
peace — involving recognition, normalization and security between the sides, an
end to Israeli occupation, and an end to the conflict. This will allow Israel to enjoy
enduring peace and security and the Palestinian people to realize their hopes and
aspirations in security and dignity.
In support of these objectives, we call on the international community,
particularly the Arab States, to preserve, strengthen and assist the Palestinian
Authority, including through efforts to rebuild its infrastructure, security and
governance capacity. We call also on the donor community and the international
financial institutions to renew their commitment to provide urgent humanitarian
assistance to the Palestinian people, and to assist in economic and institutional
reconstruction. We pay tribute to the courageous efforts of the humanitarian
agencies.
We agreed on the need to keep the situation in the Middle East under review by
the Quartet at the principal’s level through regular consultations. Our Special
Envoys will continue their efforts on the ground to assist the parties in reaching an
end to confrontation and a resumption of political negotiations.
Madrid — 10 April 2002

3
