General Assembly-Seventeenth Session

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE SPECIAL
POLITICAL COMMITTEE
CONTENTS
Page

1761 (XVII). The policies of apartheid of the Government of the Republic of South
Africa (6 November 1962) (item 87)... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
1764 (XVII). Report of the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of
Atomic Radiation (20 November 1962) (item 30). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
1856 (XVII). Report of the Commissioner-General of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (20 December
1962) (item 31).................................................... 11
1857 (XVII). Question of Hungary (20 December 1962) (item 85).....
11
Note:
Question of boundaries between Venezuela and the territory of British Guiana
(11 December 1962) (item 88)........ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11

South Africa to perpetuate its policy of racial segregation, which has been rejected by the majority of that
country's population,
1. Deplores the failure of the Government of the
Republic of South Africa to comply with the repeated
requests and demands of the General Assembly and of
the Security Council and its flouting of world public
opinion by refusing to abandon its racial policies ;
2. Strongly deprecates the continued and total disregard by the Government of South Africa of its obligations under the Charter of the United Nations and,
furthermore, its determined aggravation of racial issues
by enforcing measures of increasing ruthlessness involving violence and bloodshed;
3. Reaffirms that the continuance of those policies
seriously endangers international peace and security;
4. Requests Member States to take the following
measures, separately or collectively, in conformity with
the Charter, to bring about the abandonment of those
policies:
(a) Breaking off diplomatic relations with the Government of the Republic of South Africa or refraining
from establishing such relations ;
( b) Closing their ports to all vessels flying the South
African flag ;
( c) Enacting legislation prohibiting their ships from
entering South African ports ;
. (d) Boycotting all South African goods and refrainmg from exporting goods, including all arms and
ammunition, to South Africa;
( e) Refusing landing and passage facilities to all aircraft belonging to the Government of South Africa and
companies registered under the laws of South Africa;
5. Decides to establish a Special Committee consisting of representatives of Member States nominated
by the President of the General Assembly, with the following terms of reference :

1761 (XVII). The policies of apartheid of the
Government of the Republic of South
Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the question of
race conflict in South Africa resulting from the policies
of apartheid of the Government of the Republic of
South Africa,
Further recalling its resolutions 44 (I) of 8 December
1946, 395 (V) of 2 December 1950, 615 (VII) of
5 December 1952, 1179 (XII) of 26 November 1957,
1302 (XIII) of 10 December 1958, 1460 (XIV) of
10 December 1959, 1597 (XV) of 13 April 1961 and
1662 (XVI) of 28 November 1961, on the question of
the treatment of peoples of Indian and Indo-Pakistan
origin,
Noting the reports of the Governments of India1 and
Pakistan2 on that subject,
Recalling that the Security Council in its resolution
of 1 April 19603 recognized that the situation in South
Africa was one that had led to international friction and,
if col!-tinued, might endanger international peace and
secunty,
Recalling further that the Security Council in its
aforesaid resolution called upon the Government of South
Africa to initiate measures aimed at bringing about
racial harmony based on equality in order to ensure that
the present situation does not continue or recur and
to abandon its policies of apartheid and racial discrimination,
Regretting that the actions of some Member States
indirectly provide encouragement to the Government of
1 (!fficial Records of the General Assembly, Seventeenth
Sesszo!'f', Annexes, agenda item 87, document A/5166.
2 Ibid., document A/5173.
8 Official Record's of the Security Council Fifteenth Year
Supplement for April, May and June 1960, document S/4300'.

9

General Assembly-Seventeenth Session

10

(a) To keep the racial policies of the Government of
South Africa under review when the Assembly is not
in session;
( b) To report either to the Assembly or to the
Security Council or to both, as may be appropriate,
from time to time;
6. Requests all Member States:
(a) To do everything in their power to help the
Special Committee to accomplish its task;
( b) To refrain from any act likely to delay or hinder
the implementation of the present resolution ;
7. Invites Member States to inform the General
Assembly at its eighteenth session regarding actions
taken, separately or collectively, in dissuading the Government of South Africa from pursuing its policies of
apartheid;
8. Requests the Security Council to take appropriate
measures, including sanctions, to secure South Africa's
compliance with the resolutions of the General Assembly
and of the Security Council on this subject and, if necessary, to consider action under Article 6 of the Charter.
1165th plenary meeting,
6 November 1962.
*

*

*
The President of the General Assembly in pursuance of
paragraph S of the above resolution, appointed the following
members of the Special Committee on the policies of apartheid
of the Government of the Republic of South Africa: ALGERIA,
CosTA RICA, FEDERATION OF MALAYA, GHANA, GuINEA, HAITI,
HUNGARY, NEPAL, NIGERIA, PHILIPPINES and SOMALIA.4

1764 (XVII). Report of the United Nations
Scientific Committee on the Effects of
Atomic Radiation

The General Assembly,

I
Recalling its resolution 1347 (XIII) of 13 December
1958 and subsequent resolutions relating to the useful
work of the United Nations Scientific Committee on
the Effects of Atomic Radiation,
Noting with satisfaction the second comprehensive
report of the Scientific Committee, 5 which was adopted
unanimously,
Conscious that advances in scientific knowledge have
been made concerning the effects of radiation since the
publication of the Scientific Committee's first comprehensive report, 6
Noting with special concern the disquieting conclusions of the report, and in particular that much remains
to be learnt about the long-term effects of radiation,
1. Commends the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation for its work
and for the valuable report it has presented ;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the International
Atomic Energy Agency, to the specialized agencies, to
the international non-governmental and the national
scientific organizations and to the individual scientists
who have assisted the Scientific Committee in its work;
3. Calls particular attention to the Scientific Committee's finding that the exposure of mankind to radia4 See A/5400.
5 Official Records

of the General Assembly, Seventee11th
Session, S11pplement No. 16 (A/5216).
6 Ibid., Thirteenth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/3838).

tion from increasing numbers of artificial sources, including the world-wide contamination of the environment
with short- and long-lived radio-nuclides from weapon
tests, calls for the closest attention, particularly because
the effects of any increase in radiation exposure may
not be ful1y manifested for several decades in the case
of somatic disease, and for many generations in the case
of genetic damage;
4. Urges all concerned to take note of the suggestions made and the views expressed in the report of
the Scientific Committee;
5. Requests the Scientific Committee to continue its
assessment of radiation risks as well as its review of
those studies and further investigations that should be
undertaken in the interests of increasing man's knowledge of the effects of radiation, and to report to the
General Assembly at the eighteenth session on its
progress and on its future programme of work;
6. Calls upon the International Atomic Energy
Agency, the specialized agencies, the international nongovernmental and the national scientific organizations,
individual scientists and the Governments of Member
States to continue to co-operate fully with the Scientific Committee in carrying out its further important
responsibilities ;
7. Recommends the Governments of Member States
to prepare and carry out according to their means largescale information programmes on the effects of atomic
radiation;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
provide the Scientific Committee with the assistance
necessary for the conduct of its work;
II
Recalling section II of its resolution 1629 (XVI) of
27 October 1961,
Having considered the report of the World Meteorological Organization 7 on the proposal for a scheme of
world-wide monitoring and reporting of levels of atmospheric radio-activity,
Noting that the United Nations Scientific Committee
on the Effects of Atomic Radiation will examine this
scheme at its twelfth session to be held at Geneva in
January 1963,
Encouraged to believe that a feasible scheme for this
purpose can be implemented in the near future following final technical consultations between the World
Meteorological Organization and the other organizations
concerned,
1. Commends the World Meteorological Organization for its prompt and effective response to the invitation addressed to it in resolution 1629 (XVI), and
the International Atomic Energy Agency and the
United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of
Atomic Radiation for the valuable co-operation and
assistance they have extended to the World Meteorological Organization in this matter ;
2. Invites the World Meteorological Organization
to complete its consultations with the Scientific Committee on the development of its draft plan, and to
implement this plan, if found feasible, at the earliest
possible date ;
3. Urges the Governments of Member States and all
others concerned to co-operate fully and to take all
7 Ibid., Seventeenth
document A/5253.

Session,

Annexes, agenda

item

30,
