United Nations

S/PV.6538

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6538th meeting
Tuesday, 17 May 2011, 10.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Araud . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Yang Tao
Mr. Alzate
Mr. Messone
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Vinay Kumar
Mr. Khachab
Mr. Adamu
Mr. Vaz Patto
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Mashabane
Mr. Parham
Mr. Dunn

Agenda
The situation in Burundi

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-34143 (E)

*1134143*

S/PV.6538

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Burundi
The President (spoke in French): Under rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of Burundi to participate in this
meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Ms. Karin Landgren, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Office in Burundi, and Mr. Paul
Seger, Permanent Representative of Switzerland, in his
capacity as Chair of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, to participate in this
meeting.
I now give the floor to Ms. Landgren.
Ms. Landgren (spoke in French): Since the last
meeting of the Security Council on the situation in
Burundi (see S/PV.6439) five months ago,
developments have taken place in the country, in
particular with respect to transitional justice, human
rights and laws governing the political parties.
Last month, Parliament adopted a law on the
functioning and organization of political parties. The
extra-parliamentary opposition, fearing an attempt to
constrain its activities, followed this process closely. In
response to that concern, an amendment that would
have required all political parties to obtain new
authorization was modified. Some opposition political
parties still believe that the new law restricts the
political space and have announced that they will not
comply with it. The Government is also in the process
of drafting a bill on the status of political parties in the
opposition that would allow the creation of an official
post of leader of the opposition, and on the funding of
political parties and the functions of civil society
organizations.
National, regional and international actors,
including the United Nations Office in Burundi
(BNUB), continue to encourage initiatives to promote
dialogue between the Government and the extraparliamentary opposition. To date, none of these
initiatives has had the desired result of returning the

2

main leaders of the opposition to Burundi so that they
can again participate in the political life of the country.
On 14 March, the Executive Committee of the
Conseil national pour la défense de la démocratieForces nationales pour la défense de la démocratie
(CNDD-FDD) expelled a party executive, the Secretary
of its Council of Elders, following his allegations of
corruption and impunity within the party. He was
replaced during the course of a special party congress
on 14 May, during which congress members assessed
the achievements of the CNDD-FDD since 2005.
While the security situation is generally calm,
there has been an increase in violent incidents in
Bujumbura Rural province in April. Until recently, the
violence was attributed to bandits, but the Defence
Ministry has just publicly blamed the lack of security
on Mr. Agathon Rwasa and Mr. Léonard Nyangoma.
The Government has launched important initiatives in
the province, to include socio-economic recovery
activities and the mandatory collection of weapons
held illegally by the population. In a speech in
Bujumbura Rural on 6 May, President Nkurunziza
reassured the population that security would be
re-established within two months.
(spoke in English)
The Government is preparing the second poverty
reduction strategy paper. It will incorporate key
elements
of
the
Strategic
Framework
For
Peacebuilding and harmonize efforts in both peace
consolidation and development planning. This
document, anticipated for July, will give focus to
governance goals and resource mobilization efforts.
Burundi faces severe poverty and high
unemployment, including among young people. The
cost of fuel has increased by over 20 per cent since
October, raising the prices of all basic commodities in
turn and placing severe strains on many families.
Burundi was traditionally self-sufficient in food
production, but this is no longer the case, and 90 per
cent of Burundian families now live on an average of
half a hectare of eroded land. Agricultural tools and
technology remain poor, and market incentives are
limited.
Land has been the cause of many past conflicts in
Burundi and remains an emotive issue. Parliament
adopted a revised land code in April that includes the
decentralization of land issues to the communes and

11-34143

S/PV.6538

the establishment of a National Land Commission
tasked with managing the redistribution of land and
resolving disputes. These issues are among the
daunting socio-economic challenges that need to be
addressed to help consolidate peace in the country, as
highlighted during the meeting of the Peacebuilding
Commission on 21 April.
Graft remains a problem in Burundi. In April, the
Ministry of Good Governance presented a broad-based
national plan on good governance and the fight against
corruption, taking on board substantive comments from
the World Bank, the United Nations Development
Programme and bilateral partners. This is intended as a
framework for all partners and includes elements
related to elections; judicial, legal and public sector
reforms; human rights; and the media. This strategy is
expected to be adopted on 23 May.
Other steps include the introduction of
performance contracts for all officials, including
ministers, since the beginning of the year. Their work
will be evaluated every six months. All Government
ministers have also presented their work plans to
Parliament. In his Labour Day address to the nation on
1 May, President Nkurunziza reiterated the need to
meet performance targets, warning that underperforming
public officials would be dismissed.
I am pleased to report that the process of
establishing an independent national human rights
commission has moved steadily forward. On 5 January,
the law creating the commission was promulgated by
President Nkurunziza. An ad hoc parliamentary
commission was then set up and vetted a large number
of candidates. Twenty-one names were submitted to the
National Assembly, which is expected to nominate
seven as commissioners. I understand that this issue
will be taken up today during a three-day extraordinary
session of the National Assembly.
An impartial and independent national human
rights
commission
can
strengthen
Burundi’s
compliance with its international obligations and
enhance the protection and promotion of human rights,
thus promoting national stability. In a related positive
development, the Government responded favourably to
a request for a return visit by the independent expert on
the situation of human rights in Burundi, Mr. Fatsah
Ouguergouz. His visit began yesterday.
A persistent concern has been the continued
reports of extrajudicial executions. BNUB investigated

11-34143

and documented nine such cases between January and
Much 2011 alone, and several other cases reported in
April are under investigation. Between August and
November last year, BNUB documented 11
extrajudicial executions. The Government set up a
commission of inquiry in October 2010 to investigate
specific allegations made against the security forces in
this regard. It remained dormant until the end of April,
when the Government announced that the commission
had resumed work. We encourage the Government and
the commission to establish the facts and make
actionable recommendations where violations are
established.
I want to acknowledge the relatively vibrant
media that exists in Burundi, and the recent resolution
of a case that had raised concerns. Jean-Claude
Kavumbagu, director of NetPress, was detained in July
2010 on a charge of treason. While the State Prosecutor
sought a maximum life sentence, the court acquitted
Mr. Kavumbagu of the treason charge last Friday,
finding him guilty of violating press laws. He was
fined and sentenced to eight months in prison. As he
had been detained for 10 months, he was released
yesterday.
There are significant developments to report in
the realm of transitional justice, where — following the
national consultations that concluded in 2010 — the
Government is taking steps to set up these
mechanisms. On 3 May, a delegation led by the
Minister of External Affairs outlined the Government’s
transitional justice strategy during a meeting with
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Ms. Navi Pillay. The Government intends to create a
truth and reconciliation commission, to be operational
by January 2012, and to establish a judicial mechanism
to address impunity after the commission has
completed its work.
These are important commitments. The
Government has underlined to BNUB that the truth and
reconciliation commission process must be grounded in
reconciliation and not in score-settling. For that, broad
public awareness and orientation will be crucial.
BNUB continues to sensitize the public through
workshops where the results of the national
consultations are shared and discussed. The
Government will set up a seven-member preparatory
committee to develop appropriate legislation and a
budget and to review the experiences of other countries
that have had truth and reconciliation commissions.

3

S/PV.6538

The United Nations looks forward to more detailed
discussions with the Government, and remains ready to
assist in the establishment of transitional justice
mechanisms consistent with international standards.
We anticipate that international financial support will
also be needed in this area.
The
full
reintegration
of
demobilized
ex-combatants is crucial for sustained peace in the
country. While they had all received reintegration
assistance by the end of April, much still remains to be
done to help them become productive members of
society. To that end, the Government and BNUB have
developed a proposal to support the continued socioeconomic reintegration of people affected by the
conflict, including ex-combatants. The $24 million
programme would support labour-intensive projects
targeting the demobilized, youth and other vulnerable
groups. The programme is in line with the United
Nations strategic development framework in Burundi
for the period 2010 to 2014. We are working with the
Peacebuilding Support Office to mobilize initial
funding to launch the programme.
As stipulated in resolution 1959 (2010), the
United Nations Integrated Office in Burundi (BINUB)
has been succeeded by a scaled-down presence,
namely, the United Nations Office in Burundi. I am
pleased to report that the transition is going well. We
expect to reach BNUB’s authorized level of 134 staff
by 1 July. That represents a 70 per cent reduction from
BINUB. As difficult as it is for any staff member to
lose his or her job in the current climate, the process
has been peaceful. We continue to work with the
Government of Burundi to ensure that the needs of
separated staff are dealt with in a responsible manner.
Throughout the transition, BNUB has continued
to carry out its core tasks in support of the
consolidation of peace and democracy in Burundi. We
continue to encourage efforts to promote inclusive
political dialogue between the Government and the
extra-parliamentary opposition. We are helping the
Government to strengthen its key institutions and
supporting efforts to professionalize and enhance the
capacity of security and defence forces. We are
working with civil society and other stakeholders to
promote and protect human rights and prepare the
ground for the establishment of viable transitional
justice mechanisms. And BNUB is identifying possible
areas of support with regard to the country’s
integration into the East African Community, which is

4

determined to see Burundi move forward in peace and
economic strength.
In accordance with its mandate, BNUB is
currently developing benchmarks for its exit and
evolution into a regular United Nations country team
presence. Discussions within the United Nations family
have begun and will be followed by consultations with
national and international partners. As the Council is
aware, the Secretary-General has appointed Ms. Rosine
Sori-Coulibaly as my Deputy and United Nations
Resident Coordinator in Burundi. I look forward to
working closely with her to maximize the impact of the
United Nations system’s efforts in support of the
Burundian Government and people.
In conclusion, I would like to thank the members
of the Council and of the Peacebuilding Commission,
the United Nations family and all other partners who
have been so steadfast in their support of Burundi in its
remarkable transition. The commendable efforts of the
Burundian Government and people in consolidating the
gains achieved in peacebuilding and paving the way for
sustainable development deserve our strong and
continued support.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Landgren for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Paul Seger.
Mr. Seger (spoke in French): Please pardon,
Mr. President, the slight delay in my arrival. The Swiss
desire for punctuality stands in contrast to the slowness
for which we are sometimes known. This reminds me
of what Albert Einstein once said about dying. He said
that, on that day, he would like to return to
Switzerland, as everything there happened 10 years
after everywhere else. But we are not here to talk about
Switzerland or Albert Einstein, but instead of Burundi.
As Karin Landgren has just mentioned, the most
important development on Burundi since the Council’s
last meeting (see S/PV.6439) on this issue at which I
participated was, without a doubt, the development of
the final document containing the conclusions of the
fourth biannual review of the implementation of the
Strategic Framework for Peacebuilding in Burundi. As
the Security Council is aware, that document was
adopted on 21 April. This is essentially the last
document of its kind. Henceforth, we will try to
combine the peacebuilding strategy with the strategy to
combat poverty, illustrating what I said during the last

11-34143

S/PV.6538

meeting, namely, that there can be no peace without
development or development without peace. I will
shortly return to the new strategic framework for
combating poverty that is being developed.
Allow me very briefly now to refer to the
document we adopted in April. It focuses on two
tracks, namely, the political-institutional and the socioeconomic. Those two tracks, which include the four
priorities we in the Peacebuilding Commission have
identified in close coordination with the Government
of Burundi, will henceforth serve to inform the
methodology and priorities of the Commission. We
have deliberately limited ourselves to certain important
strategic elements; the Peacebuilding Commission
cannot do everything. As the Council is aware, our role
is to support the United Nations and its Integrated
Office in Burundi, which is very ably led by Karin
Landgren. We are a supporting political body, not an
operational one.
With regard to those priorities, we focus on two
elements when it comes to the political-institutional
track, namely, consolidating a culture of democracy
and dialogue — as my colleague Karin Landgren has
mentioned — and, secondly, good governance, human
rights and the rule of law. Dialogue and democracy, as
we have heard on numerous occasions, are indeed
major challenges that we must address jointly with the
Government of Burundi, whom the Commission would
like to help to establish an environment and space
wherein all the parties, whether represented in the
Parliament or not, can find a way to discuss their
problems and issues in a peaceful, non-violent and
civilized manner. I think we are on the right track, but
there is still work to be done. With regard to good
governance, human rights and the rule of law, there are
three issues we want to address, that is, corruption,
human rights themselves and transitional justice.
On the socio-economic front, as Ms. Landgren
also has mentioned, the greatest challenges facing us
when it comes to combating poverty is how to integrate
the most vulnerable and those most affected by the
conflict into economic life so that they can have the
means to live dignified and productive lives. We must
also try to ensure that there is no temptation to return
to violence by providing a logical viable alternative.
We are currently awaiting the finalization of the
strategic framework being drawn up by the
Government of Burundi in order to know exactly how
the Peacebuilding Commission can assist the country.

11-34143

The second aspect of that track is regional
integration, especially within the East African
Community. When I visited the region and the country
in February, I also visited Arusha and met with the
Secretary-General of the Community. I personally
believe that investing in regional integration, and
especially in the East African Community, is to invest
in the future of Burundi. Personally, I was very
impressed by the work and momentum being
developed by the East African Community.
I will make a few detailed remarks on the various
aspects I have just mentioned. With regard to the
poverty reduction strategy paper, as I just said,
progress is being made, and we encourage the
Government and its partners not only to focus on
integrating these issues in their documents but also to
stress their importance by giving them a formal place
in the Partners Coordination Group, which is itself very
important. The Burundi configuration will continue to
actively support the Government in its efforts to
integrate peacebuilding aspects in its poverty reduction
strategy paper towards the shared goal of concluding a
single framework that will enjoy the committed
support of the international community to Burundi and
reflect peacebuilding considerations.
In the document adopted in April, which I
mentioned earlier, we defined the various commitments
of actors. In the area of poverty reduction, the
Commission is seeking to organize a donors conference
in autumn 2011. Perhaps here I can make an appeal to
all members of the Security Council and to the
international community as a whole to continue to
support Burundi. I believe the country needs and has a
right to what I would call a peace dividend. Without
socio-economic support for political efforts, we will
not succeed. I believe that this aspect cannot be
overemphasized.
Financial and economic support for Burundi is
very important. The Commission itself, as members
know, does not have resources. We do not have our
own funds. The only thing we can do is to support and
assist the country in its efforts to attain funds from
bilateral and multilateral donors.
I will be very brief in my remarks on the other
matters, as Karin Landgren has already covered the
most important aspects. With regard to the question of
dialogue, our aim should be, as I said, to establish a
framework that will allow all parties to express

5

S/PV.6538

themselves openly and freely, and to create conditions
for political actors currently abroad to return to the
country. There has been some progress in this area,
with, for example, the draft law on political parties and
a communiqué from the opposition reflecting some
forward movement, but unfortunately I believe that the
current draft does not yet adequately satisfy the views
and needs of the extra-parliamentary opposition.
With regard to transitional justice, the
Government recently held meetings in Geneva with the
High Commissioner for Human Rights. I believe the
processes are in place. My suggestion would be to
approach these topics with a clear vision of the
coherence needed to achieve peacebuilding and unity. I
believe that the way we address the past is also a way
to move into the present and the future. I believe it
would be useful and important to do this with a clear
vision that will strengthen unity in the country and not
create new divisions. Things are undoubtedly on the
right track, and we stand ready to support the country
in these efforts.
With regard to human rights, I believe
Ms. Landgren also covered the main points. I fully
confirm what she has just said. I believe that the
establishment of an independent national human rights
commission is important and hope that it will soon be
fully operational. We also welcome, as Ms. Landgren
noted, the recent visit of the independent expert on the
human rights situation in Burundi. That having been
said, we must continue to pay close attention to the
situation regarding investigations into torture and
extrajudicial killings. Here, we must encourage the
country to redouble its efforts to investigate such cases.
In conclusion, what are the next steps? We have
established a steering group within the Peacebuilding
Commission composed of a limited number of
countries and open to all members of the Commission.
I would like to thank several members of the Council
present today, and the permanent members in
particular, for their participation in the steering group.
That is very encouraging. We will closely monitor the
operational phase, which has now begun, fully aware
of the fact that the Peacebuilding Commission is not an
operational body and that the work on the ground is
being done primarily by the United Nations Office in
Burundi and other United Nations entities. But we
thought it would be valuable to establish a body that
could monitor developments in Burundi more closely
and continuously. All of this was done in light of our

6

common goal — and here again I come back to what
Ms. Landgren said — to ensure that, as the
Commission’s work comes to an end, Burundi will be
able to live without the Commission in the near future.
Again, Burundi’s integration into regional bodies is of
great importance in my view.
I would like to reaffirm our full support to the
Security Council, to Ms. Langren and to the
Government of Burundi. We are here to support them
and will continue to do so with the political and other
resources at our disposal. I hope that we will see these
efforts bear fruit in the near future.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Seger for his statement.
I now give the floor
Representative of Burundi.

to

the

Permanent

Mr. Gahutu (Burundi) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to thank you, Sir, for having
invited us to this meeting. I would also like to
acknowledge and confirm the various points made by
the previous speakers, especially the Special
Representative
of
the
Secretary-General
and
Ambassador Seger in his capacity as Chair of the
Burundi configuration. I can only agree with their
remarks on the various issues addressed.
Here I would also like to welcome the
appointment of Ms. Rosine Sori-Coulibaly to support
the United Nations Office in Burundi. I believe that
this has strengthened the team for the good of our
country.
Following the 2010 electoral process, which was
carried
out
successfully
under
international
supervision, Burundi established institutions to conduct
the second legislature under Mr. Pierre Nkurunziza,
President of the Republic. We would like to recall here
that the 2010 electoral process was a success thanks to
the spirit of dialogue that prevailed between the
Government and its partners, a spirit that was forged
through the implementation of the Strategic
Framework for Peacebuilding, which was drawn up by
the political parties, civil society, the Parliament and
the Government.
The first stage of this success was the consensus
as to the composition of the National Independent
Electoral Commission, which organized the elections,
and on the electoral code, which guided the
Commission and the parties who competed during the

11-34143

S/PV.6538

electoral process. In parallel with the Independent
Electoral Commission and the electoral code, the spirit
of dialogue also inspired the establishment of a
permanent forum for dialogue among the political
parties, which is today supported by the ministers
responsible for the interior and good governance. This
forum for dialogue has recently been expanded by the
creation of the institution of the ombudsperson, a
mediator between the Government and citizens.
With respect to good governance, a major
Burundian delegation has just returned from Geneva,
where it had constructive talks with the High
Commissioner for Human Rights on setting up
mechanisms for transitional justice. As a result of this
visit, the High Commissioner for Human Rights
promised to assist with this process until its
completion. A first team of experts will thus be sent
on-site in June. The truth and reconciliation
commission is to be set up in 2012, followed by the
establishment of a special tribunal for Burundi. These
are to be the two transitional justice mechanisms.
At the same time, the process of setting up the
independent national human rights commission, in
accordance with the Paris Principles, is also moving
ahead very quickly. The President of Burundi has just
convened by decree a special session of the National
Assembly to elect the members and the bureau of
Burundi’s human rights commission, which is to be
held from 17 to 19 May.
We would also like to announce, as mentioned by
previous speakers, that the independent expert to
provide backing for the Government of Burundi in its
efforts to improve the human rights situation is now
visiting the country to prepare his last report before the

11-34143

human rights commission begins its work. The
commission will then be responsible for reporting on
the situation of human rights in Burundi.
In the area of security, an extensive programme to
bring defence forces back to their barracks and to
deploy the national police has been carried out. This
programme was followed by activities to promote
ethical and principled behaviour among the military
and the police. The programme to disarm the civilian
population, through the commission created for that
purpose, has made progress and has enabled the
retrieval of 83,287 weapons and 620,000 rounds of
ammunition from the population, as well as the
destruction of 41,320 weapons and 398,000 rounds of
ammunition.
At the same time, we have also established the
legal and institutional framework allowing us to
manage effectively and secure the weapons held by
public servants. However, all of the weapons held
illegally by the population have not yet been collected.
This explains the acts of banditry that have taken place
here and there in the country.
On behalf of the Government of Burundi, I would
like to take this opportunity to make a new appeal to
all of our partners to assist us, to preserve the
achievements and progress that have been made in
various areas and to help us face the challenges that
remain to be tackled.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. I now invite the
members of the Council to continue the discussion on
this issue in informal consultations.
The meeting rose at 10.45 a.m.

7
