S/PRST/2010/3

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 February 2010
English
Original: English/French

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6272nd meeting of the Security Council, held on 16 February 2010, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Peace
consolidation in West Africa”, the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the recent positive developments in Guinea
while remaining concerned by the situation. It reiterates the statement of its
President (S/PRST/2009/27). It looks forward to the timely restoration of the normal
constitutional order in a peaceful manner through a civilian-led transition.
“The Security Council reiterates its support for the efforts of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the African Union. It commends
President Blaise Compaoré of Burkina Faso for his mediation efforts and welcomes
the communiqués of the International Contact Group on Guinea dated 26 January
2010 and of the African Union Summit dated 3 February 2010.
“The Security Council welcomes the Joint Declaration of Ouagadougou dated
15 January 2010, which, consistent with the proposals made on 6 January by the
interim President General Sekouba Konate, provides in particular for the
establishment of a National Unity Government led by a civilian Prime Minister
designated by the opposition, the holding of elections within six months, the
commitment that the Head of State of the transition, members of the “Conseil
National pour la démocratie et le développement”, the Prime Minister, members of
the National Unity Government and the defense and security forces in active service
will not stand in the forthcoming presidential elections.
“The Security Council welcomes further the appointment on 21 January 2010
of Mr Jean-Marie Doré as Prime Minister and the designation of a unity
Government on 15 February 2010. It calls upon all Guinean stakeholders to
implement the Joint Declaration of Ouagadougou in full, to engage actively into the
transition towards the restoration of the normal constitutional order through the
holding of elections within six months. It calls upon the international community to
bring its support to the Guinean authorities led by interim President Sekouba Konate
and Prime Minister Jean-Marie Doré, including with regard to comprehensive
security and justice sectors reform, upon request from the Guinean authorities.
“The Security Council recalls that it strongly condemned the violence
committed on the 28 September 2009 and its aftermath. It urges the national
authorities to prevent any further violence, and uphold the rule of law, including

10-24097 (E) 160210

*1024097*

S/PRST/2010/3

promotion, protection and respect for human rights and due process and stresses
their obligations towards the victims and witnesses. It emphasizes the responsibility
of States to comply with their relevant obligations to end impunity.
“The Security Council commends the work of the International Commission of
Inquiry established by the Secretary-General and supported by ECOWAS and the
African Union (AU) to investigate the facts and circumstances of the events of
28 September 2009 in Guinea consistent with its mandate (S/2009/556). It takes
note positively of the submission by the Commission of its report (S/2009/693).
“The Security Council takes note that the International Contact Group invited
relevant international stakeholders, including ECOWAS, the AU and the Mediator
to consider deploying, as soon as possible and in consultation with the Guinean
authorities, a possible joint civil-military mission in Guinea with a view to
discussing modalities for defence and security sector reform and contributing to
security conditions for the electoral process. It encourages them to plan for such a
possible mission.
“The Security Council reiterates the call it made in its resolution 1888 (2009)
to increase the representation of women in mediation processes and decision-making
processes with regard to conflict resolution and peacebuilding.
“The Security Council expresses its intention to remain seized of the situation
and to react as appropriate to any threat or action against the transition. It requests
the Secretary-General to continue to update it as appropriate on the situation on the
ground, the potential implications for the sub-region, the fight against impunity, the
efforts of ECOWAS and the African Union, and the actions of the Secretariat of the
United Nations.”

2

10-24097
