S/PRST/2016/13

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 August 2016
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 7755th meeting of the Security Council, held on 19 August 2016, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Somalia”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the recent meeting of Somalia’s
National Leadership Forum (NLF) on the implementation of the 2016 National
Electoral Process.
“The Security Council welcomes the continued political and security
progress in Somalia since 2012, and underscores the need to maintain the
momentum towards democratic governance, with an inclusive, transparent and
credible electoral process in 2016 as a stepping stone to universal suffrage
elections in 2020.
“In this regard, the Security Council notes the consensus decision of the
NLF, based on the recommendation of the Somalia’s Federal Indirect Electoral
Implementation Team (FIEIT), to extend the timeline for the parliamentary
electoral process until 25 October 2016, and the timeline for the presidential
electoral process until 30 October 2016, to allow for the implementation of the
technical modalities for an inclusive process. The Security Council notes the
NLF’s consensual decision to extend the current mandates of the federal
institutions to respect this revised timeline.
“The Security Council regrets the delay to the original timeline, and calls
on all Somali stakeholders to work constructively to implement the revised
calendar without further delay.
“The Security Council notes that this electoral process is an historic
opportunity to deliver more representative governance to the people of
Somalia and to reflect Somalia’s diversity. In this regard the Security Council
welcomes the decision of the NLF on representation of minority clans and the
Banadiri community.
“The Security Council recalls the Federal Government of Somalia’s
commitment to reserve 30 per cent of seats in the Upper and Lower Houses for
women. The Security Council welcomes the further provisions in the NLF
communiqué of 9 August 2016 urging all parties to take the necessary steps to
ensure the implementation of these commitments. The Security Council urges
the Federal Government of Somalia to ensure that the electoral process is
16-14435 (E)

190816

*1614435*

S/PRST/2016/13

conducted in a transparent and credible manner, in a climate of respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms, including freedoms of expression and
association. In this regard, the Security Council commends the establishment
of an Electoral Dispute Resolution Mechanism. The Security Council
emphasizes the importance of ensuring the Mechanism is independent and
implemented without delay.
“The Security Council also emphasizes the importance of adhering to the
political road map between now and 2020, in particular in order to reach
one-person, one-vote elections by 2020. To that end, the Council notes the
NLF’s commitment to promote the establishment and registration of political
parties within two years, starting from the date when the 10th Parliament is
elected, ahead of elections in 2020.
“The Security Council recognizes that the coming months will be a
challenging period for Somalia, it will continue to follow the implementation
of elections closely, and underlines its support for peace, stability and
development in Somalia.”

2/2

16-14435
