United Nations

S/PV.9231

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9231st meeting
Wednesday, 21 December 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Kamboj. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(India)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Mythen
Mrs. Toroitich
Mr. Elizondo Belden
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. Wood

Agenda
The situation in Myanmar

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-76591 (E)
*2276591*

S/PV.9231

The situation in Myanmar

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Myanmar
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2022/980, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Albania, Brazil, France, Gabon, Ghana, Ireland,
Kenya, Mexico, Norway, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America
Against:
None
Abstaining:
China, India, Russian Federation
The President: The draft resolution received 12
votes in favour, none against and 3 abstentions. The draft
resolution has been adopted as resolution 2669 (2022).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
Today we have adopted the first Security Council
resolution on the situation in Myanmar (resolution 2669
(2022)). It is the result of many weeks of careful
consultation with Council members, with members of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
and with other key regional partners.
In February 2021, the military overturned the
results of a democratic election, seized power and
plunged Myanmar and its 55 million people into a series
of cascading crises — humanitarian, economic and
political. The coup has had negative consequences for
the region and its stability, including by exacerbating
existing challenges facing the Rohingya.
2/8

21/12/2022

With this adoption, the Council has responded to
the calls of ASEAN leaders for United Nations support
for their efforts. The resolution calls for the cessation of
violence; the immediate and concrete implementation
of ASEAN’s five-point consensus; respect for the
democratic will of the people of Myanmar; respect for
human rights and accountability for those who violate
them; full and unhindered humanitarian access to
those in need; and the immediate release of all those
arbitrarily detained, including Aung San Suu Kyi and
President Win Myint. The briefing of the SecretaryGeneral in March, mandated under the resolution, will
be an important opportunity to assess developments
on the ground. We stand ready to take further action
as necessary.
Today we have sent a firm message to the military
that they should be in no doubt that we expect this
resolution to be implemented in full. We have also
sent a clear message to the people of Myanmar that we
seek progress in line with their rights, their wishes and
their interests.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): France welcomes the Security Council’s
adoption of a resolution on the situation in Burma
(resolution 2669 (2022)). We thank the United
Kingdom for all its efforts to arrive at it. Faced with the
continuous deterioration of the situation since the coup
of 1 February 2021, it was essential that the Council
express its concerns and its demands to the junta, in
support of the Burmese people.
We of course regret the abstentions on the text,
as the seriousness of the situation requires unanimity.
But the resolution we just adopted contains four
main messages. It calls for an immediate cessation of
violence and for de-escalation, as well as for the junta’s
immediate release of all arbitrarily detained prisoners,
and for respect for human rights, including the rights of
women and children.
This is also a moment to reiterate our demands
for safe and unhindered humanitarian access, given
that, as a consequence of the continuing violence,
the humanitarian situation continues to deteriorate.
The situation of the Rohingyas, which also remains
very worrisome, is also taken into account by the
Council. In that regard, France reiterates that it is fully
engaged — in 2022 we stepped up our support for the
efforts of the international community in the form of
22-76591

21/12/2022

The situation in Myanmar

additional voluntary contributions to the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
the International Committee of the Red Cross.
Finally, France underscores the centrality of the
five-point consensus of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) as an essential framework for
resolving the conflict and our support for the ASEAN
Special Envoy and the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral, who are working to help resolve the crisis
in Burma.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
still has concerns about the resolution that was just put
to the vote (resolution 2669 (2022)). In terms of the
format, we believe that it would be more appropriate
for the Council to adopt a presidential statement under
the current circumstances. In terms of the content,
although it was amended, the tone still lacks balance.
Therefore, China had to abstain in the voting. I would
like to explain China’s position, as follows.
First, there is no quick fix to the Myanmar issue,
let alone any external solution. Whether or not it can
be properly resolved in the end depends fundamentally,
and only, on Myanmar itself. Neither democratic
transition nor national reconciliation can be achieved
overnight, and both require time, patience and
pragmatism. To get out of the current crisis, all parties
and factions in Myanmar need to act in the fundamental
interests of the country and its people and pursue
dialogue and consultation under the constitutional and
legal framework to achieve political reconciliation.
The large-scale release of prisoners by the authorities
in November should be recognized and encouraged.
The international community should adhere to the
right direction of promoting peace talks and on the
premise of respecting Myanmar’s sovereignty, political
independence, territorial integrity and unity, while
playing a constructive role in facilitating rational
dialogue and bridging differences among all parties
in Myanmar.
Secondly, Myanmar is a member of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) family, and
ASEAN has a unique advantage in dealing with
Myanmar-related issues. For a period of time, ASEAN
countries have provided constructive assistance to
Myanmar, from political mediation to humanitarian
assistance, demonstrating the collective wisdom and
political commitment of a mature regional organization.
The international community should continue to listen

S/PV.9231

to ASEAN’s views, respect the ASEAN way, support
ASEAN’s unity and leadership, create the necessary
conditions and allow time and space for ASEAN to
build consensus and play its role.
Thirdly, the Security Council must always
act with caution. Since last year, the Council has
repeatedly considered the situation in Myanmar and
has unanimously issued nearly 10 outcome documents.
China has always participated in the relevant discussions
and consensus of the Council in a responsible manner.
At the same time, we have always believed that the
standard to measure the Council’s work is not the
number of meetings convened or the documents
produced, but the effectiveness of problem-solving.
Blindly using the Council to exert pressure, or even
threaten sanctions, will only intensify confrontation
and antagonism, complicate the situation and prolong
the crisis. The Council has learned hard lessons in
dealing with hotspot issues, such as Libya.
China and Myanmar are connected by mountains
and rivers, and our policy of friendship towards
Myanmar is for all its people. We sincerely hope that
Myanmar will enjoy political and social stability, with
its people living in peace and prosperity and the country
achieving development and revitalization. Since the
change in the political situation in Myanmar, China has
always maintained an objective and impartial attitude,
worked hard to promote peace talks and did our best to
help Myanmar respond to the pandemic and improve
people’s livelihoods. China fully supports ASEAN
in adhering to the ASEAN way and constructively
implementing the five-point consensus with Myanmar
and maintaining the overall unity and leadership
position of ASEAN. China expects the Council to stick
to the right direction of a political settlement and do
more to safeguard the fundamental interests of the
people of Myanmar and the prosperity and stability of
the region.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): Norway voted in
favour of the text, and we are pleased that resolution 2669
(2022) was adopted.
Norway strongly condemns the military’s brutal
coup in February 2021, and we will continue to do so
until they stop their attacks on civilians and return to
democratic rule. They are gravely failing in their duty
to protect Myanmar’s civilian population. The people of
Myanmar deserve our sustained attention and support.
We therefore welcome that the Security Council was

22-765913/8

S/PV.9231

The situation in Myanmar

able to adopt a resolution today, and we thank the
United Kingdom for their sincere efforts on this vital
text. We now look forward to seeing closer collaboration
between the United Nations and the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations in the implementation of the
five-point consensus.
It is of the utmost importance that we were able
adopt this resolution. Nevertheless, we regret that it
took so long to do so and that it was not possible to
agree on a more substantial text. The dire situation
merits a text that would send an even stronger signal
to the actors in Myanmar to abstain from violence and
engage constructively towards building a peaceful,
reform-oriented and prosperous Myanmar.
To that end, Norway advocated for stronger
language, including on the protection of children and
education in armed conflict, combating sexual and
gender-based violence and ending impunity, as well as
language on preventing the flow of arms and financial
assets of the military. It is our hope, therefore, that
today’s resolution will pave the way for the Council’s
further engagement on Myanmar. It should be followed
by other, more substantial, resolutions, including
Chapter VII provisions, should the situation warrant it.
Let me conclude by reiterating that, as a long-term
partner of Myanmar, Norway will remain engaged in
the work of creating a peaceful and prosperous future
for the people of Myanmar.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): The United Arab Emirates welcomes the
Security Council’s adoption of today’s resolution on
Myanmar (resolution 2669 (2022)). I thank the United
Kingdom for its efforts in facilitating the adoption of
the text. I also thank the members of the Council for
their flexibility during the negotiations.
The United Arab Emirates believes that this
resolution sends an important message about the need
to address the challenges faced by the Rohingya, the
crisis in Rakhine state and the dangers it poses to the
situation in the region, at a time when international
attention on the Rohingya crisis is waning. Despite
the importance of the crisis, however, the language of
the resolution is insufficient. We had hoped that the
resolution would have included stronger language to
really address the scope of the current challenges on
the ground. We therefore call for the intensification
of diplomatic efforts at the international level to
resolve the Rohingya crisis and ensure a response
4/8

21/12/2022

for their deteriorating humanitarian conditions and
create an environment conducive for the voluntary,
safe, sustainable and dignified return of refugees and
internally displaced persons to a stable homeland.
For its part, the United Arab Emirates will continue
its humanitarian efforts to provide basic assistance to
Rohingya refugees, especially women and children, so
as to alleviate their suffering, including through our
support for the efforts of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation to address the crisis.
We welcome the fact that the Council has responded
to the request made by Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) to support the five-point consensus
and its implementation. The consensus is the most
effective way to end the crisis in Myanmar. We
emphasize the centrality of regional efforts to achieve
that goal and call on the international community to
support those efforts in order to achieve stability and
security in the region.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates reiterates
that it will continue to support the efforts of the United
Nations and ASEAN Special Envoys to achieve stability
in Myanmar.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): The
United States welcomes the Council’s adoption of this
resolution on Myanmar (resolution 2669 (2022)). The
resolution is a strong next step in the Council’s efforts
to address the Myanmar military regime’s egregious
behaviour. The resolution comes in response to the
regime’s brutal repression and violence, which pose
a clear threat to international peace and security. The
regime’s actions continue to contribute to regional
instability and refugee flows, impacting neighbouring
States while inflicting tremendous suffering on the
people of Myanmar.
The resolution notes the need for the regime to
respect human rights, immediately release detained
prisoners, allow unhindered humanitarian access and
protect minority groups. It also expresses concern
with attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure,
which have killed far too many innocent men, women
and children.
The resolution is premised on the important role of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
and its Special Envoy in addressing the situation in
Myanmar, as well as the importance of cooperation
between the United Nations Special Envoy and her
ASEAN counterpart. It helps answer the call from
22-76591

21/12/2022

The situation in Myanmar

our ASEAN partners for greater support from the
United Nations and the international community. We
look forward to Special Envoy Heyzer’s briefing to the
Security Council on the situation in Myanmar this spring.
At the same time, this resolution does not go far
enough. We should directly address the regime’s severe
violations of the freedom of religion and belief. We
should call directly for the regime to face justice for the
crimes it has reportedly committed, such as strikes on a
school and a concert that killed scores of civilians. We
should not overlook the General Assembly’s resolution
in support of an arms embargo (General Assembly
resolution 75/287). And we should pursue a mechanism
to prevent the flow of financial resources to the regime.
Those measures are critical to ending the bloodshed.
Given these realities, the United States views the
adoption of this resolution as an important start to the
conversation within the Security Council on Myanmar.
The Council should use this opportunity to seek
additional ways to support the implementation of the
five-point consensus and to promote accountability for
the regime’s actions. We look forward to working with
all members towards those ends.
I would like to conclude by commending the United
Kingdom’s careful and inclusive approach to penholding
on this resolution, which reflected the will of the Council
at every turn and serves as a model for all of us.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): Let me begin by thanking the
United Kingdom for the pragmatic approach it adopted in
guiding the Security Council to finalize the resolution on
Myanmar that we just adopted (resolution 2669 (2022)).
By this resolution, the Council has responded to
the call by the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) on the United Nations and other external
partners to support the organization’s efforts in the
implementation of the five-point consensus. Also, by
acting in the manner in which the Council has today, there
should be no doubt about the international community’s
expectation for the military junta in Myanmar to reverse
its repressive policies and commence actions that show
respect for the rule of law and the fundamental human
rights of all the people of Myanmar.
Military regimes, when they occur, are an aberration
of the political aspirations of any peoples. But when such
unconstitutional regimes are accompanied by downright
repressive measures, as they usually are, it is even more
worrisome. Not surprisingly, the persistent overruling

S/PV.9231

of the will of the people of Myanmar by the Tatmadaw
military authorities since February 2021 has worsened
the plight of this important South-Asian country. We
firmly believe that it is only through dialogue that
this unsustainable governance situation, which has
created insecurity within the country and beyond, with
widespread humanitarian consequences, can be resolved.
We therefore encourage the State authorities of
Myanmar to embrace the mediation efforts spearheaded
by ASEAN, complemented by the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General and other stakeholders, to bring the
crisis in the country to an end.
Mr. Mythen (Ireland): I would like to acknowledge
the presence of the Permanent Representative
of Myanmar and to warmly welcome him to the
Chamber today.
Allow me first to thank the United Kingdom
for presenting the resolution adopted this afternoon
(resolution 2669 (2022)) and for facilitating a measured,
sensitive, inclusive and consultative negotiation process.
Ireland welcomes the adoption of resolution 2669
(2022). We have long stated that Security Council
action in response to the violence suffered by the
Myanmar people since the military coup in 2021 has
been inadequate. The Council could have, and should
have, done more. At a minimum, we should have met to
address their suffering in an open briefing, where they
could hear the views of the Council and its members.
In the absence of greater action, the Myanmar
military have been relentless in the brutal violence they
have used as a tool of control and repression against
the civilian population. Given the overwhelming
silence of the international community, the impunity
they have enjoyed for decades only grows. It is for this
reason — to combat the cycle of violence and impunity
that the Myanmar military relies upon — that Ireland
voted in favour of this resolution. We welcome its
important and notable adoption today.
While we strongly support the adoption of this text,
it is Ireland’s view that it should have gone further. It
should have recognized and condemned the continued
sale and transfer of weapons to Myanmar and the
widespread sexual and gender-based violence and
grave violations against children in Myanmar. It should
have recognized the importance of accountability
mechanisms such as the Independent Investigative

22-765915/8

S/PV.9231

The situation in Myanmar

Mechanism for Myanmar. And above all, it should have
directly called on the Myanmar military to halt their
relentless assault on the people of Myanmar.
However, we recognize the resolution as a pivotal
moment in the Council’s response to the situation in
Myanmar. The resolution acknowledges the need for
the United Nations, the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) and the international community to
continue to act in support of the people of Myanmar. It
further recognizes the actions of the Myanmar military
as the trigger to the current crisis in the country. It
urges the military to immediately release all arbitrarily
detained prisoners, including President Win Myint and
State Counsellor Aung San Suu Kyi. It recognizes the
continuing challenges facing the Rohingya people. It
demands an end to violence and reiterates the necessity
for full, safe and unhindered humanitarian access to all
in need.
To conclude, Ireland reiterates the need for the
Security Council to maintain a dedicated focus on the
situation in Myanmar, to do so in open meetings and to
keep at the heart of our work the needs and interests of
the Myanmar people.
Ms. Costa Filho (Brazil): We are on the verge of
concluding the first year of our tenure here at the Security
Council, and we have found that this file has been one
of the hardest on which to achieve a reaction from the
Council to the ongoing developments in Myanmar. In
that light, we are appreciative of the positive engagement
of all Council members, which has finally allowed us to
speak on the situation in Myanmar. In that respect, we
are particularly grateful to the United Kingdom, as the
penholder, for the inclusive and transparent manner in
which it conducted the process, and in that way allowed
us to arrive at the text we just adopted. That is all the
more so because Brazil has always stressed the need for
the international response to the situation in Myanmar
to take the lead from the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN). And we are therefore particularly
grateful for the fact that ASEAN was involved in the
process and consulted throughout.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Albania voted in favour of
resolution 2669 (2022). We welcome its adoption and
believe that this milestone text will go a long way to
support the basic aspirations of the people of Myanmar,
which have been denied by the brutal military coup. It
was about time that the Security Council did its part.
6/8

21/12/2022

This decision shows the ability of the Council to
respond to the growing calls for supporting Myanmar
in finding a peaceful solution to the deep crisis in the
country. With today’s result, we have responded to the
leaders of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) and made the right choice to stand with the
people of Myanmar in their quest for freedom and rights.
We welcome the focus on the situation of the Rohingya,
who must not be forgotten. With this decision, the
Council will have the opportunity to remain seized of
the developments in the country. We look forward to
the report of the Secretary-General in March 2023.
We commend the work and constructive spirit
with which the United Kingdom, as penholder, led the
negotiations to produce a balanced yet important text.
We call on all the relevant parties to support the full
implementation of the ASEAN five-point consensus
and ensure accountability for crimes committed.
We look forward to the full implementation of the
resolution as part of the effective and immediate actions
required to resolve the political crisis, beginning with
the immediate release of political prisoners as part of
the restoration of, and respect for, human rights for
all — a precondition for achieving peace and stability
in the country.
Political dialogue, not repression, is the way to
address the huge challenges Myanmar faces. The
United Nations has an important part to play in that.
Mr. Elizondo Belden (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mexico thanks the United Kingdom as drafter of
resolution 2669 (2022). Mexico voted in favour of the
resolution on the situation in Myanmar given the fact
that, two years after the start of the crisis, it conveys
an unequivocal message that reaffirms the need for an
immediate cessation of violence, respect for human
rights and the need for an inclusive dialogue to resume
the process towards democratic transition in the
interests of the people of Myanmar.
The resolution calls for ensuring safe humanitarian
access free of all obstacles and stresses the need
to protect the civilian population, in particular
women, children and minorities. It also responds to
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) call
on the importance of United Nations support for the
implementation of the five-point consensus. Mexico
reiterates its support for the efforts of ASEAN, as well
as for the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General.
22-76591

21/12/2022

The situation in Myanmar

The resolution also stresses the need to create
the conditions for the voluntary, safe, dignified and
sustainable return to Myanmar of refugees and forcibly
displaced persons, particularly the Rohingya. However,
we would have liked the resolution to have included
references to the importance of preventing the flow
of arms.
I conclude by emphasizing the importance of the
Council not remaining inert in the face of the situation
in Myanmar and continuing to support diplomatic
efforts to achieve a peaceful solution.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): Gabon
voted in favour of resolution 2669 (2022), adopted
today. We thank the United Kingdom for facilitating
it. Above all, our vote reflects a message of solidarity
with the people of Myanmar and against violence on the
civilian population. It is also a call for a resolution of
the Rohingya crisis, which has lasted far too long. And
it is a message calling for an unhindered humanitarian
response commensurate with the suffering of the people
of Myanmar, as well as for the implementation of the
five-point consensus of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN). We will continue to support
the quest for a solution based on dialogue, all the while
encouraging the prioritization of the regional dynamic
and the guiding role of ASEAN.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): Russia abstained in the voting on the
resolution on Myanmar (resolution 2669 (2022)). It is
our principled position that the situation in Myanmar
does not pose a threat to international peace and
security. This conclusion follows from the contents
of the resolution itself, which is mostly focused on
human rights aspects. We stand for a division of labour
among all United Nations organs in accordance with
their respective mandates. In this case, the situation
of human rights should be addressed by the Third
Committee of the General Assembly, rather than the
Security Council. The human rights agenda must not
be politicized or turned into an instrument for opposing
unwanted Governments.
Moreover, we must say that we are dissatisfied with
the work of the authors of the resolution, who apparently
never even intended to endorse a well-balanced text
accounting for the interests of all Member States in the
Council. There were no real negotiations on the text.
Our colleagues again and again simply ignored all
the concerns regarding the text that other delegations

S/PV.9231

raised. In particular, they ignored the proposal to
include the point about the counterproductiveness of
unilateral restrictive measures that have a negative
effect on the socioeconomic situation in the country.
That approach demonstrates that care for the ordinary
people of Myanmar and developing solutions for the
normalization of the country are not among the goals
of those who drafted the resolution. Their true goal is
to promote a political anti-Myanmar agenda by pushing
through this politicized document and claiming that
“progressive mankind” allegedly looks forward to a
Security Council resolution on Myanmar.
The acts and policies of the military authorities may
be given varying assessments; however, the Security
Council must not play into the hands of those who
would benefit from a destabilization of the situation
on the ground, undermining the mediation efforts of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
and creating division in the Security Council. It is our
firm conviction that any Council product, especially a
resolution, must aim at strictly the opposite — promoting
international peace and security. Judging by what our
Western colleagues said today, they have no such
task with regard to Myanmar, and they will continue
fragmenting the situation in the country and try to drag
the Security Council into that disgraceful ploy.
We proceed from the assumption that all political
forces in Myanmar need to act in a reserved manner
and abstain from steps that may escalate violence and
polarize public sentiment. We see that the military
indeed have such a goal. Naypyidaw has reaffirmed
its commitment to the constitutional provisions that
stipulate the duration of the state of emergency. The
intention to hold parliamentary elections in 2023 is a
stabilizing factor, which renders Myanmar’s political
trajectory more predictable. It is sad that the West would
try to not notice either of those things. The text drafted
by the informal penholders is clear proof of that. At
the same time, since the effect of this non-consensual
document is going to be rather limited, we decided not
to veto it, despite its clearly provocative nature.
Russia will continue promoting political dialogue
and normalization in Myanmar and to oppose attempts
to interfere in its internal affairs. We support the
willingness of ASEAN to facilitate a settlement in
and around Myanmar, that is, to address humanitarian
problems and provide assistance to the people in need.

22-765917/8

S/PV.9231

The situation in Myanmar

We believe that the collective efforts by ASEAN to
implement the five-point consensus must be based on
close interaction with Naypyidaw.
We remain convinced that the situation in Rakhine
state should remain the only aspect of the situation
in Myanmar on the Council’s agenda. In that regard,
promoting anti-Myanmar initiatives in the Security
Council is both inappropriate and counter-productive.
The President: I shall now make an explanation of
vote in my national capacity.
At the outset, I would like to compliment the
delegation of United Kingdom, under Ambassador
Barbara Woodward, for having negotiated the text of
resolution 2669 (2022) in a transparent and consultative
manner by taking into account the views of neighbouring
countries, and in particular those of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), and keeping their
concerns on board.
India shares a nearly 1,700-kilometre-long border
with Myanmar and has historical and cultural links
with its people. As such, any instability in the country
impacts us directly. Resolving the current crisis and
the maintenance of peace, stability and prosperity in
Myanmar are therefore of direct interest to our national
security. The welfare of the people of Myanmar remains
our utmost priority and is at the core of all our efforts.
We believe that the complex situation in Myanmar
calls for an approach of quiet and patient diplomacy. Any
other course will not help in resolving the long-standing
issues that have prevented enduring peace, stability,

8/8

21/12/2022

progress and democratic governance. Under the current
circumstances, we are of the considered view that a
Security Council resolution may entrench the parties in
their inflexible positions, rather than encourage them
to pursue an inclusive political dialogue.
We strongly call upon all parties for an immediate
cessation of hostilities and to abandon their extreme
positions and immediately initiate an inclusive
political dialogue for the restoration of democracy.
Political leaders should be released and allowed to
resume political activities. The United Nations system
should assist the parties in dialogue so that the state of
emergency comes to an end and the country returns to
the democratic path.
It is therefore important to carefully weigh actions
by the Council. Quiet and constructive diplomacy is
the desirable recourse for seeking constructive and
enduring solutions in Myanmar. The consequences of
instability will affect neighbouring countries the most,
and it is therefore important to consider their views and
perspectives seriously.
In view of those concerns and our firm commitment
to the democratic process and the well-being of the
people in Myanmar, India has decided to abstain in the
voting on the resolution.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 3.40 p.m.

22-76591
