IX.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

ber 1970, 2968 (XXVII) of 14 December 1972 and
3349 (XXIX) of 17 December 1974,
Recalling also its resolutions 2925 (XXVII) of
27 November 1972, 3073 (XXVIII) of 30 November
1973 and 3282 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974 on the
strengthening of the role of the United Nations,
Recalling especially resolution 3499 (XXX) of
15 December 1975, by which the General Assembly
established the Special Committee on the Charter of
the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the
Role of the Organization,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on
the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization,8
Considering that the Special Committee has not completed the mandate given to it,
Reaffirming its support for the purposes and principies set forth in the Charter of the United Nations,
l. Takes note of the report of the Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on
the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization;
2. Decides that the Special Committee should continue its work in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2
of General Assembly resolution 3499 (XXX);
3. Invites Governments to submit, or to bring up
to date, their observations and proposals in accordance
with General Assembly resolution 3499 (XXX);
4. Requests the Secretary-General to render all assistance to the Special Committee, including the preparation of summary records of its meetings;
5. Requests the Special Committee to submit a
report on its work to the General Assembly at its thirtysecond session;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-second session the ítem entitled "Report of
the Special Committee on the Charter of the United
Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the
Organization".
81 st plenary meeting
29 November 1976
31/76.

lmplementation hy States of the provisions of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations of 1961

The General Assembly,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General9
on the implementation by States of the provisions of
the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations of
1961, 1 º
Noting that since the adoption by the General Assembly of resolution 3501 (XXX) of 15 December
1975 the number of States parties to the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations of 1961 has increased,
Concerned at continuing instances of violations of
the rules of diplomatic law relating, in particular, to the
status of the diplomatic courier and the diplomatic bag
not accompanied by diplomatic courier,
8 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 33 (A/31/33).
o A/31/145 and Add.1.
10 United N ations, Treaty Series, vol. 500, No. 7310, p. 95.

181

Recognizing the advisability of studying the question
of the status of the diplomatic courier and the diplomatic bag not accompanied by diplomatic courier in
the light of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations of 1961,
Considering it desirable that the General Assembly
should periodically consider at its sessions the question
of implementation by States of the provisions of the
Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations of 1961,
1. Urges States which have not yet done so to become parties to the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic
Relations of 1961 ;
2. Reaffirms the need for strict implementation by
States of the provisions of the Vienna Convention on
Diplomatic Relations of 1961 in the interest of maintaining normal relations between them, strengthening
international peace and security and developing international co-operation;
3. Invites Member Sta tes to submit or to supplement their comments and observations on ways and
means to ensure the implementation of the provisions of
the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations of
1961 and on the desirability of elaborating provisions
concerning the status of the diplomatic courier in accordance with paragraph 4 of General Assembly resolution 3501 (XXX), with due regard also to the question
of the status of the diplomatic bag not accompanied
by diplomatic courier;
4. Requests the International Law Commission at
the appropriate time to study, in the light of the information contained in the report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation by States of the provisions of
the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations of
1961 and other information on this question to be received from Member States through the SecretaryGeneral, the proposals on the elaboration of a protocol
concerning the status of the diplomatic courier and the
diplomatic bag not accompanied by diplomatic courier,
which would constitute development and concretization
of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations
of 1961;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-third session an analytical
report on ways and meaos to ensure the implementation
of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations of
1961 on the basis of comments and observations on this
question received from Member States and also taking
into account the results, if available and ready, of the
study by the Intemational Law Commission of the
proposals on the elaboration of the above-mentioned
protocol;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-third session the item entitled "lmplementation
by States of the provisions of the Vienna Convention
on Diplomatic Relations of 1961: report of the Secretary-General".
97th plenary meeting
13 December 1976
31/97.

Report of the lnternational Law Commission

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the International
Law Commission on the work of its twenty-eighth
session, 11
11 Official Records of tlze

l'Íorz,

General Assembly, Thirty-first SesSupp/ement No, JO (A/31/10).

182

General Assembly-Thirty-first s~sion

Emphasizing the need for the progressive development of international law and its codification in arder
to make it a more effective means of implementing the
purposes and principies set forth in Articles 1 and 2
of the Charter of the United Nations and in the Declaration on Principies of International Law concerning
Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States,12
and to give increased importance to its role in relations
among States,
W elcoming the fact that the International Law Commission completed the first reading of the draft articles
on the most-favoured-nation clause,
Noting with appreciation the work done by the International Law Commission on State responsibility,
succession of States in respect of matters other than
treaties and the law of the non-navigational uses of
international watercourses,
Noting with satisfaction that the International Law
Commission continued to pay special attention to the
question of rationalizing further its organization and
methods of work,
l. Takes note of the report of the International
Law Commission on the work of its twenty-eighth
session;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the International
Law Commission for the work accomplished at that
session;
3. Approves the programme of work planned by
the International Law Commission for 1977;
4. Recommends that the International Law Commission should:
(a) Complete at its thirtieth session, in the light
of comments received from Member States, from organs
of the United Nations which have competence on the
subject-matter and from interested intergovemmental
organizations, the second reading of the draft articles on
the most-favoured-nation clause adopted at its twentyeighth session;
(b) Continue on a high priority basis its work on
State responsibility, taking into account relevant General Assembly resolutions adopted at previous sessions,
with a view to completing the preparation of a first
set of draft articles on responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts, if possible within the next
term of office of the members of the International Law
Commission, and take up, at the earliest possible time,
the separate topic of international liability for injurious
consequences arising out of acts not prohibited by international law;
(e) Proceed with the preparation, on a priority
basis, of draft articles on:
(i) Succession of States in respect of matters other
than treaties;

(ii)

Treaties concluded between States and international organizations or between intemational
organizations;

(d) Continue its work on the law of the non-navigational uses of intemational watercourses;

5. Urges Member States that have not yet done so
to submit to the Secretary-General their written comments on the subject of the law of the non-navigational
uses of intemational watercourses;
1 2 Resolution 2625

(XXV), annex.

6. Expresses confidence that the International Law
Commission will continue to keep the progress of its
work under review and to adopt the methods of work
best suited to the speedy completion of the tasks entrusted to it;
7. Supports the request of the Intemational Law
Commission to the Secretary-General to prepare and
publish as soon as possible a new and revised cdition
of the handbook entitled The Work of the Jnternational
Law Commission;
8. Expresses the wish that seminars continue to be
held in conjunction with sessions of the International
Law Commission and that an increasing number of
participants from developing countries be given the opportunity to attend these seminars;
9. Requests tbe Secretary-General to forward to
the International Law Commission for its attention the
records of the discussion on the report of the Commission at the thirty-first session of the General Assembly.
99th plenary meeting
15 December 1976
31/98.

Arhitration Rules of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law

The General Assembly,
Recognizing the value of arbitration as a method of
settling disputes arising in the context of international
commercial relations,
Convinced that the establishment of rules far ad hoc
arbitration that are acceptable in countries with different
legal, social and economic systems would significantly
contribute to the development of harmonious international economic relations,
Bearing in mind that the Arbitration Rules of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law have been prepared after extensive consultation
with arbitral institutions and centres of international
commercial arbitration,
Noting that the Arbitration Rules were adopted by
the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law at its ninth session18 after due deliberation,
1. Recommends the use of the Arbitration Rules
of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law in the settlement of disputes arising in the
context of intemational commercial relations, particularly by reference to the Arbitration Rules in commercial contracts;
2. Requests tbe Secretary-General to arrange for
the widest possible distribution of the Arbitration Rules.
99th plenary meeting
15 December 1976
31/99.

Report of the United Nations Commission on lnternational Trade Law

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law on the work
of its ninth session, 14
13 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/31/17), chap. V, sect. C.
14 !bid., Suppleme11t No. 17 (A/31/17).
