S/PV.9195

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9195th meeting

Wednesday, 16 November 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Agyeman. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ghana)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. De Rivière
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Mrs. Kamboj
Mr. Mythen
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-69591 (E)
*2269591*

S/PV.9195

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

spillover remain all too real. Yesterday’s incident in
Poland near the Ukrainian border was a frightening
reminder of the absolute need to prevent any further
escalation. I would like to join the Secretary-General
in extending my condolences to the families of the two
Polish citizens killed in the incident.

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Estonia, Poland, Slovakia and
Ukraine to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite His
Excellency Mr. Olof Skoog, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
Ms. DiCarlo: In the past few days, Ukrainians
have been subjected to some of the most intense
bombardments of the nine-month-old war. Russian
missiles and drones have rained down on Kyiv,
Mykolayiv, Chernihiv, Cherkasy, Zhytomyr, Sumy,
Kharkiv, Lviv, Poltava and elsewhere, destroying
or damaging homes and severely disrupting critical
services. The impact of such attacks can only worsen
during the coming winter months.
As of 14 November, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) had
recorded 16,631 civilian casualties, with 6,557 persons
killed and 10,074 injured since the start of the full-scale
invasion of Ukraine. The recent barrages will, alas,
add to horrific toll the war has already taken. I must
say it again: attacks targeting civilians and civilian
infrastructure are prohibited under international
humanitarian law.
The military dynamics on the ground continue to
evolve. In the past week, the city of Kherson returned
to the control of the Government of Ukraine. Heavy
battles also continue in the Donetsk and Luhansk
regions. Indeed, there is no end in sight to the war. As
long as it continues, the risks of potentially catastrophic
2/24

16/11/2022

The ongoing bombardment of Ukraine has already
damaged an estimated 40 per cent of the country’s powergeneration capacity. Kyiv has been hit the hardest. Most
parts of the capital are now without electricity for 12
hours a day. As the Ukrainian Government focuses on
repairing damaged infrastructure, the United Nations
has made it a priority to ensure that the most vulnerable
groups receive winter supplies and services. More than
185,000 people have already received essential basic
winter supplies. Humanitarian partners are setting up
heating points near the front lines. Some 525 generators
were provided or are being distributed to priority
institutions, including hospitals, collective centres
and clinics.
Humanitarian access has resumed in the areas
back under the control of the Government of Ukraine,
including in Kherson. However, it is still extremely
difficult to reach people in need in areas of the east and
south under the control of the Russian military and across
the front line. Mine contamination, particularly in areas
close to the front or where control has recently shifted,
is putting more lives at risk, impeding the movement of
civilians and hampering humanitarian efforts. I remind
the parties that international humanitarian law requires
them to facilitate the rapid and unimpeded passage of
humanitarian relief for all civilians in need.
The allegations of atrocities and human rights
violations in Ukraine during this war are extensive.
Today I would like to highlight grave concerns about the
rights, safety and security of the youngest Ukrainians.
More than 400 children have been killed — and many
more have been injured, have lost their family members
or have been forced to leave their homes. According
to Children of War, a Government portal, 279 children
were considered missing as of 12 November. There are
also disturbing reports of forced transfers of children,
including of some under institutionalized care, to
Russian-occupied territory or to the Russian Federation.
OHCHR has documented several individual cases,
including of unaccompanied children, that appear to
amount to deportations to the Russian Federation, in
violation of international humanitarian law.
22-69591

16/11/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

OHCHR also continues to document other types of
human rights violations, including 57 verified cases of
conflict-related sexual violence. Forty-eight of those
cases are attributable to Russian armed forces and
affiliated groups; nine are attributable to Ukrainian
armed forces and law enforcement authorities.
The Independent International Commission
of Inquiry on Ukraine continues its work towards
accountability for alleged violations and abuses
of human rights and violations of international
humanitarian law, with ongoing investigations within
and outside Ukraine. The commissioners are planning
another visit to Ukraine before the end of the year.
Another issue of concern is the conditions of
prisoners of war. I welcome the continued prisoner
exchanges between Russia and Ukraine, including
most recently on 11 November. I encourage the sides
to continue releasing prisoners of war. I call on the
parties to ensure humane treatment of prisoners of war,
in line with their obligations under international law,
in particular the Third Geneva Convention. I also call
on the Russian Federation to grant OHCHR and the
International Committee of the Red Cross unimpeded
access to detainees.
The extension of the Black Sea Grain Initiative
remains vital in order to help avert a food crisis for
millions of people. More than 10 million metric tons of
foodstuffs have now been moved under the Initiative,
reaching — or on their way to — some 40 countries. The
impact of the Initiative extends far beyond immediate
ports of arrival, helping to lower global prices for key
food commodities around the world. The SecretaryGeneral has continued his engagement with all parties
in support of the renewal and full implementation of
the Initiative. He has also emphasized his commitment
to removing remaining obstacles to Russian food
and fertilizer exports. Those products are not under
international sanctions, but suffer indirect impacts.
It is important and critical to get them back to world
markets — the sooner, the better.
The risk of a nuclear incident in the context of the
open hostilities in Ukraine remains an unacceptable
danger, and I wish to echo the serious concerns
expressed by numerous Member States in that regard.
The Director-General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) recently briefed the Council (see
S/PV.9172) on the organization’s latest efforts, including
ongoing discussions regarding the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant, as well as assessments of activities

S/PV.9195

and materials at other sites in Ukraine. The IAEA has
reported that, in the coming weeks, it will send nuclear
safety and security missions to three more operating
nuclear power plants, as well as to Chornobyl, at the
request of the Ukrainian Government. I reiterate the
imperative of avoiding any military activity that could
risk compromising the safety and security of any
nuclear facility.
Since before the invasion of 24 February, the
United Nations and many others in the global
community warned of the consequences of a wider war
in Ukraine — for Ukrainians, first of all, but also for
much of the world. Those fears have been amply borne
out. One significant casualty of the war has been the
international collective security system we have all
pledged to uphold. The damage to the structures built
in order to resolve or manage tensions and conflict is
significant, making it, in turn, even more difficult to
chart a path out of the hostilities in Ukraine.
There is only one way to stop the death, destruction
and division. The war must end. And it must end in line
with international law and the Charter of the United
Nations, as called for by the General Assembly.
The President: I thank Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I would like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo for her valuable briefing today.
I want to start by noting the tragic explosion that
killed two people in Poland near the Ukrainian border.
We extend our deepest condolences to the loved ones of
the Polish citizens who were killed. As President Biden
told President Duda last night, we stand with Poland
in this difficult moment, and have offered our full
support for, and assistance with, Poland’s investigation
to determine exactly what happened. We have complete
confidence in the Polish Government’s investigation
and appreciate the calm, careful and measured response.
While we still do not know all the facts, we do
know one thing — this tragedy would never have
happened but for Russia’s needless invasion of Ukraine
and its recent missile assaults against Ukraine’s civilian
infrastructure. The Charter of the United Nations
is clear — Ukraine has every right to defend itself
against this barrage, to defend its sovereignty and its
territorial integrity.

22-695913/24

S/PV.9195

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

The more-than-90 missiles that rained down on
Kyiv and other targets in Ukraine have devastated
civilian infrastructure. In fact, this may have been the
widest-scale missile attack since the beginning of the
war. Now millions of Ukrainians are without heat or
electricity. We extend our solidarity to the Ukrainian
people for the fallout of this attack, and our deepest
condolences for the lives lost.
This is a deliberate tactic by Putin. He seems to have
decided that, if he cannot seize Ukraine by force, he
will try to freeze the country into submission. It is hard
to overstate how horrific these attacks are. When I was
in Ukraine last week, I saw first-hand the tremendous
suffering these kinds of attacks and this war has
wrought on the Ukrainian people, and on Europe more
broadly. I know we have all seen the photos of cratered
playgrounds, bombed-out hospitals and destroyed
homes across Ukraine, but no photograph can capture
the real lives affected and the real people suffering the
immense human toll of Russia’s war against a fellow
Member State.
I felt that toll when I spoke with a mother in Kyiv
who had to hold her daughter’s lifeless bloody hand
after a Russian attack on her apartment building. Her
daughter, in her mother words, “just wanted to go
to school”.
I felt that toll when I met with a humanitarian aid
worker who was detained and tortured by Russian
forces. She was so traumatized that she could only
share a portion of the horrors she experienced, unable
to put the rest into words.
I felt that toll when I met a 10-year-old named
Malina, who lived in a facility where displaced families
were gathered to prepare for a bitterly cold winter, a
facility that itself had once been hit and damaged
by Russian missiles. I was there to announce more
humanitarian funding from the United States in order
to provide supplies and support, while Russia prepared
to weaponize the winter. I made that announcement in
the dark, during a blackout caused by Russian attacks.
Afterward, I asked Malina what she would do when the
war was over. I could tell that this was something that
she had given some thought to. She said simply that
she wanted to see her best friend, whom she had not
seen since the start of the war. And I have to say that I
wondered if she would someday see her friend again.
When I met with President Zelenskyy his message
was simple. He seeks peace. He told me he seeks a
4/24

16/11/2022

just peace based on the United Nations Charter and
its principles, which is what everyone in the Council
is here to uphold and defend. We cannot say the same
for Russia. As Secretary Blinken told the Council,
“[i f Russia stops fighting, the war ends. If Ukraine
stops fighting, Ukraine ends” (S/PV.9135, p.11). It is
Ukrainian civilians who are in danger. It is Ukrainian
civilians whose electricity grids were targeted and who
are not sure how they will keep warm throughout the
winter. It is Ukrainian civilians who are suffering.
There is one man sitting comfortably in Moscow
who can put a stop to this brutal, horrific war right now,
this second. But, until he does, we must address not
only the scale of the humanitarian and human rights
crisis unfolding in Ukraine, but also the continued
spillover effects of this needless war. We should just
look at the outsized harm done by Russia’s exacerbation
of the global food security crisis.
If Council members are looking for a practical
way to lower tensions and help those in need, it would
be by supporting and securing an extension of the
Black Sea Grain Initiative. According to the United
Nation records, nearly 500 ships, carrying more than
10 million metric tons of grain and other food items,
have departed under the Initiative. That is enough to
feed tens of millions of people. The Black Sea Grain
Initiative has helped to stabilize food markets, with
reports that prices have fallen to pre-war levels. Two
thirds of the wheat exported under the Initiative went to
the global South. But the deadline for renewing the deal
is fast approaching.
When I was in Kyiv, I visited a granary and heard
that farmers need the deal to be extended so that they
would have the confidence to plant their wheat and
continue serving as a breadbasket for the developing
world. I could hear the desperation in their voices, and I
promised them that I would take their message back to
the Security Council.
Russia must extend that essential, life-saving
arrangement. Russia must allow those ships to keep
feeding the world. I call on our fellow Council members
to make the same calls, with the same urgency, to keep
the deal alive.
In the long run, the only way to ensure that food
supplies are not further affected is for Russia to
withdraw its troops, stop the atrocities and end the war.
But, in the meantime, we are grateful for the efforts
of Türkiye and the United Nations in sustaining and
22-69591

16/11/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

expanding that life-saving Initiative. I sincerely hope
that we can continue to strive, with Ukraine in the
driver’s seat, towards a just and lasting peace.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo for her comprehensive update.
We are having another meeting on Ukraine, and
yet, after nine months of brutal war, we continue to
deplore the loss of innocent life, countless unnecessary
fatalities, widespread human misery, massive
destruction, food insecurity and a world order shaken
to its core.
In a normal life, nine months is the period that
humans need to bring a baby to life. Russia has used
it to create a disaster of terrible proportions, including
by making normal life impossible for all, including
babies born in Ukraine since 24 February. For what
reason has it done that? It is for a dream that has turned
into a nightmare and a miscalculation that has become
an obsession.
What some feared, and others anticipated, happened
yesterday. A missile landed in a farm in Poland, killing
two people. It landed roughly at the same time as a
barrage of Russian missiles struck western Ukraine. A
full investigation is under way, and we look forward to
its conclusions. But that does not change anything with
regard to the core issue: as long as the war continues, we
run the risk of a spillover, by accident or intentionally.
The incident should be a stark reminder that those that
engage in a path of unnecessary, reckless escalation
will bear the consequences.
We and the world know that the consequences of
the war are not limited only to Ukraine. Moldova has
already complained about the effect of Russian missiles
fired close to its borders, and parts of its territory are
experiencing power outages as a result of Russia’s
missiles hitting Ukrainian cities and vital infrastructure.
We offer our condolences to the families of the
victims and to the people of Poland and Ukraine. We
reiterate our full and unwavering solidarity with Poland,
just as with every other NATO member. Let us make it
clear: this is not a war between Russia and NATO, nor
is it a war between Russia and the West. It has never
been that, despite the Kremlin’s propaganda to justify
its debacle. It is, and remains, a war of choice, a pure
act of unprovoked aggression and an attempt to grab
territory. The war must end, not expand. Russia started
it; Russia must put an end to it, and that is long overdue.

S/PV.9195

Yesterday President Zelenskyy proposed a 10-point
peace plan at the Group of 20 summit in Indonesia,
again demonstrating leadership by making it clear that
he was prepared for diplomacy to end the unjust and
unjustified war. The plan includes a path to nuclear
safety, food security, a special tribunal for war crimes
and a final peace treaty with Russia.
Regrettably, but not surprisingly, the staggering
response was another wave of missiles, Russia’s biggest
in a month, again targeting residential areas and power
infrastructure in several regions of the country, aimed
at destroying essential utilities, such as electricity,
water and gas infrastructure across Ukraine. As the
winter gets colder, more than 7 million Ukrainians are
left without power and with the supply of electricity in
a critical condition.
In yesterday’s case, there was no error. It looks like
more terror. Unable to prevail on the ground, Russia
decided to weaponize everything, including now the
weather, with the intention of freezing an entire nation
into submission. But it seems that it fails to understand
that Ukraine has nothing more to lose in the fight. The
heroic resistance of brave Ukrainians has clearly made
it impossible for Russia to win, unattainable for them
to advance and incomprehensible for them to acclaim.
Russia decided to withdraw its troops from
Kherson. It was not the first of such sudden reversals.
They did the same from the surroundings of Kyiv
earlier this year. No one, including in Russia, is buying
the camouflaged language anymore. The so-called
special operation cannot conceal the fiasco, and the
retreat cannot hide the defeat. Only a few weeks ago,
on 30 September, the Kremlin proclaimed Kherson to
be Russian forever. Now, a few weeks later, that just
became what it should be — never.
A wiser decision would be for Russia to come to
its senses, cease all hostilities and unconditionally
withdraw all its forces and military equipment from the
entire territory of Ukraine. Let me once again reiterate
that any annexation of territory by another State
resulting from the threat or use of force is a violation of
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
international law, and it will not be accepted.
The Russian Federation continues to violate and
blatantly ignore international law. Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo mentioned some key aspects of
those violations. The use of missiles, drones and
explosive weapons in populated areas is prohibited by

22-695915/24

S/PV.9195

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

international law, including by binding resolutions of
the Security Council of which Russia voted in favour.
Violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law, enforced disappearances and
arbitrary detention of civilians, the torture and illtreatment of both civilians and prisoners and cases of
conflict-related sexual violence have been widespread
and are now well documented. Those gross violations
will not go unpunished. Victims and their family
members seek justice and accountability.
Russia may continue to block the adoption of
resolutions by the Security Council, but, as we have seen
repeatedly and convincingly, including last Monday
(see A/ES-11/PV.15), it will not manage to veto the
decisions of the General Assembly and other initiatives
to seek and ensure reparations and accountability.
We reiterate our strong support for the Black Sea
Grain Initiative. We reiterate our call for its extension
beyond 22 November to keep that vital food supply line
open to the rest of the world. Its impact is known and
felt worldwide, and any decision other than an extension
would be a cynical punishment of those in dire need.
Let me conclude by recalling that the toll of the
war is already frightening. With every passing day,
the toll will be heavier for all, particularly Ukraine,
but also everyone else, including Russia itself. In
the course of the past nine months, nothing has gone
according to plan in Ukraine for the simple reason that
the Russian plan was wrong and the intention behind it
reprehensible, and the reality has proved disastrous. It
is time to change course, silence the guns, pack up, go
home and talk peace, not war.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): As
the leaders of the Group of 20 met to defend peace,
Russia once again demonstrated its lack of scruples by
launching a new round of air strikes against Ukrainian
cities, targeting civilian infrastructure. France
condemns these strikes, which constitute flagrant
violations of international law, in the strongest possible
terms. It reaffirms its support for Ukraine. I also express
France’s solidarity with Poland and our condolences for
the victims, which President Macron conveyed to the
Polish Prime Minister last night.
Russia bears full responsibility for the war. Its
massive strikes against Ukraine are threatening
international stability and security and may lead to an
unintended escalation. Ukraine is only exercising its
strict right to defend itself.
6/24

16/11/2022

With this aggression, Russia is deliberately
violating the United Nations Charter, including
the principle of territorial integrity of Ukraine. On
16 March, the International Court of Justice demanded
the suspension of Russia’s military operations. Nearly
nine months after the start of the war, attacks against
civilians and civilian infrastructure continue. Russia is
now targeting power stations, hydroelectric plants and
heating networks located far behind the front line, with
the stated aim of breaking the resistance of a people
fighting for their freedom.
Because it is retreating on the ground, Russia seeks
to plunge Ukraine into cold and darkness as winter
approaches. This strategy is already a failure: it does not
weaken the resistance of the Ukrainian people. Rather,
it strengthens their determination. The liberation of
Kherson is a new illustration of that. The more Russia
persists in prolonging this war, the more it worsens the
energy, food and economic consequences of the war.
In this very Chamber, over the past few weeks, we
have heard Russia make outrageous accusations that
Ukraine is preparing a dirty bomb. The inspections
by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
that were conducted in Kyiv, Zhovti Vody and Dnipro
at the request of the Ukrainian authorities did not
find any undeclared activities or materials. We now
have confirmation that these allegations were totally
unfounded. France welcomes the speed with which the
IAEA went to the site and congratulates Ukraine for
its transparency.
Russia is not hesitating to exploit food insecurity
and malnutrition. The fate of millions of people
depends on the extension of the Istanbul agreements.
After first suspending its participation in the Black Sea
Grain Initiative for a few days, Russia is now seeking
to monetize its agreement to renew it. This blackmail
is intolerable. Everything must be done to ensure that
Ukrainian grain exports continue unhindered.
We call on Russia not to obstruct the renewal of
the 22 July agreements. France will continue to support
the efforts of the Secretary-General and Türkiye
in this regard. It will also continue to move forward
with its European partners in the framework of the
solidarity routes that have enabled the export of nearly
15 million tons of grain and other food products by land
and waterways.
Let me remind you, Mr. President, that the
European Union, the United States and the United
22-69591

16/11/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Kingdom published guidelines on 14 November aimed
at facilitating exports of Russian food products and
fertilizers. France has announced a contribution of
€7.5 million to finance the delivery by the World Food
Programme of fertilizers to Africa.
Russia will not be able to exonerate itself from its
responsibility for the crimes committed in Ukraine. I
welcome the adoption by the General Assembly of a
resolution recommending the creation of a register of
damages suffered by all Ukrainian victims (General
Assembly resolution ES-11/5).
France salutes the courage and resistance of the
Ukrainian people. We will continue to stand by them.
On 13 December, France and Ukraine will jointly
organize a conference in support of Ukraine. It will
aim to respond to the present emergency and increase
the supply of international aid, whether in the form
of basic equipment or the reconstruction of critical
infrastructure, in particular energy infrastructure.
France reiterates its unwavering support for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine in the
face of Russia’s aggression. We remain determined to
continue our support for Ukraine’s efforts to defend its
territory for as long as necessary.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing.
I would like to start by offering our sympathies and
condolences to the Polish people and to the families
of those injured and killed in yesterday’s incident.
While we await the outcome of the investigation, we
should be clear that this is a tragedy that indisputably
stems from Russia’s illegal and unjustified invasion
and its inhumane assault on civilians across Ukraine.
Yesterday, as President Zelenskyy was setting out his
10-point plan for peace in Ukraine for the Group of 20,
Ukrainian civilians were facing the largest barrage of
Russian missile and drone strikes since the first week
of the war. We extend our condolences to the Ukrainian
people and the families of those injured in these attacks.
Russia’s systematic attacks on Ukraine’s critical
national infrastructure have left millions without
electricity, heating, water, medicine and food, as
temperatures start to drop below zero. And more
than that, today we have heard again detailed reports
from the United Nations of civilian deaths, sexual
violence and the forced deportation of children. Russia
is knowingly trying to gain military advantage by
creating desperation. Attacks of this kind may violate

S/PV.9195

international humanitarian law and are, in any event,
deeply inhumane.
On Monday, the General Assembly adopted
a resolution on an international mechanism for
reparations for damage, loss and injury arising from
Russia’s internationally wrongful acts against Ukraine
(General Assembly resolution ES-11/5). This was an
important first step towards justice for Ukraine.
We are in no doubt that Ukraine will prevail in the
face of Russia’s aggression. The liberation of Kherson
shows the strength, courage and determination of the
Ukrainian people to defend their right to sovereign
equality and territorial integrity guaranteed under the
United Nations Charter. The United Kingdom will
continue to stand by the Ukrainian people.
But while the war is ongoing, we must continue
also to manage its wider effects as best we can. That is
why we strongly support the Black Sea Grain Initiative,
which has been vital in helping to alleviate the serious
risks of food insecurity in the world. We strongly
support the United Nations in the efforts to renew it.
Fundamentally, this war is the result of unilateral
action on the part of the Russian Federation. The
path forward is therefore simple: Russia needs to
cease hostilities, withdraw from within Ukraine’s
internationally recognized borders and commit to a
path of dialogue.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): First, the
United Arab Emirates extends its heartfelt condolences
to Poland for the deaths of the two civilians killed in
yesterday’s incident. The news of missiles hitting
Polish territory and the increase in the number of
strikes across Ukraine seemed to signal the frightening
escalation that many of us have talked about here in this
Chamber. It is a perfect demonstration of the fact that
as the fighting continues, each day becomes a gamble
in which there cannot be any winners.
The humanitarian situation in Ukraine is a source of
profound concern. With the onset of winter, 40 per cent
of the country’s power system is reportedly damaged and
30 per cent of its power stations destroyed, potentially
compounding the humanitarian crisis with a lack of
heating. Around the world, Governments continue to
warn of the war’s consequences for the global food
supply, most recently at the Group of 20 (G-20) summit
in Indonesia. In addition to the export of grain, the
supply of ammonia and fertilizer, which are crucial to
ensuring adequate crop yields for next year’s harvest,

22-695917/24

S/PV.9195

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

is also a priority. As the Secretary-General has said, we
cannot let this year’s crisis of affordability become next
year’s crisis of availability. We join the call for renewing
the Black Sea Grain Initiative and urge the stakeholders
to reach a solution that ensures the extension of the
agreements — a critical breakthrough for which we are
grateful to the United Nations and Türkiye. Similarly,
we commend the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and other humanitarian actors
for their tireless efforts to provide Ukrainian civilians
with essential supplies, including the recent convoys to
southern Ukraine.
As the humanitarian assistance and efforts to renew
the Grain Initiative continue, we must acknowledge
that that is not enough. Only a sustainable and peaceful
resolution of the war will put an end to the suffering
it has caused. We are encouraged by the recent public
statements discussing the contours of a possible peace
agreement. The Council must play its part in supporting
any efforts to hold talks, and we must focus on measures
that can bring the sides together rather than push them
further apart.
Last month marked the sixtieth anniversary of the
Cuban missile crisis. Back then, pragmatic and creative
diplomacy brought the world back from the brink.
Public statements that counselled calm and restraint in
response to the news from Poland and emphasized the
need to establish the facts on the ground helped to avoid
further escalation in the past 24 hours. But the overall
episode was an unnerving warning of the risks inherent
in the continuation of the war. That cannot be the new
normal — too much is at stake, not least for Ukraine. I
want to recall the statement that came out of the G-20.
We must uphold international law and the multilateral
system, defend the Charter of the United Nations and
adhere to international humanitarian law. Beginning
with urgently needed de-escalation, we must encourage
confidence-building measures and open channels of
communication to end the conflict and ensure that
today’s era is not one of war.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): We thank Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing.
The missiles that landed in Poland yesterday,
regardless of their origin and whether they were
intentional or not, are cause for serious concern. We
extend our condolences to the relatives of the victims
of those tragic events. The incident reminds us that the
risks of an expanding conflict are real and compels
8/24

16/11/2022

us to redouble our efforts to find a prompt diplomatic
solution that will put an end to the suffering of civilians
throughout the region.
I would like to make four points. First, I want to
highlight the humanitarian situation. The damage
inflicted in the nine months of conflict is now
being compounded by the destruction of electricity
infrastructure and the onset of winter. The lack of
electricity jeopardizes many other basic services, of
which the water supply is only one. All of that puts the
lives and health of millions of civilians at greater risk.
Deteriorating living conditions will lead to a new wave
of displacement at a time when the host communities
are already stretched to their limit. The numbers speak
for themselves. Some 7.8 million Ukrainians have
had to leave their country while another 6 million are
internally displaced. In that context, humanitarian aid
becomes critical to the survival of the most vulnerable
members of the population. We reiterate our call for
unfettered access to all civilians, including in the
occupied oblasts where martial law has been declared.
While this may be less obvious, the conflict has
also had serious consequences for people’s mental
health. The more than 400 children who have died
and another 279 missing provide a tragic picture of
the pain that the war is causing. Mexico reiterates the
importance of including psychosocial support services
in humanitarian response strategies. The mental health
consequences of the war will not end when the conflict
ends. It will therefore be crucial to develop a long-term
strategy to address that aspect of the conflict — one
that is as painful as it is silent.
Secondly, I will touch on the issue of nuclear
security. The situation around the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant remains a cause for concern. We
reiterate the call for the establishment of a nuclear
safety and security protection zone around the plant, as
proposed by the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA). Mexico acknowledges the work of the IAEA,
in particular its verification work in three locations,
based on one of the parties’ doubts about activities
taking place there. We note that the Agency found no
evidence of undeclared nuclear activity or materials.
We will closely follow the results of the visits to other
nuclear power plants, including Chornobyl, in the
coming weeks. While the situation at the Zaporizhzhya
plant is undoubtedly critical, it is important to
underline that during this conflict any nuclear facility
22-69591

16/11/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

S/PV.9195

could potentially become a disaster area affecting the
population and the environment.

ultimate impossibility of a clear military victory at a
cost that is acceptable to humankind.

Thirdly, I would like to mention the Black Sea
Grain Initiative, which, as others have said, has been
instrumental in helping to mitigate the food insecurity
that is primarily affecting developing countries. It
therefore must continue. The agreement must be
implemented to facilitate access to global markets
for Russian food products and fertilizer, including
ammonium. We recognize the Secretary-General’s
efforts to remove many of the obstacles faced in
exporting such products. The agreements have been a
beacon of hope for those of us who believe in dialogue
and diplomacy as paths to a solution to the conflict, in
spite of rifts that at times appear almost insurmountable.

There is no long-term military solution. All that a
continuation of the war will do is delay negotiations
while even greater damage is done. Kenya therefore calls
once again for an immediate cessation of hostilities.

Lastly, it is essential to advance international
investigations to ensure accountability. Those who
have committed crimes in this conflict must be brought
to justice. The international community owes at least
that to the victims. We will therefore closely follow the
work of the International Criminal Court.
I would like to conclude by reiterating that Mexico
emphasizes the adoption of new approaches that
prioritize mediation and dialogue to put an end to
the war. Mexico reiterates its support for the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Ukraine.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo for her briefing today, which made it
clear that the war in Ukraine continues to cause extreme
suffering to civilians far beyond what is acceptable
under international law and international humanitarian
law. We offer our condolences to all the families and
communities that have lost loved ones to the war,
including in the incident that occurred yesterday in
Poland, and we pray for the speedy recovery of those
injured and traumatized.
We are gravely concerned by the persistent
targeting of civilians and objects indispensable to their
survival, including residential homes, health facilities
and shelters, as well as energy and water infrastructure.
The war, which follows a long-term political
conflict, is a violation of Ukraine’s territorial integrity
and constitutes a breach of the fundamental principles
of the Charter of the United Nations. The military
alliances forming on either side are giving the war a
regional and global footprint. The risk of its escalation
to the use of weapons of mass destruction suggests the

Negotiations will not be easy, especially if they
are to be fully in line with the Charter of the United
Nations in protecting the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Ukraine — but they can succeed, as others
have in Europe’s volatile history. It will also be critical
that those negotiations be accompanied or followed
by a broader settlement that stabilizes what is now a
profoundly compromised European security order.
The world needs peace in Ukraine and in Europe. The
humanitarian costs for the people of Ukraine are joined
by the costs for millions of people around the world.
We continue to applaud the humanitarian-inspired and
United Nations-facilitated Black Sea Grain Initiative
and strongly urge its renewal on permanent terms.
The flow of grains and fertilizers from Ukraine over
the Black Sea, as well as from the Russian Federation
over land corridors, must be assured. Unfortunately,
there are still unilateral blockages of food and fertilizer
products, despite frequent assurances to the contrary.
We therefore urge the Secretary-General to
urgently undertake an assessment of official and
unofficial blockages and to make that report available
to the Security Council. The same should be done by
humanitarian organizations, such as the World Food
Programme. We also encourage regional organizations,
such as the European Union and the African Union, to
review and report on the experiences of their member
States in ensuring unimpeded exports of Ukrainian and
Russian food and fertilizers to world markets.
Our region, the Horn of Africa, is experiencing the
worst drought in decades. We cannot afford to pay for
exceedingly expensive fertilizers if we are to avoid a
worse food insecurity situation in the coming year. We
must move forward from political assurances of the
open flow of those vital goods and transparently and
rigorously assess and report the facts on the ground.
Millions of lives depend on the Council going beyond
rhetoric and guaranteeing practical effects.
The crisis presents an opportunity. Africa is the
most food-insecure region in the world, yet it has
the largest amount of under-used arable land with a
population that is still mostly rural. Too many African

22-695919/24

S/PV.9195

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

families spend a disproportionate part of their income
on purchasing food. It is a major component of the
political instability that sadly has led to the continent
having the most conflict situations being handled by
the Security Council.
We now have a historic opportunity to put in place
financial risk mitigation, technology transfers and
investments to transform agricultural productivity on
the continent. While we commend the humanitarian
efforts being made to offer relief, our target must be
sufficient production. The efficacy of the continent’s
cooperation agreements with other regions and major
Powers should be judged by the extent to which they
lead to a surge in Africa’s production of food and
fertilizer so that it is never again as vulnerable as it
is today.
The more protracted this war is, the more its
malign effects will spread. As more citizens suffer in
more countries, their political demands may lead to
less worldwide solidarity with the suffering people of
Ukraine. Every country calling for that solidarity must
look into its own conduct when it comes to enabling
the free flow of food and fertilizer products and act
with compassion and empathy for those who need them
around the world.
In conclusion, Kenya once again reiterates its
respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence of Ukraine.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): Let me begin by thanking
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing and
update on the situation in Ukraine.
India remains concerned about the situation
in Ukraine, including the targeting of civilian
infrastructure and the death of civilians. Since the
beginning of the conflict, India has consistently called
for an immediate cessation of hostilities and an end to
the violence. We have called on both sides to return
to the path of diplomacy and dialogue, and we have
expressed our support for all diplomatic efforts to end
the conflict. We therefore stand ready to support all
efforts aimed at de-escalation. India’s Prime Minister
has said unequivocally that this cannot be an era of war.
We hope that the international community
will continue to respond positively to the call for
humanitarian assistance. India has so far dispatched
12 consignments of humanitarian aid to Ukraine and
stands ready to do more.
10/24

16/11/2022

I will also state that the impact of the Ukraine
conflict has not been limited to just Europe. The global
South especially faces serious economic consequences,
and there are growing concerns about energy and
food security due to the conflict, following the
severe stress created by two years of the coronavirus
disease pandemic.
As far as specific initiatives on issues such as food
grains and fertilizer shipments are concerned, we very
much hope that the United Nations-facilitated Black Sea
Grain Initiative, with its fertilizer package deal, will be
renewed in the coming days and will be implemented
earnestly in all its aspects by all parties.
I wish to assure the Council that India’s approach to
the Ukraine conflict will continue to be people-centric.
We are providing humanitarian assistance to Ukraine
and economic support to some of our neighbours in the
global South under economic distress.
In conclusion, I reiterate that the global order
is anchored on the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, international law and respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States.
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong (Gabon) (spoke in French): I
thank Ms. DiCarlo for her enlightening briefing.
The war in Ukraine will soon enter its ninth month,
and there are no signs of de-escalation or a cessation of
hostilities on the horizon. We welcome the resumption
of exports under the Black Sea Grain Initiative
following a brief suspension. The implementation of the
agreement must be grounded in the firm commitment
and good faith of all the parties. I would like to echo the
Secretary-General’s call for a renewal of this important
agreement and its full and balanced implementation.
The resumption of the Grain Initiative is a sign that
even in times of war, the channels of dialogue and
diplomacy remain open.
The war in Ukraine continues to have many
humanitarian
consequences,
with
massive
displacements of people fleeing the fighting, numerous
civilian casualties and incalculable costs in terms of
property loss. Continued insecurity and the disruption
of supply chains have driven many people into hunger
and distress. The first victims are vulnerable people,
especially women and children, who are often victims
of sexual violence, human trafficking and various
other violations of basic human rights. Once again,
we call on the warring parties to uphold international
humanitarian law and refrain from inflicting suffering
22-69591

16/11/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

S/PV.9195

on civilians. Civilian infrastructure, including civilian
nuclear sites, must not be subject to attacks and
humanitarian aid must be allowed to flow unimpeded.
My country reiterates its opposition to the use of any
weapons of mass destruction. We call for dialogue and
good-faith negotiations to achieve a ceasefire. Gabon
supports and will continue to support all efforts aimed
at finding a diplomatic solution that can ensure peaceful
coexistence between all the parties.

Ireland stands with them today, as always. We are very
concerned about the reports of heavy fighting in the
east, where living conditions for the civilian population
are increasingly dire and where Russian forces continue
to attack, particularly around the city of Bakhmut and
other towns in the region. In the south, we cautiously
welcome the liberation of the city of Kherson and note
the decision of the Russian leadership to withdraw to
the eastern bank of the Dnipro River.

Mr. Mythen (Ireland): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo for her briefing. I also want to open
by expressing our condolences to the Polish people
following the explosion in the small border town
of Przewodów yesterday, which killed two people.
We extend our deepest sympathies to the families of
those killed or injured. We also fully support Poland’s
investigation of the incident, and we stand in full
solidarity with Poland.

We recall that parties to the conflict must comply
with international humanitarian law. That includes
prohibitions against indiscriminate and disproportionate
attacks and the obligation to take all feasible precautions
in attack. There must also be full, safe and unhindered
humanitarian access to civilians in need, including
those who choose to remain or are unable to leave.
Those who seek to leave or are forced to leave must
be allowed to do so safely and for destinations of their
own choosing. We note that thousands of civilians were
reportedly evacuated by the Russian army before its
withdrawal from Kherson, and hundreds of thousands
of Ukrainians have been moved from Russian-occupied
territories. We would like to remind the Council that
the transfer or deportation of civilians by an occupying
Power from occupied territory can constitute a war
crime. Refugees, internally displaced and stateless
persons are particularly at risk of exploitation, with
attacks and abductions that lead to trafficking. Women
and children face particular danger in that regard and
must be protected from harm. Conflict-related sexual
violence is never acceptable, and again may amount to
war crimes.

In recent weeks Russia has launched hundreds of
drone and missile strikes in Ukraine with the apparent
aim of terrorizing and demoralizing the civilian
population. Yesterday Russia scaled up its strikes with
further attacks on Kyiv and across Ukraine. While
Russia seeks to escalate the war, tonight millions of
people across Ukraine are grappling with the prospect
of a dark and freezing winter without reliable access
to water, heat, electricity or other basic services. The
most vulnerable in Ukrainian society — the internally
displaced, children and the elderly — face a particularly
precarious future. Women, already disproportionately
affected by the war, are once again put in unsafe and
uncertain situations. That this may be the intended
result of recent Russian attacks on Ukraine’s cities
and infrastructure is simply unconscionable. That
includes efforts to remove Zaporizhzhya from the
Ukrainian grid and attacks on other Ukrainian nuclear
facilities. Such utter disregard for nuclear safety carries
the strong risk of a nuclear incident with potentially
terrible consequences for Ukraine, Russia and the wider
region. We stress the importance of the seven pillars
of nuclear safety and security and their applicability in
armed conflict, as set out by the Director General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency. We condemn
those heinous attacks in the strongest possible terms.
Attacks intentionally directed at civilians and civilian
objects are war crimes, and those responsible for them
must be held to account.
The people of Ukraine have shown remarkable
resolve and determination in the face of brutal adversity.

The reverberations of the war continue to be
felt far beyond Ukraine’s borders, with unequal and
disproportionate impacts on developing countries. The
Black Sea Grain Initiative plays an important role in
alleviating global food insecurity, and it should continue
to do so in the months ahead. We are grateful for the
efforts of the United Nations and Türkiye to facilitate
Russia’s resumed participation in the agreement. We
urge all sides to maintain engagement in good faith and
to continue that important initiative.
We have set out many of these concerns on many
previous occasions at this table, and I fear we will do
so again. But as my Minister for Foreign Affairs said
earlier today, Ireland will make no apology for being on
the side of international law, the Charter of the United
Nations and Ukraine and its people. Russia should end
its illegal war of aggression and stop killing innocent

22-6959111/24

S/PV.9195

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

civilians and shelling infrastructure with immediate
effect. It is never too late for dialogue and diplomacy.
We therefore renew our call on Russia to immediately
cease hostilities, withdraw its forces and commit to
resolving all outstanding issues peacefully and in line
with the Charter.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo for her briefing.
Brazil shares the concerns about the worsening
humanitarian situation in Ukraine and the impact of
the conflict on food security in other regions. Since the
start of hostilities, we have advocated for the parties to
engage in negotiations for a ceasefire and a peaceful
solution to their differences.
The Black Sea Grain Initiative, which has already
enabled exports of more than 10 million metric tons
of grain, has been an important step. Brazil welcomes
the decision of the Russian Federation to reconsider
the suspension of its participation following the
incidents of 29 October. While the conflict in Ukraine
is not the only cause of the food insecurity we now
face, the continuation of grain and fertilizer exports
through Black Sea ports helps stabilize prices and
prevent shortages. Fragilities in the global food supply,
however, are the result of systemic actions over past
decades that have hindered the development of the
agricultural sector throughout the developing world, in
particular in Africa. Among them, we must recognize
the deleterious impact of massive agricultural subsidies
and distorting tariff and non-tariff barriers that hold
back agricultural production in developing countries.
We renew our support for the mediation efforts of the
Secretary-General and Türkiye. We encourage the
parties to engage in the immediate extension of the
Grain Initiative, which we see as a necessary decision
and an important confidence-building measure.
The approach of winter finds Ukrainian cities
in an alarming situation. The destruction of civil
infrastructure, particularly in the energy sector,
exposes millions of families to life-threatening
conditions. Brazil strongly condemns the attacks on
residential areas and civilian facilities, for which there
is no justification. We urge all the parties to uphold
their obligations under international humanitarian
law and adopt practical measures to minimize civilian
injuries and damage on the ground.
At this challenging time, the international
community needs to stand together in providing
12/24

16/11/2022

humanitarian assistance to Ukraine. Since March,
contributions of food and medical supplies have been
shipped from our country to Ukraine. In the coming
weeks, Brazil will send 24 additional tons of rice
donated by the private sector. The Government of Brazil
has also simplified the requirements for entering the
country in order to facilitate the reception of refugees.
We are encouraged to see that wave of solidarity being
observed in dozens of countries. We urge Governments
and the private sector to engage in similar initiatives,
which have never been so urgent since the beginning
of the conflict.
Finally, we renew the call for the parties to return
to the negotiating table without delay. We encourage
other members to explore ways to foster dialogue.
There is no more urgent task facing the United
Nations than the search for an immediate ceasefire,
without preconditions.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Ukraine crisis is becoming increasingly protracted,
expansive and complex, thereby putting further
pressure on the already tense international situation
and creating more uncertainty in the world, which is
not in the interest of any party. No matter how difficult
the challenges are, the international community must
strive to seek consensus, find space for cooperation and
play a constructive and responsible role in promoting
the de-escalation of the situation in order to resume
diplomatic negotiations as soon as possible and mitigate
the spillover effects of the crisis. In the current context,
China believes that the international community should
take the following steps.
First, we should work together to support a peaceful
resolution of the crisis. Conflicts and wars have no
winners. Dialogue and negotiation will provide the
only viable way out of the Ukraine crisis. As long as we
begin negotiations, there is hope for peace. China notes
that Russia has expressed its willingness to engage in
dialogue on many occasions in recent days and hopes
that the parties concerned can meet each other halfway,
respond positively and engage in direct contact as soon
as possible in order to create the conditions for the
resumption of negotiations.
There are no simple solutions to complex issues.
On the basis of accommodating each other’s legitimate
security concerns, the parties should discuss building a
balanced, effective and sustainable European security
architecture in order to directly address the security
deficit that underlies the crisis and achieve peace
22-69591

16/11/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

and stability on the European continent. We hope
that the United States, NATO and Russia will carry
out a comprehensive dialogue to that end. China will
continue to play a constructive role in its own way.
With regard to media reports of missiles landing in
a village on the eastern border of Poland, resulting in
casualties, China calls on all the parties concerned to
remain calm and exercise restraint in order to prevent
misunderstandings and misjudgements and prevent a
further escalation of the situation.
Secondly, we should work together to prevent
nuclear risks. There should be no room for trial-anderror when it comes to nuclear safety, security and
safeguards related to public health and environmental
safety in Ukraine and its neighbouring regions. All
the parties concerned should exercise restraint and
prudence, strictly abide by nuclear safety conventions
and other international law, ensure the safety of nuclear
materials and facilities in Ukraine and do their utmost
to avert any possible nuclear risk.
China supports the International Atomic Energy
Agency in fulfilling its responsibilities according to its
mandate and playing an active role in nuclear safety
issues. China has always maintained that a nuclear
war cannot be won and must never be fought. We took
note of Russia’s recent statement reiterating the joint
declaration made on 3 January by the leaders of the
five nuclear-weapon States on preventing nuclear war
and avoiding arms races. The international community
should work together to maintain global strategic
stability, make every effort to prevent a confrontation
between the major Powers, emphasize that nuclear
weapons must never be used and that a nuclear war
must never be fought and prevent a nuclear crisis on the
Eurasian continent.
Thirdly, we should work together to improve the
humanitarian situation. China is deeply concerned
about the continuing deterioration of the humanitarian
situation in Ukraine and deeply sympathizes with the
people of Ukraine and the surrounding areas given the
difficulties they are going through. We call on all the
parties concerned to earnestly abide by international
humanitarian law, make every effort to prevent attacks
on civilians and civilian facilities, minimize civilian
casualties and the impact on people’s basic livelihoods
and do everything possible to prevent larger-scale
humanitarian crises.

S/PV.9195

This winter will be very difficult for the
people affected in the countries concerned and the
neighbouring regions. The international community
and humanitarian agencies should continue to scale up
humanitarian relief efforts to assist Ukraine in order
to help relieve the humanitarian pressure, improve the
humanitarian situation in Ukraine and its neighbouring
regions and ensure that all refugees, displaced persons
and other people in need can be properly resettled and
safely survive the winter.
Fourthly, we should work together to mitigate the
spillover effects of the crisis. The Black Sea Grain
Initiative has contributed positively to alleviating the
global food crisis. China welcomes the call for all the
parties to adhere to humanitarian principles and focus
on the overall situation by resuming the implementation
of the Initiative. China calls on all the parties to
maintain cooperation and dialogue in order to reach a
proper solution for the extension of the Initiative. China
supports the coordinating role that the SecretaryGeneral and his team continue to play in resolving
Russia’s difficulties in exporting grains and fertilizers.
We call on the parties concerned to take robust
measures to eliminate the negative impact of sanctions.
It is urgent for the international community to manage
the huge impact of the Ukraine crisis on global energy,
food and financing, as well as its impacts in other
areas. Sweeping and indiscriminate sanctions disrupt
global industrial and supply chains, undermine the
momentum of global economic recovery and damage
the economic and financial stability of developing
countries. Immediate action must be taken to rectify
that approach.
The world today is undergoing profound changes
unseen in a century. The Ukraine crisis and its spillover
effects, which represent the starkest example of those
changes, highlight the major challenges that face
human development. What is wrong with the world,
and what should we do about it? That is the question
of our time that every country faces. At the Group of
20 leaders’ summit, which just concluded, President Xi
Jinping, demonstrating profound insight into the future
of humankind from a historical and global perspective,
put forward a series of initiatives and proposals that
are critical for guiding actors in addressing the current
global challenges.
China calls on all countries to foster a sense of
community based on a shared future for humankind
and to promote peaceful development and a win-win

22-6959113/24

S/PV.9195

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

approach to cooperation. All countries should opt
for unity instead of division, cooperation instead of
confrontation and inclusion instead of exclusion. All
countries should continue to work together to overcome
difficulties and create a better future. China firmly
opposes drawing ideological lines, the Cold War
mentality, group politics and bloc confrontation. We
reject beggar-thy-neighbour practices, building small
yards with high fences and creating closed and exclusive
clubs. China also opposes any attempts to politicize
economic and livelihood issues or using them as tools
and weapons. China stands ready to work with the rest
of the world and will continue working tirelessly to
address global challenges and build a community based
on a shared future for humankind.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo for her very useful briefing.
Yesterday the Russian army inflicted massive
waves of missile strikes on Ukraine, with civilian
casualties. And in Poland, we saw an explosion
resulting in the tragic loss of Polish lives. We are in
close contact with our allies and partners and support
the ongoing investigation.
What we do know, however, is that this would
not have happened were it not for Russia’s illegal
war on Ukraine. One only needs to look to Kherson
to see further evidence of its brutal campaign against
civilians. We see the atrocities and destruction in the
wake of Russia’s forced retreat. They did what they
could to make the situation as difficult as possible
for the civilian population, destroying water, heat
and electricity supplies. And they continue those
tactics across the country. With winter approaching,
the number of casualties and displaced persons could
accelerate. Children, the elderly and other people in
highly vulnerable situations are particularly at risk.
We call for safe, rapid and unimpeded access for
humanitarian organizations to all people in need,
including prisoners of war. We commend the United
Nations, the International Committee of the Red Cross
and other humanitarian organizations for staying and
delivering a principled humanitarian response under
very challenging circumstances. We also commend the
courageous and committed Ukrainian responders. We
also reiterate our demand that all civilians be protected.
International humanitarian law and international human
rights law must be fully respected and implemented.
International law applies to all nations. It is not optional.
14/24

16/11/2022

The suffering and atrocities committed by
Russian armed forces have shocked the whole world.
The consequences are felt globally. Russia’s war of
aggression is causing a refugee tragedy with a regional
impact. It is destabilizing financial markets and supply
chains and disrupting global energy security.
The world’s most vulnerable people and countries
depend on a steady supply of food from Ukraine
and Russia to global markets. It is essential to keep
a transportation line open for the export of grain,
related foodstuffs and fertilizers, including ammonia.
Considering the dire global consequences, we trust
that the parties will stay committed to the Black Sea
Grain Initiative and that those life-saving shipments
will continue.
Russia’s war of aggression demonstrates its
disregard for the core principles of our Organization
and the suffering of millions of people in the wake of
this war. As members of the Security Council, it is
our duty to set a different course. As the SecretaryGeneral has emphasized, we have the values and
principles necessary to chart that course. They are
already enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.
When the time comes, we will stand firmly with the
Secretary-General in efforts to build and sustain peace
in Ukraine.
We will work actively to ensure that the Council
remains vigilant of the situation in Ukraine and able to
address a host of other conflicts on its agenda. Let me end
by repeating something we have said numerous times
before, yet it cannot be said often enough — through its
aggression and actions, the Russian Federation is acting
with blatant disregard for international law. Russia must
immediately heed the ruling of the International Court
of Justice and the calls of the United Nations to suspend
its military operations within Ukraine’s internationally
recognized borders and to stop the senseless bloodshed
and global suffering.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to our Albanian and American
colleagues for calling today’s meeting. It is true that
they requested it last week without even stating the
topic of the meeting. As we now see, they demonstrated
remarkable farsightedness. Had this meeting not been
scheduled, we would have needed to convene it in
order to discuss the attempts by Ukraine and Poland to
provoke a direct clash between Russia and NATO.
22-69591

16/11/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

The totally irresponsible statements made by the
leaders of these two countries cannot be interpreted
any other way. Take for example the statement by
Mr. Zelenskyy:
“We must put the terrorist in his place. The longer
Russia feels impunity, the greater the threats for
anyone within the range of Russian missiles. A
missile strike on NATO territory is a Russian
missile strike on collective security. This is a very
significant escalation. We must act.”
Then Zelenskyy expressed condolences to Poland
in connection with the people killed as a result of the
Russian missile attack, while stating that “Russia kills
everyone it can reach”.
I would like to draw the attention of colleagues to the
fact that these are statements made by a man who could
not but have access to information that it was Ukrainian
missiles launched by Ukraine air defence systems that
crossed into Polish territory. That means that this is
not just an intentional attempt at disinformation, but a
conscious attempt to involve NATO, which is waging
a proxy war with Russia in Ukraine, into a direct
confrontation with our country.
The Russophobic Polish authorities went almost as
far, as they stated unequivocally from the very start that
they had suffered a Russian attack. The Foreign Ministry
of Poland even summoned the Russian Ambassador in
the middle of the night to register their resolute protest.
That happened despite the fact that the photos posted
on social media in the wake of the event leave no doubt
that it was Ukrainian air defence missiles that crossed
into Poland. That fact has now been confirmed even by
NATO and globally in the West.
Had it not been for that evidence, all these facts
would have been concealed from the public and Russia
would have been proclaimed the guilty party. But it is
hard to deny the obvious. That is just like the Ukrainian
armed forces strike on Kramatorsk on 8 April, which
Ukraine tried to pass off as a Russian crime, but
photos by eyewitnesses prevented this deliberate and
cruel provocation. Our former Western partners do
not like to recall that incident, and the Kyiv regime
has since introduced penalties for everyone who posts
materials on social media showing the consequences of
any military strikes. They do so to prevent Ukrainian
citizens from inadvertently thwarting the provocations
of their authorities.

S/PV.9195

Returning to this tragic incident. I cannot fail to
mention that Ukrainian air defences have long had a
bad reputation, at least since the time in October 2001,
when a Russian civilian aircraft en route from Tel
Aviv to Novosibirsk was shot down above the Black
Sea during a military exercise. That accident claimed
78 lives. Many also recall the tragedy when Malaysia
Airlines Flight MH-17 was shot down over Donbas. The
so-called international investigators, Ukraine included,
never even considered the possibility that it might have
been responsible for that disaster. And in recent months,
we have regularly seen footage of Ukrainian air defence
missiles hitting residential buildings, which were used
to conceal those systems. These are clumsy attempts
to pass off those incidents as consequences of Russian
strikes carried out with high-precision weapons against
military targets and critical infrastructure, while
failing to mention that, in case of a direct hit by such
high-precision weapons, there would have been nothing
left of those homes.
We long ago stopped being surprised by the attempts
to blame Russia for everything in all circumstances and
contrary to all facts and common sense. So it is today
too, where, despite clear evidence of Ukrainian-Polish
provocation, many representatives of Western States
indicated in their remarks that, even if the missiles
had been launched by Ukraine, it was Russia’s fault
all the same for destroying critical infrastructure.
The flawed nature of that logic is clearly evident in
the irresponsible shelling of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear
power plant, which, as everyone here is well aware,
Ukraine is behind.
Some Council members reiterated their favourite
cunning mantra: had it not been for Russia, we would
not be where we are. I once again recall that we would
not be where we are had there not been a deadly
unconstitutional coup d’état in Kyiv in 2014, with the
direct involvement of several Western States. From
the very beginning, the leaders of that coup set out
to distort history and suppress the Russian language,
thereby provoking a violent internal civil conflict. We
would not be discussing any of this now if they had
not indulged the Kyiv regime in its unwillingness to
implement the Minsk agreements and had not covered
up its eight-year war against the people of Donbas. In
that case, we would not have needed to start our special
military operation to protect those people.
If States had not interfered and supplied Ukraine
with weapons and ammunition, if they had encouraged

22-6959115/24

S/PV.9195

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

the Ukrainian leadership to seek peace on realistic
terms, rather than indulging its delirious fantasies
about the possibility of victory over Russia, for the
sake of which the Zelenskyy regime is sending tens
of thousands of soldiers into a senseless slaughter, and
if they had not ignored the terrorist attacks against
Russia by Ukrainian special forces, we would not
have had to launch high-precision strikes against its
infrastructure. But since they are acting in the way in
which they are, and since the Kyiv regime takes credit
for non-existent military achievements, we have to
pursue the objectives of the special military operation
by weakening Ukraine’s military potential, which has
been mostly maintained owing to the abundant flow of
Western weapons.
We became accustomed to Ukraine being beyond
any criticism. Any crimes committed by the Kyiv
regime are by default ignored or attributed to Russia.
We are already used to the detestable fakes about
Russia and its armed forces. I will ask those States one
question, which is of course rhetorical: have any of them
ever commented on the reprisals and atrocities that the
Kyiv regime inflicts on civilians in the territories under
its control, on the names that it calls them and on the
torture to which Kyiv subjects them? That is happening
now in Kherson, and, prior to that, it happened in other
cities and localities. All that is in the public domain.
I will answer for them: no, because all that is beyond
their horizon and their arbitrary conscience. When
they criticize someone, they should look in the mirror.
They should not forget how arrogantly they dismissed
the proposals to discuss issues of European security,
clinging on to NATO’s so-called sacred right to expand
without regard for the concerns of other countries.
Since we are all gathered here, let me recall the
involvement of NATO countries in the Ukrainian
conflict. They continue to flood Ukraine with weapons,
sending whole teams of instructors and foreign
mercenaries to operate them. At the same time, the
United States military has become actively engaged in
the planning and de facto coordination of armed action,
to which even the Pentagon recently officially admitted.
We have no doubts about the use of Western
military equipment, which is being used to target
civilian facilities. In the past week alone, the central
districts and residential areas of Donetsk, Yasynuvata,
Stakhanov, Svatove and other locations, as well as even
towns in Russia’s Belgorod region, were subjected
to repeated shelling, including with High Mobility
16/24

16/11/2022

Artillery Rocket System multiple rocket launchers.
Strikes continue against the Kakhovka hydroelectric
power plant, the destruction of which would trigger a
major humanitarian disaster.
We do not have any illusions as to why the West
needs this. For it, Ukraine is also a testing site for
various types of weapons. Ukrainian Minister of
Defence Reznikov recently admitted that when he said
that various Western weapons systems were competing
in Ukraine.
We are very surprised at the attempts of our
Western colleagues to take credit for exporting Russian
fertilizers to developing States through the World
Food Programme (WFP). The President of France,
Emmanuel Macron, announced that the channel for
deliveries had allegedly been established thanks to the
efforts of France and the WFP. He used the pronoun
“we”. We heard similar claims from other Western
delegations today. I would like to know who that “we”
refers to. I recall that we are talking about fertilizers
that Western States kept on their territories and that
Russia itself offered to transfer to developing countries.
The West, in particular the European Union (EU), not
only failed to facilitate that, but actively opposed it.
Now it hypocritically poses as a saviour of developing
countries. Once again, the Russian fertilizers that are
going to Africa were previously frozen in European
ports because of the EU’s sanctions policy. Russia itself
offered to send them to countries in need free of charge.
That is exactly what happens now through the WFP,
and we are paying for those services.
It would be naive to think that all Western military
and financial support to Ukraine is used as intended.
We cited quite a lot of evidence as to how a significant
proportion of those weapons ended up in the hands
of terrorists and criminals, fuelling conflicts across
the world, and how a huge amount of resources are
simply plundered. It now seems that the suppliers of
that so-called assistance are finally beginning to think
about that.
On 7 November, a group of American experts was
sent to Ukraine to verify the supply of weapons to Kyiv.
It turned out that the United States was in control of
only a tenth of it, that is, 22,000 items. The fate of the
other weapons remains unclear.
At the same time, the bankruptcy of the largest
American cryptoexchange, FTX, and the literal
disappearance of its billion-dollar assets have revealed
22-69591

16/11/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

interesting facts about its contacts with the Ukrainian
Government. Meanwhile, the founder and owner of
FTX is one of the major donors to the United States
Democratic Party, which plays a key role in allocating
funds to Kyiv. We are not surprised by those schemes,
which surely might seem surprising to American
taxpayers.
The timid voices of reason, including from the
West, are drowning in the aggressive uproar of those
who seek to prolong the hostilities at all costs and
defeat Russia with the help of Ukraine. For example,
NATO Secretary-General Stoltenberg said that the
Alliance considered unacceptable any contacts aimed
at a settlement that took into account Russia’s position
and interests. In an article, the former United States
Special Representative to Ukraine, Volker, made the
normalization of relations between Russia and the
West conditional on our military defeat, a change
in our leadership and the reconsideration of our
current borders.
Western countries are trying to shift responsibility
for all their faults onto Russia, while using the platform
of this world Organization for their own self-serving
purposes. That was clearly visible on Monday,
14 November, during the debate at the special session
of the General Assembly (see A/ES-11/PV.15 and
A/ES-11/PV.16). Western sponsors of resolution ES11/5, on so-called reparations, failed to explain, even
in general terms, what kind of a reparations mechanism
for Ukraine they intended to establish. Instead, they
just made developing States support a legally flawed
politicized text aimed at illegally legitimizing the
expropriation of someone else’s assets. But this time,
even the Western intimidation, coercion and blackmail
campagin clearly failed. The results of the voting,
whereby more than half the Member States refused to
support the West’s latest anti-Russian narrative, are
self-explanatory. For most countries, including those
that were forced to vote in favour of the resolution,
the double standards of our Western colleagues are
obvious, as is their unwillingness to be accountable
for their wrongdoings — slavery, colonialism, military
invasions, blockades, sanctions and their desire to
counter international law with a so-called rules-based
order in which they themselves set the rules.
The developing world has once again become
convinced that the Ukrainian crisis is only a
bargaining chip in Western plans, a tool to punish the
unwanted, subjugate subordinates and try to maintain

S/PV.9195

their vanishing global dominance in an evolving
multipolar world.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Ghana.
I thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary
DiCarlo for her comprehensive briefing and assessment
of the security and humanitarian situations in Ukraine.
At the outset, I reaffirm Ghana’s complete
commitment to the sovereignty, political independence
and territorial integrity of Ukraine. We reiterate our
support for all legitimate international efforts aimed at
restoring Ukraine to a state of peace.
The question of global food security is critical.
During the most recent meeting of the Council on
Ukraine (see S/PV.9161), many delegations showed
strong support for the continuity of the Black Sea Grain
Initiative. We are pleased that the Russian Federation has
since reconsidered the suspension of its participation in
the Initiative, which has recorded more than 10 million
metric tons of grain shipments across the world. The
active leadership of the Secretary-General and the
Government of Türkiye have been key to the effective
operationalization of the Initiative, and we remain
supportive of their efforts in this regard. As the 120-day
Initiative draws to a close on 19 November, we count on
the good-faith commitments of all stakeholders for the
timely renewal of the grain deal.
The almost 100 million people who suffer from
high levels of food insecurity is an unacceptable reality.
We urge that their condition be at the forefront of
discussions to ensure unhindered global food supplies.
We also urge that pragmatic measures to address
impediments to the export of Russian fertilizers and
agroproducts be adopted. We must prevent the further
worsening of food insecurity in the coming months.
On the deteriorating security and humanitarian
situations, Ghana remains deeply concerned by the
intensified missile and drone attacks in several cities
of Ukraine, including, renewed attacks on Kyiv,
Kharkiv and Lviv yesterday. The unrelenting assault
on Ukraine’s already-battered energy infrastructure
just before the upcoming winter season threatens the
livelihood of many civilians. Many homes, schools
and medical facilities also have no heating or access
to potable water. Typical of all conflict situations,
the women, children and vulnerable persons, most of
whom are either displaced or sheltering in bunkers,
have become the worst victims of this war.

22-6959117/24

S/PV.9195

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

The attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure
reveal the worst form of our common humanity and
may constitute serious violations of international law.
It departs from the accepted norms and the customary
principles of conventional warfare codified in the
Geneva Conventions of 1949 and the Additional Protocol
relating to the protection of victims of international
armed conflicts. Ghana therefore reiterates its call
on the parties to bring their forces into accord with
international law, including international humanitarian
law and human rights law.
We are gravely alarmed by the emerging reports
of possible war crimes in the city of Kherson and
maintain the principled position that such claims,
including human rights violations and conflict-related
sexual violence, be submitted to thorough, transparent
and independent investigations. Together with the
international community, the Security Council must
work collectively to avoid impunity in Ukraine and
secure justice for all victims of the war.
We note with satisfaction the ongoing humanitarian
efforts, including the distribution of cash, food and
non-food items, medical outreach and water, sanitation
and hygiene services. In commending the United
Nations humanitarian agencies and partners for the
life-saving support provided since the beginning of the
war, we also stress the need for such efforts to be guided
by the fundamental principles of humanity, neutrality,
impartiality and independence.
While welcoming the elevated humanitarian
efforts, we deem it necessary to point out that
humanitarian assistance only offers temporary relief
and is insufficient to protect civilians from harm.
Humanitarian assistance cannot be a substitute
for a comprehensive and lasting resolution of the
conflict. We therefore reiterate our call on the Russian
Federation to immediately and unconditionally cease
its aggression against Ukraine consistent with the rules
of international law and the purposes and principles of
the United Nations Charter and to seek a resolution of
its concerns through diplomacy and dialogue.
Yesterday’s Polish missile incident and the
experience of history remind us of the risk that the
continuation of this unnecessary war poses in its
further spread. The scenes from the city of Kherson are
telling signs of how much the people desire an end to
the war, an end to the strife and the beginning of a new
chapter of peace, reconciliation and reconstruction. The
Council must therefore support all efforts for peace.
18/24

16/11/2022

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I thank UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing. I am
sure that it is difficult, if not painful, to deliver such
a tragic account of the situation on the ground. I am
also profoundly thankful to our friend and colleague,
the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America, Mrs. Linda Thomas-Greenfield, for sharing
her personal experience on meeting some of the victims
of Russian war crimes in Ukraine.
We believe that every member of the Council ought
to visit Ukraine. Each one is welcome — each one
except Russia, which must immediately leave Ukraine,
stop the carnage and cease making a cannon-fodder
production line of its own people.
I also recognize in this Chamber the representative
of the terrorist Russian regime in the permanent seat of
the Soviet Union. What a mockery of peace efforts it is
that terrorists are still at the table on an equal footing
with 14 members of the Security Council one day after
the gravest attack on Ukraine’s critical infrastructure.
While temperatures in Ukraine start to drop below
freezing, these terrorists aim to deprive Ukrainians of
electricity, water and heating.
More than 90 missiles targeted energy facilities
and other civilian infrastructure in at least 11 regions
of Ukraine. As a result, approximately 10 million
Ukrainians throughout the country have been affected
by emergency blackouts.
Ukraine expresses its solidarity with the brotherly
Polish people following yesterday’s tragedy in the
village of Przewodów, where two people were killed by
missiles. We support a full and transparent investigation
to establish all the facts of this tragic incident, and we
are ready to cooperate with the Polish side to contribute
to this investigation.
At the same time, it is clear that the Russian war
of aggression against Ukraine, with regular missile
terror as one of its core elements, remains the only root
cause of violence and human suffering in Ukraine and
beyond. As soon as Russia is unable to continue its war,
security in the region will immediately be restored.
Ukraine is now defending itself from barbaric
Russian attacks that aim to deprive millions of people
of access to services to meet their basic needs, thereby
22-69591

16/11/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

creating a humanitarian disaster that could create
spillover effects far beyond my country. We are grateful
for the support of our friends, in particular Poland,
in countering these attacks and bringing peace and
security back to our region.
Russia commits its abominable attacks against
civilians because it is the only kind of revenge it can
take for its regular military and diplomatic defeats.
Last week, Ukraine restored its sovereignty over 4,500
square kilometres in the Kherson and Mykolaiv regions.
The Russian forces were kicked out of the only regional
centre they had been able to occupy since the invasion
began. Members may have seen touching pictures of
how the local people, who spent eight months under
occupation and endured much suffering at the hands
of the Russians, greeted their liberators on the streets
of Kherson and other de-occupied settlements. Eight
months ago, when the Russian occupying forces
entered Kherson, the city’s residents were also in the
streets. While the atmosphere was totally different,
there were some similarities to the joyful rallies this
month. The Russian occupiers were also met with
Ukrainian flags, the Ukrainian national anthem and the
slogan “Kherson is Ukraine”. It is a sad fact that many
of those residents did not live to see the de-occupation.
Fleeing from the right bank of the Dnipro River, the
Russian army left behind traces of the same atrocities
that it had committed in other regions. Investigators
have already documented more than 400 Russian war
crimes and have found the bodies of both civilians and
military personnel.
There is nothing for Russian diplomacy to boast
about either, except perhaps the sprinting skills that
Putin’s representative has been regularly developing
by promptly fleeing the Chamber. I do appreciate the
fact that he is here today. Russian diplomacy did not
and could not find any credible argument in response
to the General Assembly’s adoption of resolution ES11/5, for the “furtherance of remedy and reparation
for aggression against Ukraine”. We welcome that
resolution, which is a clear message of hope for justice
and an important first step towards accountability.
We have recently heard a number of statements
from the Russians on the issue of negotiations and
dialogue. One can hardly comment on the sincerity of
those statements against the backdrop of the nine dozen
missiles that fell on Ukrainian civilian infrastructure in
one day. If there is no concrete action to restore peace,
it means that Russia simply wants to deceive all of us

S/PV.9195

again. Russia wants to buy time, build up its forces
and then launch another wave of aggression, terror
and global destabilization. We must not allow it to
recharge. It is time to stop the war before the situation
finally spirals in a menacing direction and becomes
unpredictable and uncontrolled. We should remember
the steps that President Zelenskyy outlined in his
address to the Summit of the Group of 20, or rather the
Group of 19.
The first step that should be taken is ensuring
radiation and nuclear safety. Russia must immediately
withdraw all its militants from the territory of the
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant. Control of the station
should be immediately transferred to the International
Atomic Energy Agency and Ukrainian personnel.
Second, there should also be a focus on food
security. Thanks to the strong support of the United
Nations, Türkiye and other partners, we have been able
to improve food security globally. Since July, Ukraine
has exported more than 10 million tons of foodstuffs by
sea. In order to increase our exports by several million
tons per month, we propose expanding the grain export
initiative to other ports, in particular the ports of
Mykolayiv and Olvia in the Mykolayiv region. Ukraine
has also launched the Grain from Ukraine initiative to
support the most vulnerable. The first ship under that
initiative, carrying 27,000 tons of wheat, will leave
for Ethiopia. Ethiopia has continued to vote against
Ukraine in the United Nations, but we have nevertheless
continued to ship our grain there. Ukraine can export
45 million tons of foodstuffs this year, and any country
can join and contribute to ensuring that Ukrainian grain
is supplied to those in need and that a significant part of
it is directed to those who are suffering the most.
The third step concerns energy security. Russia’s
acts of terror against Ukrainian energy infrastructure
also aim to prevent us from exporting our electricity to
our neighbours. While Russia is interested in an energy
crisis, we should all be interested in ending terror. I
thank all our partners that have already helped Ukraine
with the supply of air-defence and missile-defence
systems. They work, but we need more to ensure full
protection from Russian terrorists. We are ready to
receive a mission of United Nations experts to examine
Ukraine’s critical energy infrastructure objects in
order to assess the scale of the damage and what is
needed to restore them, as well as to prevent their
further destruction.

22-6959119/24

S/PV.9195

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

The fourth critical step is the release of all prisoners
and deportees. Thousands of our people, both military
personnel and civilians, are in Russian captivity and
being subjected to brutal torture. Russia also continues
to hold at least 11, 000 children who have been forcibly
deported to Russia. The only viable solution is the
release of prisoners on an all-for-all basis.
Fifth, the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations must be fully respected. Ukraine is not prepared
to compromise its sovereignty and territorial integrity
within its internationally recognized borders.
Sixth, Russian troops must withdraw from the
territory of Ukraine and Ukraine’s control over all
sections of its State border with Russia must be restored.
That will result in a real and complete cessation
of hostilities.
Seventh, justice should immediately come next.
When we liberate our lands, we are seeing one thing
everywhere, which is that Russia leaves behind torture
chambers and the mass graves of the people it has
murdered. That was the case in Bucha and other cities
in northern Ukraine after their occupation. That was
also the case in the Kharkiv region, and we are seeing
the same thing now in the Kherson region.
The eighth step is that we need to immediately
protect the environment. Millions of hectares of forest
have been burned by shelling. Almost 200,000 hectares
of our land are contaminated with unexploded mines
and shells. Dozens of coal mines are flooded. At the
twenty-seventh session of the Conference of the Parties
to the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change, which was just held in Egypt, Ukraine
therefore proposed to create a platform to assess the
environmental damage of the war.
The ninth step is preventing escalation. Ukraine
requires effective security assurances, which should be
an integral element of the post-war security architecture
in the Euro-Atlantic space. Those guarantees could be
formalized in the Kyiv security compact, a draft of
which has been already formulated by Ukraine.
The final step will be a confirmation of the
end of the war. When all the anti-war measures are
implemented and security and justice begin to be
restored, a document confirming the end of the war
should be signed by the parties.
It seems that since our meetings in October,
Russia has levelled up with regard to its definition
20/24

16/11/2022

of its enemies in the war. Last time, as members will
remember, there were war mosquitoes and birds. As
we recently learned, Russia is now trying “to stop the
supreme ruler of hell, whatever name he uses — Satan,
Lucifer or Iblis”. In this fight, Russia’s enemies are
backed by Westerners who have “saliva running down
their chins from degeneracy”. Who do those quotations
belong to? An inebriated person? A narrow-minded fan
of Nazi ideas about superior nations and degenerate
nations? They actually belong to the former Russian
President Dmitriy Medvedev, now Putin’s deputy in the
Russian security council.
I wonder why the Russian delegation refrained
from delivering that important update to the Council.
Perhaps we should prepare for another urgent Council
meeting as soon as Russia finds those who can brief
the Council on how to exorcize demons. It would be
a logical continuation of both Russia’s attempts to
discredit the Security Council and the process of
internal moral degradation of the Kremlin.
Unfortunately, those morbid reflections have led
to the deaths of tens of thousands of people in the
bloodiest war in Europe since the Second World War.
Russia must be stopped — and thanks to the courage of
the Ukrainian army, the commitment of the Ukrainian
people and international solidarity with Ukraine,
Russia will be stopped.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland.
Mr. Szczerski (Poland): Allow me to start by
providing the Security Council with some additional
details about yesterday’s tragic event in Poland. On
15 November at approximately 3.30 p.m., during yet
another massive wave of missile strikes by Russian
forces against critical civilian infrastructure throughout
the whole of Ukraine, including in the immediate
vicinity of the territory of Poland, two Polish citizens
lost their lives in the Polish village of Przewodów,
about 5 kilometres from the Polish-Ukrainian border.
The apparent cause of their deaths was the explosion
from a missile that fell on that location, which has no
military character whatsoever.
I would like to express our deepest gratitude
for the gestures of solidarity, including those heard
today, that Poland continues to receive from all over
the world with regard to that tragic event. No matter
what may have been the particular course of events
in Przewodów that fatal afternoon, those innocent
22-69591

16/11/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

people would not have been killed if there had been no
Russian war against Ukraine. Their only fault was the
fact that they lived close to the Ukrainian border, near
civilian infrastructure that Russia continues to attack
as military targets.
Yesterday’s sad event teaches us how close we
actually live to a potential escalation and spillover
of the Russian war of aggression, with far-reaching
consequences that we can all foresee. Bearing that
in mind, Poland decided to act with full restraint and
responsibility. We immediately launched an extensive,
multifaceted investigation aimed at explaining all the
details of the incident. The earliest initial findings
support the hypothesis that the event was not a
deliberate attack, but of course we need to wait for the
final conclusions once the investigation is over.
Poland is also conducting intensive consultations
on the incident with its NATO allies and key partners. A
decision was furthermore made to increase the combat
readiness of selected units of the Polish Armed Forces,
with particular emphasis on air space monitoring. We
wish to assure the whole international community of
the transparency of the ongoing investigation and of
the guarantees of collective security that Poland will
continue to provide to the region, both as an individual
country and as part of NATO, which remains a defensive
alliance. We understand our responsibilities, and that
is why Poland will remain a stronghold of peace and
security and stability in the region.
It is clear that Russia is to blame for menacing
the world with a war of aggression and its spillover
effects, including yesterday’s tragic incident in Poland.
The launch of yesterday’s missile attacks against
Ukraine — the fiercest since the beginning of the
war — required significant military preparations.
Despite its recent setbacks on the battlefield, Moscow
clearly did not change its goals. It still wants to erase
sovereign Ukraine from the map and cause innocent
people to suffer. That evidently shows Russia’s
absolute lack of will to embark on a path leading to a
resolution of the conflict it has created. Russia pretends
to be ready for talks but in reality carries out barbaric
attacks against the civilian population and energy
infrastructure of Ukraine.
The current situation will not change our approach.
Poland believes it is crucial to continue supporting
Ukraine, as it has done since the very beginning of
the war. We approach it in a multidimensional way,

S/PV.9195

by providing aid both in Ukraine and within our own
territory. We will continue on that path.
The total estimated value of Polish aid given
in 2022 to Ukrainian refugees by both individuals
and local and State authorities amounts to more
than $5.5 billion dollars — about 1 per cent of
Poland’s gross domestic product (GDP). According
to the estimates of the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development, Poland will have spent
a total of $8.5 billion in 2022 — almost 1.5 per cent
of its GDP — on humanitarian and military assistance,
making it one of the major donors to Ukraine.
As we heard today, the most urgent humanitarian
issue that we need to focus on currently is the
approaching winter. Due to Russian bombings, over
3.5 million people have been left without a roof over
their heads. The priority is to create shelter for those
people. Russian forces continuously attack Ukrainian
energy infrastructure in a deliberate attempt to
aggravate the humanitarian crisis. Their goal is
probably also to cause another wave of refugees,
which is calculated to destabilize the situation in host
countries, including Poland.
Russian imperialism needs to be treated for what it
really is: a global threat with far-reaching consequences.
That global threat needs to be neutralized before it
plunges the whole world further into chaos. The war
needs to end with a just peace. It needs to end on
terms that are acceptable to Ukraine. The aggressor
cannot benefit from its aggression. Instead, we need
accountability for the war atrocities and damages it has
inflicted. Therefore, Poland welcomes the resolution
adopted by the General Assembly last week on the
creation of a register as a mechanism to document
damages (General Assembly resolution ES-11/5). We
see that as a first step in the right direction.
In conclusion, we once again call on all States
that stand on the side of international law to take all
necessary steps to persuade Russia to stop its aggression
and withdraw from Ukrainian territory. That is the only
way to prevent further death, injury and devastation.
It is the only way to stop escalation of the large-scale
humanitarian and human rights crisis that continues to
take the lives of innocent civilians.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Estonia.

22-6959121/24

S/PV.9195

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Mr. Tammsaar (Estonia): I speak on behalf of the
three Baltic States, namely, Latvia, Lithuania and my
own country, Estonia.
We thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her
most valuable briefing.
Allow me to start by commending the immense
bravery of the Ukrainian defence forces, who after
months of Russian occupation took back control of
Kherson on Friday. There is no doubt that, sooner or
later, Ukraine will liberate all the occupied territories
within its internationally recognized borders. Those
territories are Ukrainian, and Ukraine has every right
to defend them in full accordance with Article 51 of
the Charter of the United Nations. We are steadfast in
supporting Ukraine’s efforts for as long as it takes and
will continue providing strong political, military and
financial support to Ukraine.
Russian missiles hitting critical infrastructure and
residential buildings in Kyiv and a number of other
Ukrainian cities yesterday once again proves that
Russia is not interested in peace. During the heaviest
wave of missile strikes against Ukraine since February,
two Polish citizens lost their lives in an explosion that
took place in the east of Poland. Allow me to extend
my deepest condolences to the families of those who
tragically lost their lives due to that barbaric attack.
Notwithstanding the ongoing investigations, it
is clear that Russia alone bears responsibility for the
explosion as it continues its illegal war against Ukraine.
We commend the swift actions of United
Nations humanitarian agencies, led by Humanitarian
Coordinator Ms. Denise Brown, to bring humanitarian
aid to Kherson on Monday for the first time since the
Russian forces took control of the city. As in other
liberated areas, the Russian army left behind a trail of
atrocity crimes in Kherson. The city was left without
water, heat, electricity and communications. We urge
Russia to give humanitarian organizations access
to areas currently under Russian occupation so that
the necessary emergency assistance can reach all in
need in Ukraine. The winter is fast approaching in
Ukraine, with temperatures expected to fall well below
freezing point. By using missiles and Iranian-supplied
drones, Russia’s deliberate strikes on Ukraine’s energy
facilities have by now left 7 million people without
electricity. Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania are continuing
to provide humanitarian aid to Ukraine to address the
needs worsened by the winter and by Russia’s attacks
22/24

16/11/2022

on Ukraine’s infrastructure, along with demining
assistance. We also urge Russia to give United Nations
representatives and the International Committee of the
Red Cross access to the places of detention of civilians
and military prisoners of war and to ensure access for
the United Nations Fact-Finding Mission to Olenivka.
The deportation of Ukrainian children to Russia is a
war crime. Children belong with their families and
loved ones and must be safely and immediately returned
to their homes.
Russia’s unprovoked and brutal war of aggression
against Ukraine has triggered issues of deep global
concern. Through its blockade of Ukrainian seaports
and destruction of necessary infrastructure, Russia has
caused a global food crisis and essentially weaponized
food and hunger as a means of hybrid warfare. The
Black Sea Grain Initiative, alongside the European
Union-led solidarity lanes, has therefore been
instrumental in stabilizing the global food market and
providing food to millions of people in Africa, Asia and
Europe. Russia’s statements claiming that Ukrainian
grain is reaching only European countries and that its
own grain and fertilizer shipments are prohibited by
Western sanctions are fake, as we have heard United
Nations officials attest to in the Security Council. We
praise the Secretary-General and Türkiye for all their
efforts to renew the grain deal and urge Russia to agree
to its renewal beyond 19 November and to implement it
in good faith.
We strongly condemn Russia’s irresponsible
nuclear rhetoric and its cynical accusations claiming
that Ukraine is creating a dirty bomb, accusations that
have been clearly and unequivocally refuted by the
International Atomic Energy Agency. We urge Russia
to immediately withdraw all its troops and military
equipment from the premises of the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant, which Russia is illegally
controlling, and to stop its nuclear blackmail.
Finally, it is critical to ensure that all the evidence of
crimes and violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law committed in Ukraine continues to be
collected in a manner that will hold up in independent,
impartial judicial institutions. We are determined to
ensure that all who are responsible for war or other
atrocity crimes are held to account. But as has been said,
the people who bear the greatest responsibility are those
who decided to wage an illegal war on Ukraine. The
aggressor cannot go unpunished, or others will follow
its lead. We therefore call for establishing a special
22-69591

16/11/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

tribunal to close the current jurisdictional loophole and
bring Russia’s top political and military leadership to
justice for launching an aggression against Ukraine.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Skoog.
Mr. Skoog: I thank you, Mr. President, for
convening us and for the opportunity to address the
Council this afternoon. I also thank Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo for a very comprehensive briefing.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union (EU) and its member States.
I would like to highlight the following three points
on, first, the importance of upholding international
humanitarian law; secondly, accountability for
crimes committed in Ukraine; and thirdly, the global
consequences of Russia’s war of aggression.
First, with regard to international humanitarian
law, in the past few weeks Russia has stepped up its
targeted strikes against Ukraine’s civilians and civilian
infrastructure. Yesterday saw the largest and gravest
missile attack since the start of the invasion. We
express our condolences to the families of the victims
in both Ukraine and Poland. By deliberately disrupting
energy and water supplies, Russia is trying to paralyse
Ukraine and sow despair within the population as
winter approaches. Such unacceptable actions targeting
civilians and civilian infrastructure by Russia are
unlawful and constitute war crimes. The International
Monetary Fund estimates that Ukraine may need
$4 billion a month just to keep the lights on and the
taps running. We cannot leave the Ukrainian people
in that situation. The EU is therefore undertaking
urgent rehabilitation measures to prepare for winter
and repair the energy infrastructure bombed by Russia,
as well as working on a package to ensure Ukraine’s
macroeconomic stability, maintain its essential public
services and rebuild critical infrastructure. I also
want to reiterate the importance of ensuring full
humanitarian access, including to areas not currently
under the Ukrainian Government’s control.
My second point concerns accountability. The
images from the liberation of Kherson bring both
joy and dread — joy, as the population welcomed its
liberators after eight months of brutal occupation, and
dread, as stories and evidence of cruelty and war crimes
surface, as they did in Bucha, Izyum and elsewhere. It
is of paramount importance to continue documenting
all evidence of war crimes committed throughout
Ukraine. We rely on the International Criminal Court

S/PV.9195

and the Ukrainian authorities to bring the perpetrators
to account. We acknowledge Ukraine’s efforts to secure
accountability, including for the crime of aggression.
We are accordingly examining the feasibility of various
options in order to see how to ensure full accountability
in the best possible way.
The General Assembly’s adoption on Monday
of resolution ES-11/5, recommending the creation of
a register of damages and recognizing the need for
reparations for damage is another important step in
ensuring accountability. All the victims of Russia’s
aggression deserve justice and reparation. The EU
will continue to support Ukraine in the framework
of the International Court of Justice proceedings. We
also highlight the important work of the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine
established by the Human Rights Council in that regard.
Thirdly, with regard to the global consequences,
Russia’s weaponization of food in its war against Ukraine
has rendered it solely responsible for the escalating
global food security crisis. The EU is at the forefront
of global efforts to address food insecurity, which is
affecting millions of vulnerable people, especially in
developing countries. We reiterate our strong support
to all efforts to extend the United Nations-brokered
Black Sea Grain Initiative and scale up operations
for the delivery of much-needed grain and other
foodstuffs. We commend the work of the SecretaryGeneral and the Joint Coordination Centre in Istanbul
in that regard. According to United Nations data, two
thirds of the wheat exported from Ukraine through
the Black Sea Grain Initiative has gone to developing
countries. In addition to exports by sea, 15 million
tons of agricultural goods have been exported from
Ukraine to global markets overland through the EUUkraine solidarity lanes. In order to address capacity
constraints and further facilitate export from Ukraine,
the EU has mobilized an additional €250 million.
In parallel, the EU is stepping up global food
assistance. Earlier this week, a new humanitarian aid
package of €210 million for 15 countries was announced,
bringing the EU’s overall food security support to
€8 billion between 2021 and 2024. We call on others
to follow suit and step up their humanitarian assistance
to the most vulnerable, too. I want to express in that
regard my appreciation for the solidarity and admirable
humanitarian gestures that have been announced by
several Council members, including some from very
far away.

22-6959123/24

S/PV.9195

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

President Zelenskyy stated earlier this week that his
country is ready for peace. The EU supports all genuine
and meaningful efforts to that end undertaken in full
respect for international law, including respect for
Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity. We note,
however, that Russia has not shown any indications that
it is engaging in serious and sincere diplomatic efforts.
On the contrary, it has stepped up its missile attacks on
civilian infrastructure. The EU will continue to stand
by Ukraine for as long as it takes, and we continue to
urge Russia to immediately cease all hostilities and
unconditionally withdraw all its forces and military
equipment from the entire territory of Ukraine within
its internationally recognized borders. The war would
end tomorrow if Russia withdraws, as requested by the
General Assembly.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Chatrnúch (Slovakia): Slovakia aligns
itself with the statement delivered on behalf of the
European Union.
Nearly nine months have passed since the
beginning of Russia’s unprovoked and unjustified
military aggression against Ukraine, in violation of all
fundamental values and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and international law. Despite the
many calls of the international community, the Russian
Federation remains silent and continues to justify its socalled special military operation under a false pretext
based on spreading disinformation and propaganda,
which we strongly condemn.
How can the Russian Federation continue
to persuade us that its action is justifiable under
international law? In recent months in this very Chamber
we heard the representative of Russia mention that
Ukrainian civilians have been happy to see the Russian
army allegedly liberating them from Kyiv’s influence.
But recent pictures and videos of civilians greeting the
brave Ukrainian soldiers fighting for the future of their

24/24

16/11/2022

country with open arms in the newly liberated city of
Kherson prove the exact opposite and only confirm that
the Russian Federation has tried to persuade us about
its kingdom-of-crooked-mirrors perception.
Slovakia remains gravely concerned about the
humanitarian situation in Ukraine, which unfortunately
is fast deteriorating. We remain appalled by the huge
numbers of killings of innocent civilians and attacks
on critical infrastructure, as well as the huge scale
of sexual- and gender-based violence committed by
Russian soldiers and occupants.
We deplore in the strongest terms yesterday’s
Russian missile attacks across Ukraine, which plunged
7 million homes into darkness.
How can we expect the Russian Federation to adhere
to international law and international humanitarian law,
which includes protecting innocent civilians in times of
war, when it does not guarantee the fundamental rights
of its own citizens? We were horrified by a video of
an execution by sledgehammer of a former Russian
prison inmate. Such an act is nothing other than an
arbitrary killing, with multiple violations of human
rights, including the right to life. And it is proof that
human rights are nothing but a concept to the Russian
Federation — one that it deliberately ignores.
We would also like to reiterate our concerns about
the serious effects of the Russian invasion on global
food security. It has resulted in millions of people
around the world being pushed into extreme poverty,
hunger and lack of access to food. As the Black Sea
Grain Initiative is about to expire, we strongly support
its extension.
Last but not least, Slovakia urges the Russian
Federation to listen finally to the voice of the United
Nations and implement all relevant resolutions,
including General Assembly resolution ES-11/5,
adopted on Monday.
The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m.

22-69591
