General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

94

J
PROHIBITION OF THE DEVELOPMENT, PRODUCTION,
STOCKPILING AND USE OF RADIOLOGICAL WEAPONS

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 38/ l 88 D of 20 December 1983,
l, Takes note of that part of the report of the Conference on Disarmament that deals with the question of
radiological weapons, in particular the report of the Ad
Hoe Committee on Radiological Weapons 124 and its rec­
ommendation that, in view of the fact that the Commit­
tee's mandate was not fulfilled, the Conference on Dis­
armament should re-establish the Ad Hoe Committee on
Radiological Weapons at the beginning of its 1985 session;
2. Requests the Conference on Disarmament to con­
tinue its negotiations on the subject with a view to a
prompt conclusion of its work, taking into account all pro­
posals presented to the Conference to this end, the result of
which should be submitted to the General Assembly at its
fortieth session;
3, Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
Conference on Disarmament all relevant documents relat­
ing to the discussion of all aspects of the issue by the Gen­
eral Assembly at its thirty-ninth session;
4, Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "Prohibition of the devel­
opment, production, stockpiling and use of radiological
weapons",

2. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "Question of Antarctica".
102nd plenary meeting
17 December 1984

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 38/77 of 15 December 1983,
Having considered the item entitled "Question of Antarctica",
Taking note of the study on the question of Antarc­
tica, i2s
Conscious of the increasing international awareness of
and interest in Antarctica,
Bearing in mind the Antarctic Treaty 126 and the signifi­
cance of the system it has developed,
Taking into account the debate on this item at its thirty­
ninth session, 127
Convinced of the advantages of a better knowledge of
Antarctica,
Affirming the conviction that, in the interest of all man­
kind, Antarctica should continue forever to be used exclu­
sively for peaceful purposes and that it should not become
the scene or object of international discord,
Recalling the relevant paragraphs of the Economic Dec­
laration adopted at the Seventh Conference of Heads of
State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at
New Delhi from 7 to 12 March I 983, 128
l, Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the study on the question of Antarctica;

39/153. Strengthening of security and co-operation
in the Mediterranean region
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 36/102 of 9 December 1981,
37/118 of 16 December 1982 and 38/189 of 20 December
1983,
Recognizing the importance of promoting peace, secur­
ity and co-operation in the Mediterranean region and of
strengthening further the economic, commercial and cul­
tural links in the region,
Expressing concern over persistent and increasing ten­
sion in parts of the Mediterranean region and the conse­
quent threat to peace,
Considering, in this regard, the urgency for all States to
conform in their actions with the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, as well as with the
provisions of the Declaration on Principles of Interna­
tional Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-opera­
tion among States in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations, 129
Reaffirming the need to promote security and to
strengthen co-operation in the region, as provided for in
the Mediterranean chapter of the Final Act of the Confer­
ence on Security and Co-operation in Europe, signed at
Helsinki on 1 August 1975,
Recalling the declarations of successive meetings of non­
aligned countries concerning the Mediterranean, as well as
official declarations on, and contributions to, peace and
security in the Mediterranean region made by individual
countries,
Reaffirming the primary role of Mediterranean countries
in the promotion of security and co-operation in the Medi­
terranean region,
Taking note, in this connection, of the conclusion of the
meeting of the Mediterranean members of the movement
of non-aligned countries, held at Valletta on 10 and 11
September 1984, 130 and of the commitments assumed by
the participants with the objective of contributing to peace
and security in the region,
Taking note also of the debate on this item during the
various sessions of the General Assembly and, in particu­
lar, of the report of the Secretary-General on this item, 131
I . Reaffirms:
(a) That the security of the Mediterranean is closely
linked with European security and with international
peace and security;
(b) That further efforts are necessary for the reduction
of tension and of armaments and for the creation of condi­
tions of security and fruitful co-operation in all fields for
all countries and peoples of the Mediterranean, on the
basis of the principles of sovereignty, independence, terri­
torial integrity, security, non-intervention and non-inter­
ference, non-violation of international borders, non-use of
force or threat of use of force, the inadmissibility of the
acquisition of territory by force, peaceful settlement of dis-

124 0/frcia/ Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-ninth Sessum. Suppi<•­
ment No. 27 (A/39/27), para. I 20.

I 23.

102nd plenary meeting
17 December 1984

39/152. Question of Antarctica

125 A/39/583 (Part I) and Corr. I and 2 and A/39/583 (Part II) and Corr. I.
vols. I-III.
126 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 402, No. 5778, p. 72.
127 Official Records of the General Assemhly. Thirty-ninth Sessum. First
Committee, 50th and 52nd to 55th meetings

128 A/38/132-S/ 1567 5 and Corr. I and 2, annex, sect. III, paras. I22 and
129 Resolution 2625 1XXV), annex.
130see A/39/526-S/16758 and Corr.I, annex.
1 JI A/39/517 and Add. I and Add. I !Corr. I.

III.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

putes and respect for permanent sovereignty over natural
resources;
(c) The need for just and viable solutions of existing
problems and crises in the area on the basis of the provi­
sions of the Charter and of relevant resolutions of the
United Nations, the withdrawal of foreign forces of occu­
pation and the right of peoples under colonial or foreign
domination to self-determination and independence;
2. Welcomes any further communication to the Secre­
tary-General, from all States, of proposals, declarations
and recommendations on strengthening peace, security
and co-operation in the Mediterranean region;
3. Urges all States to co-operate with the Mediterra­
nean States in the further efforts required to reduce tension
and promote peace, security and co-operation in the region
in accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and with the provisions of
the Declaration on Principles of International Law con­
cerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States
in accordance with the Charter;
4. Encourages once again efforts to intensify existing
forms and to promote new forms of co-operation in vari­
ous fields, particularly those aimed at reducing tension and
strengthening confidence and security in the region;
5. Renews its invitation to the Secretary-General to
give due attention to the question of peace, security and
co-operation in the Mediterranean region and, if requested
to do so, to render advice and assistance to concerted
efforts by Mediterranean countries in promoting peace,
security and co-operation in the region;
6. Invites the member States of the relevant regional
organizations to lend support and to submit to the Secre­
tary-General concrete ideas and suggestions on their
potential contribution to the strengthening of peace and
co-operation in the Mediterranean region;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the itern entitled "Strengthening of security
and co-operation in the Mediterranean region".
102nd plenary meeting
17 December 1984

39/154. Review of the implementation of the Decla­
ration on the Strengthening of International
Security
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 38/73 H of 15 December 1983.
Profoundly concerned over the situation of the international community today in circumstances of tensions and
conflicts long continuing between nations, denoting a
marked decline in the respect for the Charter of the United
Nations and the basic elements of international law,
Gravely concerned over the increasing manifestations of
various forms of international terrorism,
Considering that the main organ of the United Nations
which under the Charter has the essential characteristic of
rendering effective its decisions is the Security Council,
Bearing in mind that the notes by the President of the
Security Council dated 12 September 1983 132 and 28 Sep­
tember 1984, 133 although referring to the subject of collec­
tive security, indicate no concrete steps taken or to be
taken to implement the relevant provisions of the Charter,
132 S/1597 I. For the printed text, see Official Records of the Security Coun­
cil, Thirty-eighth Year, Resolutions and Decisions, /983. part II, "Considera­

tlOn of the report of the Secretary-General on the work of the Orgamzatton.
1982".
l33 SI 16760. For the printed text, see Official Records of the Secunty Coun­
cil, Thirty-ninth Year, Resolutions and Decisions, /984, part 11. "Considera­
tion of the report of the Secretary-General on the work of the Organization"

95

Taking due account of the need that, on the occasion of
the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations, specific
endeavours should be devoted by the international com­
munity to enhance the effectiveness of the United Nations
required by the Charter,
1. Recommends that the Security Council give priority
consideration to the need for strengthening the system of
collective security provided for in the Charter of the
United Nations;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to report thereon to
the General Assembly at its fortieth session.
102nd plenary meeting
17 December 1984

39/155. Implementation of the Declaration on the
Strengthening of International Security
The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Review of the
implementation of the Declaration on the Strengthening of
International Security",
Noting with concern that the provisions of the Declara­
tion on the Strengthening of International Security 134 have
not been fully implemented,
Noting further with concern that the United Nations sys­
tem of collective security has not been used effectively,
Recalling the duty of States not to intervene in the inter­
nal or external affairs of any State, in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations,
Recalling the provisions of the Declaration on Principles
of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and
Co-operation among States in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations, 135
Noting the provisions of the Declaration on the Inad­
missibility of Intervention and Interference in the Internal
Affairs of States, 136
Recalling the Manila Declaration on the Peaceful Settle­
ment of International Disputes, 137
Alarmed by increasing tensions in international relations
and the heightened confrontations that characterize the
relations between the great Powers, accompanied by the
policy of competition for spheres of influence, domination
and exploitation in more and more parts of the world, the
escalation to new levels of the arms race, particularly in
nuclear weapons and the danger of its extension into outer
space, all of which pose a grave threat to global peace and
security,
Profoundly disturbed by the increasing recourse to the
use or threat of use of force. military intervention and
interference, aggression and foreign occupation, by the
aggravation of existing crises in the world and the outbreak
of new ones, by the continued infringement of the inde­
pendence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of countries,
by the denial of the right to self-determination of peoples
under colonial and foreign occupation and by attempts to
characterize erroneously the struggles of peoples for inde­
pendence and human dignity as falling within the context
of East-West confrontation, thus denying them the right to
self-determination, to decide their own destiny and realize
their legitimate aspirations, by the persistence of colonial­
ism, racism and apartheid supported by the growing use of
I H Resolution 2734 (XXV)
I 35 R esolution 2625 (XXV). annex.
136 Resolution 36/ l 03, annex
7
1_1 Resolution 37/ 10. annex
