S/2021/944

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 November 2021
Original: English

Situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report, submitted pursuant to paragraph 17 of Security Council
resolution 2592 (2021) and paragraph 41 of resolution 2568 (2021), provides updates
on the implementation of those resolutions, including on the mandates of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) and the United Nations Support
Office in Somalia (UNSOS). The report covers significant developments from
1 August to 4 November 2021.

II. Political, security and economic overview
A.

Political developments
2.
Slow progress was made towards the implementation of the agreements of
17 September 2020 and 27 May 2021 on elections. Upper House elections began on
29 July in all federal member states, with 52 out of 54 seats selected, of which 14
were women, translating into 26 per cent representation by women, but falling short
of the minimum 30 per cent quota for women. The National Consultative Council,
composed of the Prime Minister, federal member state leaders, the Mayor of
Mogadishu and the Governor of the Banaadir Regional Administration, continued
their regular engagements and met in Mogadishu on 21 and 22 August. Following the
meeting, a seven-point communiqué was issued in which the procedures for financial
administration, the selection of electoral delegates and electoral security, among other
issues, were clarified. On 23 August, the opposition Council of Presidential
Candidates registered its concerns over the role of federal member states in the
process of identifying elders responsible for selecting electoral delegates. The
National Consultative Council held a virtual meeting on 22 September to discuss the
electoral timetable and review preparations for the elections of the House of the
People and the collection of candidate fees.
3.
On 21 October, an agreement was reached between the President, Mohamed
Abdullahi “Farmajo”, and the Prime Minister, Mohamed Hussein Roble, of Somalia
over tensions that had emerged after the Mr. Roble dismissed the Director of the
National Intelligence and Security Agency, on 6 September, for failing to deliver a
report on the disappearance of one of the agency’s agents, Ikran Farah Tahlil. On
16 September, Mr. Farmajo announced the suspension of Mr. Roble’s powers,

21-16080 (E)

161121

*2116080*

S/2021/944

specifically with regard to the appointment and dismissal of officials. Senior Somali
officials undertook a series of mediation efforts while international partners,
including the Special Representative of the Secretary -General, engaged with all
parties to urge a de-escalation of tensions and a resolution of the dispute.
4.
In the Hiraan Region of Hirshabelle State, mediation is continuing between
disaffected members of the Hawadle clan and the Hirshabelle State administration,
including by Hawadle politicians and elders.
5.
In “Somaliland”, the President, Muse Bihi Abdi, conducted a reshuffling of the
cabinet that followed the parliamentary and local council elections of 31 May, in
which the opposition parties had achieved some gains.

B.

Security developments
6.
The security situation remained volatile, with a monthly average of 273
incidents recorded. Most incidents continued to be perpetrated by Al-Shabaab. They
are primarily hit-and-run attacks targeting the Somali security forces and the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), as well as attacks using improvised explosive
devices and assassinations. The Shabelle Hoose, Banaadir and Shabelle Dhexe
Regions were the most affected overall by Al-Shabaab activity.
7.
Al-Shabaab carried out targeted attacks through suicide bombings in
Mogadishu. On 19 August, a person-borne improvised explosive device detonated at
a restaurant frequented by soldiers in the Shangaani district of Mogadishu, reportedly
killing four people. On 14 September, a suicide bomber detonated his explosive -filled
vest at a tea shop frequented by security forces in the Wadajir district, reportedly
killing 11 people and injuring 15 others. On 25 September, in the Xamar Weyne
district, a suicide vehicle-borne improvised explosive device exploded in a line of
vehicles waiting to pass through a checkpoint near Villa Somalia, resulting in the
killing of six people: three civil servants and three civilians. On 12 October, a suicide
bomber detonated his device in a restaurant popular with soldiers in the Yaaqshiid
district, killing five people.
8.
In the southern and central regions, Al-Shabaab maintained a high rate of
attacks. In Bay Region, on 16 August, a mortar attack was launched in Baidoa, one
kilometre from the AMISOM-protected area, where the United Nations and the
airfield are located. The incident occurred hours after the conclusion of the Upper
House elections in the regional capital. In Jawhar, Shabelle Dhexe Region,
Al-Shabaab launched indirect fire attacks on several government buildings on
4 October, followed by an indirect fire attack on 6 October, which injured two
members of the Hirshabelle Regional Assembly. In Hiraan Region, on 19 September,
Al-Shabaab used improvised explosive devices to destroy the newly built Buulobarde
airstrip terminal a few days before its expected inauguration.
9.
In Mudug Region, Al-Shabaab countered an offensive carried out by the Somali
National Army and the Galmudug security forces in the Hobyo district. On 16 August,
Somali forces took over Caad village, one of Al-Shabaab’s largest bases in the region.
The following day, the group assaulted the army base in Caad and killed at le ast seven
Galmudug soldiers. On 24 August, Al-Shabaab carried out a complex attack, initiated
with a vehicle-borne improvised explosive device, on the army base in Cammaara
village. In all, 10 Somali National Army personnel were reportedly killed, and 17
others were injured. Many civilians were killed by roadside explosive devices and
landmines intended for security forces across the Hobyo district.
10. In Galguduud Region, the return of Ahl al-Sunna wal-Jama‘a leadership
triggered the mobilization of former Ahl al-Sunna wal-Jama‘a soldiers in the

2/16

21-16080

S/2021/944

Dhuusamarreeb district. On 30 September, Ahl al-Sunna wal-Jama‘a and the Somali
National Army clashed in Bohol village, resulting in the killing of over 10 soldiers.
After the clash, Ahl al-Sunna wal-Jama‘a moved to the towns of Guri Ceel and
Matabaan, in Hiraan Region, and took control of those areas without resistance. After
the failure of attempts at negotiation between the Galmudug authorities and Ahl
al-Sunna wal-Jama‘a leadership, Galmudug positioned its forces near Guri Ceel in
anticipation of an offensive operation against Ahl al-Sunna wal-Jama‘a. On
10 October, Ahl al-Sunna wal-Jama‘a militias withdrew from the town of Matabaan.
On 23 October, heavy clashes between Galmudug forces and Ahl al-Sunna
wal-Jama‘a erupted in Guri Ceel. The confrontations caused the displacement of over
100,000 people and led to the destruction of property, including two hospitals. On
27 October, after the mediation of local businesspeople, Ahl al -Sunna wal-Jama‘a
vacated Guriel and retreated to its stronghold in Bohol village. The Somali National
Army and Galmudug forces took full control of the town.
11. Activity by pro-Da’esh elements continued to be reported in Bari Region, where
the Mayor of Balidhidin, Qandala district, was reportedly shot and killed on
18 August and the Puntland Security Forces were targeted with an improvised
explosive device in Cal Miskaat, Boosaaso district, on 30 August. Two soldiers were
reportedly injured.

C.

Economic developments
12. The economy of Somalia is expected to rebound moderately from the negative
impacts of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, extreme flooding and
locust infestation, according to the Word Bank Somalia Economic Update report
released in September. The real gross domestic product of 2.4 per cent for 2021,
2.9 per cent for 2022 and 3.2 per cent for 2023.
13. On the fiscal front, the Federal Government is facing a challenge in
implementing its budget for 2021 owing to limited sources of income . In the abovementioned World Bank report, it is stated that domestic revenue in the first quarter of
2021 was 13 per cent lower than in the same period in 2020 owing to a 45 per cent
decline in non-tax revenue resulting from insufficient collection of fees, creating a n
approximately $10 million domestic revenue gap per month against the required
expenditure. Moreover, owing to lingering political uncertainty over the elections,
budgetary support from international partners remains on hold.
14. The efforts of the Government of Somalia, with the support of the United
Nations, culminated in the accession of the country to the United Nations Convention
against Corruption on 11 August. Building on the national anti-corruption strategy for
2020 to 2023, a United Nations task force and the Government are currently
developing a 10-year joint United Nations programme to strengthen anti-corruption
in Somalia, including by implementing changes in the government structure,
supporting anti-corruption legislation efforts and building the capacity of civil society
organizations and journalists.

III. Support for peacebuilding and State-building efforts
A.

Establishment of a functional federal State

1.

Preparations for elections
15. On 4 September, the Federal Electoral Implementation Team issued an updated
electoral timetable, setting 18 September as the date for the conclusion of Upper

21-16080

3/16

S/2021/944

House elections. The timetable called for elections for the House of the People to be
held from 1 October to 20 November. On 30 September, the Team issued a revised
electoral timetable, scheduling the House of the People elections to be held from 1 to
20 November. Galmudug has yet to complete the electoral process for the Upper
House. Preparations for the House of the People elections remain behind schedule.
16. The dispute over the leadership of the “Somaliland” electoral management body
was resolved after the Chief Justice, Bashe Yusuf Ahmed, facilitated a dialogue
between the Deputy Prime Minister, Mahdi Mohammed Gulaid “Khadar”, and the
Upper House Speaker, Abdi Hashi Abdullahi, on 5 September. The two leaders agreed
on a power-sharing arrangement for the electoral management body’s leadership
posts, and the “Somaliland” elections for the Upper House were concluded on
30 September. The House of the People elections commenced on 1 November with
the election of two seats for “Somaliland”. On 2 November, a complaint was filed
against the election process for one of the two seats. On 8 November, the Elec toral
Dispute Resolution Committee ruled that the election process was in line with agreed
procedures for indirect elections.
17. On 8 October, the United Nations held a preliminary technical meeting with
donors on the electoral budget revised by the Offic e of the Prime Minister and the
Federal Electoral Implementation Team. The revised budget, which totals to
$27.2 million, presents a resource gap of $8.3 million. The increase in the budget,
compared with the current budget of $18.9 million, is attributabl e to slippage in the
timeline, which affected electoral committee costs, as well as increases in delegate
allowances, travel costs and media and communications costs. The Office of the
Prime Minister has sought support from donors to cover the gap.
18. The second meeting of the National Elections Security Committee was held on
2 October with virtual connections to the federal member states and chaired by
Mr. Roble. The Federal Government of Somalia, federal member states, UNSOM and
AMISOM police commissioners provided an update on security preparations and the
election security budget. Mr. Roble urged that security preparations be ready for the
House of the People elections. With their federal member state counterparts, UNSOM
and AMISOM police advisers continued to advocate the development of
comprehensive security plans for the House of the People elections.
19. The United Nations and AMISOM continue to provide elections security
support. United Nations-procured equipment has been handed over to all 12 Join t
Operations Centres, and the Centres’ staff are receiving training funded by the trust
fund for peace and reconciliation in Somalia, delivered by AMISOM and Somali
police trainers. Further elections security training, including in public order
management and leadership courses, is under way in the federal member states and
Banaadir Region, funded by the Joint Police Programme and UNSOM and supported
by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the AMISOM police.
The courses include training on human rights and gender equality. The AMISOM
police have reinforced their contingent in Dhuusamarreeb and provided police
officers to Baraawe and Garbahaarrey to enhance security during the House of the
People elections.
20. On 25 October, in Puntland, the Transitional Puntland Electoral Commission
conducted the first direct local council elections in the districts of Qardho, Eyl and
Ufeyn. A total of 449 candidates from eight political associations contested 87 local
council seats. In all, 23 women were elected. A total of 28,854 out of the 46,839
registered voters voted at 54 polling stations. Federal- and state-level officials, as well
as international and local observers, including the United Nations, witnessed the
election.

4/16

21-16080

S/2021/944

2.

Constitutional review
21. The Ministry of Constitutional Affairs, the Joint Oversight Committee of the
Federal Parliament and the Independent Constitutional Review and Implementation
Commission finalized handover reports for the following administration a nd the
Federal Parliament after consultations with civil society, South-West, Hirshabelle and
Galmudug States and the Banaadir Regional Administration. The handover reports
contain information on the progress made, the challenges encountered and proposed
future actions with regard to the constitutional review process. The reports are aimed
at safeguarding the gains achieved during the terms of the previous administration
and the tenth session of Parliament.

3.

Prevention and resolution of conflicts
22. On 22 August, Somali National Army forces that had declared their opposition
to the President of Hirshabelle, Ali Abdullahi Hussein “Gudlawe”, took control of the
offices of the Hirshabelle Administration, as well as other strategic locations in
Beledweyne, Hiraan Region, in protest of a planned visit by Mr. Gudlawe to
Beledweyne. However, thanks to the intervention of the leading Hawadle clan elder,
it was agreed on 25 August that the offices be returned to the Hirshabelle
Administration and that a committee be established to discuss the grievances of the
Hawadle in Hirshabelle State.
23. Clashes between the Dir and Hawadle clans over land in Defow, on the outskirts
of Beledweyne, Hiraan Region, occurred in August and September, resulting in the
death of more than 10 persons. On 12 September, Ugas Yusuf of the Hawadle clan
arranged for the withdrawal of the Hawadle militias from Defow, and the Somali
National Army units were deployed in the area. The United Nations continues to
provide financial and technical assistance to the Hirshabelle Administration in
support of the clan reconciliation process.

B.

Cross-cutting issues

1.

Gender equality and the empowerment of women
24. UNSOM, jointly with UNDP, the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and
the Empowerment of Women, the United Nations Population Fund and other partner
agencies, remained actively engaged to support efforts to achieve the minimum quota
of 30 per cent for the parliamentary representation of women in the 2021 elections
because a concrete mechanism to secure the quota has yet to be implemented .
Through the Gender and Elections Task Team, chaired by the Deputy Special
Representative for Somalia, UNSOM led the coordination of United Nations support
for the advocacy efforts.
25. As part of United Nations efforts to enhance women’s participation in public
life, including through political representation and the implementation of the
minimum quota of 30 per cent, the Deputy Secretary -General visited Somalia on
12 September. In addition to meeting women leaders, she engaged with Somali
leaders and clan elders, stressing the urgency of achieving the minimum quota and of
strengthening women’s representation and participation in politics.
26. Between August and September, goodwill ambassadors, established to advocate
the implementation of the minimum quota, undertook six missions to federal member
states and spoke with federal member state leaders, clan elders, civil society, women
political aspirants and electoral management committees to introduce a mechanism
for the implementation of the minimum quota in accordance with the agreements of

21-16080

5/16

S/2021/944

17 September and 27 May. The United Nations facilitated their advocacy campaign
through financial and coordination support.
27. The United Nations supported the Ministry of Women and Human Rights
Development at the federal and federal member state levels in undertaking advocacy
for the quota by engaging the clan elders, religious leaders, civil society organizations
and young people at the community level and managing the call centre for women in
Mogadishu.
28. The safety and security of women during elections continue to be a concern for
women leaders and aspirants. The United Nations continues to advocate measures to
guarantee the security and protection of women leaders, candidates and delegates.
The Swedish Folke Bernadotte Academy, supported by the United Nations, trained
Somali Police Force staff for the women’s situation desks in all 12 Joint Operations
Centres.
2.

Youth empowerment
29. On International Youth Day, 12 August, the United Nations inter-agency
working group on youth, the United Nations Somalia Youth Advisory Board and the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) organized activities
to raise awareness of the important role that Somali young people play in national
development. In addition to promoting advocacy messages and a radio programme
entitled “Path to Peace”, the United Nations organized a webinar on 11 August that
was focused on youth innovation in transforming food systems in Somalia. The event
was attended by Government officials, youth organizations, academics and donors.
30. A total of 40 adolescents and young people (20 young men and 20 young
women) are receiving vocational training on marketable skills in “Somaliland”, while
a cohort of 40 adolescents and young people (17 young men and 23 young women)
are incubating businesses in Puntland after participating in UPSHIFT social
innovation boot camps.
31. During the reporting period, 30 staff (18 men and 12 women) from the
“Somaliland” Ministry of Youth and Sports and from the Ministry of Employment,
Social and Family Affairs were trained on youth policy development and
implementation, leadership and communication skills as part of a government
capacity-building programme supported by the United Nations.

3.

Development coordination
32. On 3 August, the Federal Ministry of Energy and Water launched the national
water strategy, which lays the foundation for sustainable development of water
resources in Somalia. A national task force on droughts and floods was launched at
the same time to lead the nexus approach to mitigate climatic shocks.
33. UNSOM continued to work on integrating environmental considerations into
the mediation approach to addressing disputes over land and water in Hirshabelle, as
well as incorporating youth and gender dimensions into the process.
34. On 19 September, the United Nations Environmental Programme organized a
two-day workshop to finalize the national forestry policy, which is pending
endorsement from the Cabinet.

6/16

21-16080

S/2021/944

IV. Human rights and protection
A.

Human rights
35. During the reporting period, UNSOM recorded 194 civilian casualties,
comprising 99 people killed and 95 injured, a 30 per cent decrease compared with
125 and 151, respectively, during the previous period. Al-Shabaab remained the single
largest perpetrator, responsible for 109 casualties (56 per cent), followed by 36
casualties (19 per cent) attributed to unknown actors, 24 (12 per cent) to clan militias,
16 to state security forces (8 per cent), 7 to AMISOM (4 per cent) and 2 to others
(1 per cent).
36. During the reporting period, authorities arbitrarily arrested and detained 37
individuals, including 17 Al-Shabaab suspects, 5 journalists, 5 youth activists, a
politician and a poet. In the same period, authorities released 29 individuals without
charges or without being brought before a court, as required under the Code of
Criminal Procedure. UNSOM continued to record violations of the r ight to freedom
of expression, documenting 23 violations during the period under review, including
the arrest and detention by the authorities of 16 journalists – 8 in South-West State, 4
in “Somaliland”, 2 in Galmudug and 1 each in Mogadishu and Hirshabel le. On
19 August, “Somaliland” police arrested a prominent social media activist and
freelance journalist without providing any reason for the arrest. He remains in
detention without being charged. On 23 September and 2 October, the “Somaliland”
police detained two other journalists, who were released on the same day of their
arrests without charges. In Mogadishu, on 5 September, the Somali Police Force
reportedly detained a male journalist and physically assaulted several other journalists
and confiscated some of their equipment while they were covering a peaceful protest
over the disappearance of Ms. Tahlil. The Somali Police Force arrested two other
journalists in Galmudug on 29 September and 2 October for their reporting on Ahl
al-Sunna wal-Jama‘a activities in Galmudug. Both journalists were released without
being charged or having appeared before a court.

B.

Compliance with the human rights due diligence policy
37. The technical working group of the AMISOM-United Nations joint human
rights due diligence policy resumed its monthly meetings in August. Mitigation
measures related to corrective actions and a follow-up to allegations, predeployment
training of AMISOM troops and AMISOM air assets were discussed during meetings,
held in August and September. Discussions also included an overview of mitigation
measures transmitted to the Federal Government for the additional 3,000 Somali
security forces mandated under Security Council resolution 2520 (2020) as eligible
for UNSOS support.
38. On 29 August, UNSOM conducted awareness-raising briefings for 298 soldiers
of the Somali National Army. The briefings, carried out in support of the European
Union Training Mission in Somalia, included modules on basic concepts of
international human rights and humanitarian law and child protection, as well as
United Nations requirements under the human rights due diligence policy.
39. In line with efforts to strengthen awareness of human rights due diligence policy
requirements, UNSOS continued to meet and engage with Somali security forces
liaison officers and other focal points to emphasize and facilitate compliance with the
policy within the units receiving UNSOS support.

21-16080

7/16

S/2021/944

C.

Children in armed conflict
40. During the reporting period, the United Nations had verified 738 grave
violations against 731 children (581 boys and 150 girls) and seven attacks on schools.
The country task force on monitoring and reporting on grave violations against
children had verified the recruitment and use of 249 children, the abduction of 241
children and the killing and maiming of 190 children. Rape and other forms of sexual
violence were committed against 78 children. Of the violations, 390 (53 per cent)
were attributed to Al-Shabaab, 151 (20 per cent) to unknown armed elements, 118
(16 per cent) to government security forces, 42 (7 per cent) to clan militia and 37
(5 per cent) Ahl al-Sunna wal-Jama‘a.
41. On 15 September, UNSOM, in coordination with the Ministry of Women,
Family Affairs and Human Rights of Jubbaland, launched a working group on
children and armed conflict in Kismaayo. The group is aimed at reviewing progress
made in implementing the Government’s 2012 action plans on ending and preventing
the recruitment and use and the killing and maiming of children, as well as in
implementing the 2019 road map to accelerate the implementation of the action plans,
including at the federal member state level. Also on 15 September, UNSOM, in
conjunction with the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and the Child
Protection Unit of the federal Ministry of Defence, concluded a three -day training
workshop on the protection of children affected by armed conflict for 16 Somali
National Army commanders drawn from various sectors in Bay and Bakool Regions.

D.

Prevention of sexual and gender-based violence
42. UNSOM verified nine incidents of conflict-related sexual violence, affecting
three women, five girls and one 19-year-old man, through the monitoring and
reporting arrangement. Six incidents occurred in Puntland, two in Galmudug and one
in South-West State. In two cases, young girls were abducted, gang -raped and
murdered by unidentified perpetrators, one in Puntland and the other in South -West
State. Police continue to investigate both cases. Three men were convicted and
sentenced to death for gang-raping a 19-year-old man in North Gaalkacyo, Puntland,
on 9 August. The three men were reportedly represented by two defence lawyers and
have been granted time to appeal the sentence. In Galmudug, on 25 August, the
Galguduud Regional Court, in the town of Cadaado, sentenced a civilian man to five
years’ imprisonment for raping a 6-year-old girl on 19 August. A Somali National
Army soldier was arrested for allegedly raping a 25-year-old woman in south
Gaalkacyo, Galmudug, on 18 August. The remaining four cases, involving the gang
rapes of two women and two girls, were perpetrated by unidentified elements.
43. UNSOM continued to engage with traditional clan elders and advocat ed their
support for the formal criminal justice system in sexual violence cases. On 25 and
26 August, UNSOM collaborated with Nagaad Network, a local non-governmental
organization partner in “Somaliland”, and trained 30 clan elders in Burco, Togdheer
Region, on the rights of victims of sexual violence to gain access to the formal justice
system. The training was aimed at raising the awareness of participants of the need to
eliminate the interventions of clan elders during the prosecution of alleged
perpetrators. The clan elders committed to supporting the formal justice system and
called upon those in other regions of “Somaliland” to take similar action.

8/16

21-16080

S/2021/944

V. Humanitarian situation
44. The humanitarian situation in Somalia remained dire owing to multiple factors,
including climate shocks, conflict, diseases and desert locust infestation. Nearly half
the population, 5.9 million people, are in need of life-saving assistance.
45. The combined impact of erratic rainfall, flooding and conflict has led to
widespread food insecurity. Findings of the Food Security and Nutrition Analysis Unit
of FAO in June and July show that, in the absence of humanitarian assistance, nearly
3.5 million people in Somalia were expected to face high levels of acute food
insecurity (Integrated Food Security Phase Classification phase 3), or even worse
food insecurity, in 2021. An estimated 1.2 million children under the age of 5 years
are likely to be acutely malnourished, including nearly 213,400 who are likely to be
severely malnourished.
46. Efforts are under way in Hirshabelle, which has been affected by recurrent
flooding, to implement flood mitigation measures. In Beledweyne, 65 out of 300
identified river breakage sites have been closed, saving more than 2,000 hectares o f
farmland from floods. An early warning system is in place, including a short message
service alert system that warns communities of expected flooding.
47. Somalia is experiencing its third consecutive season of below -average rainfall.
The humanitarian community is scaling up its response to the drought conditions in
southern, central and north-eastern areas of the country, where severe water shortages
and livestock deaths are observed. With available climate forecasts indicating below average rainfall in November, it is becoming increasingly likely that a worsening
drought is unfolding. Long-range forecasts for the 2022 gu rains suggest elevated
chances of a fourth below-average rainfall season.
48. The COVID-19 pandemic has compounded the humanitarian crisis in Somalia.
Since March 2020, the country has had 20,192 confirmed cases of COVID -19,
including 1,111 deaths. Vaccination uptake among the population remains low. As at
30 September, only 365,788 Somalis – less than 2 per cent of the population – had
received at least one dose of the COVID-19 vaccine and 281,461 had been fully
vaccinated. A total of 1,357,200 doses have been provided to Somalia under the
COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access (COVAX) initiative.
49. The desert locust infestation that had begun in 2019 and continued until early
2021 has declined thanks to concerted control actions by FAO, the Federal
Government and federal member states. In addition, dry conditions in affected areas
limited the breeding of new swarms. As at 31 August, 332,860 he ctares had been
sprayed. However, remnant swarms still exist in some parts of Puntland and
“Somaliland”, in addition to the risk of new swarms arriving from the Afar Region of
Ethiopia.
50. Displacement owing to insecurity, armed conflict and climate chang e has
increased. From August to October, 55,000 people were forced to flee their homes,
80 per cent of them as a result of conflict and 20 per cent owing to climate -related
events. Overall, 2.9 million people have been displaced from their homes and have
faced significant risks of eviction, abuse and harassment. Displaced women and girls
continue to face increased risks of gender-based violence and sexual abuse.
51. Humanitarian access remains a major challenge, limiting the ability of
humanitarian workers to help people in need and to sustain operations. In some
districts, in particular in the southern and central regions, access to main supply routes
is limited by insecurity, which also affects the safety of humanitarian workers. During
the reporting period, at least 22 access-related incidents were reported, during which

21-16080

9/16

S/2021/944

two humanitarian workers were injured. The highest number of incidents occurred in
“Somaliland” (8), Galmudug (4) and Hirshabelle (3).
52. Funding for the 2021 Humanitarian Response Plan remains critically low, at
50 per cent. As a result, only 36 per cent of the 4 million people targeted have been
helped. Some 230 humanitarian partners continue to deliver life -saving assistance
despite the low funding.

VI. Comprehensive approach to security
A.

Implementation of the Somali transition plan and the Mutual
Accountability Framework
53. On 18 and 19 August, a meeting of the African Union Commission and
representatives of the Federal Government of Somalia was held in Mogad ishu to
discuss the post-2021 security architecture and the new African Union-led mission.
Both sides agreed to the deployment of an African Union transition mission and to
commence work on the concept of operations as mandated in Security Council
resolution 2568 (2021). During subsequent talks, held in September and October in
Mogadishu between the Federal Government and the African Union, the parties failed
to reach an agreement on the nature of the new mission and the concept of operations.
Discussions between the African Union, the United Nations and the European Union
on the reconfigured African Union mission were held in July and August. Throughout
the period, the United Nations continued to engage with the African Union, the
Federal Government of Somalia and partners to advance discussions towards
developing a joint proposal on the strategic objectives, size and composition of a
reconfigured African Union mission.
54. On 6 October, a second cohort of 150 Somali Police Force Darwish was sent to
Shabelle Hoose in support of Operation Badbaado I, bringing the total strength of
Somali Police Force Darwish operating in Shabelle Hoose to 400.
55. The Somali security forces have increased their operational activity in Shabelle
Dhexe to secure the main supply route between Mogadishu and Jawhar. In addition,
efforts towards the final consolidation of Operation Badbaado I are continuing.
AMISOM is reviewing its forward operating base locations to generate mobile forces
and take on a more offensive role, as detailed in the Somali transition plan.

B.

Operations
56. A sub-working group on police of strand 2B of the comprehensive approach to
security met on 9 August. The sub-working group agreed on two prioritized activities,
namely resolving the challenges of providing weapons to newly trained police and
clarifying future actions in developing the capacities of the State Police Darwish. A
concept note on the way forward was developed and will be discussed at the next
meeting of the sub-working group.
57. In addition to the operations in Shabelle Hoose and Shabelle Dhexe, the Somali
security forces have seized territory in southern Mudug and conducted operations in
northern Hiraan and Juba Hoose to degrade Al-Shabaab. The donation of military
vehicles by Puntland to Galmudug and subsequent joint operations is a positive
example of inter-state security cooperation. AMISOM reinforced its contingent at
Dhuusamarreeb to enhance security to the Galmudug House of the People elections
and intends to reinforce security in Garbahaarrey ahead of the elections.

10/16

21-16080

S/2021/944

58. On 26 August, two technical-level meetings of the working group on strand 2C
on the rule of law and a meeting of the Joint Justice Programme steering committee
were held. The terms of reference for an evaluation of the Joint Justice Programme
were approved.
59. The Mine Action Service supported AMISOM and Somali security forces in
improvised explosive device threat mitigation by providing nine threat analysis
reports and two reports on improvised explosive device awareness.

C.

Institutional capacity-building
60. On 6 September, the Joint Police Programme Executive Board approved
activities valued at $4.6 million, including the construction of the Afmadow police
station, as well as training, stipends for 600 police recruits in Juba Hoose and the
construction of the Gaalkacyo police station. The Board terminated the payment of
stipends to 109 South-West State police officers who had remained undeployed for
18 months.
61. From 6 to 8 and 13 to 15 September, the United Nations Environmental
Programme, supported by UNSOM, delivered training on climate and inclusive
security for the Somalia maritime authorities. Thirty-two participants from the
Federal Government and the federal member states were trained on the interlinkages
between climate change, maritime peace and security and gender equality.
62. The UNSOM/UNDP integrated Security Sector Reform Unit h as commenced
implementation of the security sector reform initiation plan, a bridge arrangement
following the closure of the joint security sector governance programme (2018 –
2021). The funding instrument enables the Unit to support oversight institutions i n
Somalia, focusing on the Somali transition plan, electoral security and strategic
planning until mid-2022.
63. UNSOM, with funding from the Department of Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs and support from UNDP, launched a project with the Federal Gover nment on
17 August to advance the participation of women in security and defence institutions.
The project is aimed at mapping the inclusion of Somali women in the security sector,
identifying barriers to their recruitment, retention and promotion and prov iding
recommendations to increase the representation of women in the sector.
64. Following an Al-Shabaab attack on 4 March, which resulted in the escape of an
estimated 400 prisoners and severe damage to infrastructure, the refurbishment of the
Boosaaso prison, through funding from the Joint Corrections Programme, was
completed at the beginning of October.
65. Capacity development activities were conducted for 39 people (35 men and 4
women), Custodial Corps personnel (39 people) and 45 judicial personnel (2 6 men
and 19 women) in Kismaayo, Hargeysa, Beledweyne and Garoowe on human rights,
gender-responsive justice, trial and advocacy skills, case management, prison
management and administration. On 12 October, the Ministry of Justice of
“Somaliland” concluded a day-long workshop on legislative drafting, supported by
the Somalia Joint Rule of Law Programme.
66. UNSOM continued to work with international partners to keep rehabilitation
centres for low-risk former Al-Shabaab fighters COVID-19-free and functioning. By
the end of October, 317 male and 223 female beneficiaries were actively enrolled at
the centres. The national programme on the handling of disengaged combatants and
associated women, established in 2013, is expected to be adapted and respond to the
complex needs of disengaged men and women with renewed community -focused
approaches.

21-16080

11/16

S/2021/944

67. From 6 July to 13 August, a virtual mission under the Global Focal Point for the
Rule of Law conducted a review of the Joint Justice Programme and the joint security
sector governance programme with a view to providing a road map for the next
generation of joint United Nations programmes in the areas of justice and security.
68. UNSOM and UNDP jointly launched “justice month”, including a series of
workshops in each federal member state capital and Banaadir. At the workshops, a
diverse group of justice stakeholders and community members gathers to reflect on
justice issues and generate innovative solutions to inform the development of a
countrywide justice sector strategic plan and the next United Nations Joint Justice
Programme.

D.

Support activities
69. On 12 August, the Ministry of the Interior, Federal Affairs and Reconciliation
issued the 2021 Fragility Index and Maturity Model overview report. The report,
covering 32 districts in Galmudug, Hirshabelle, South -West State, Jubbaland and
Banaadir Region, provides a review of progress towards the four focus areas set out
in the national stabilization strategy: security and rule of law, local governance, social
cohesion and reconciliation and community recovery. In the report, it was noted that
progress has been recorded in the Shabelle Hoose districts thanks to Operation
Badbaado I, but concerns were highlighted. They include persistent intimidation of
the population by Al-Shabaab, as well as challenges experienced with regard to
inclusive and accountable State-building processes and structures, such as district
peace and stability committees, in terms of their role and sustainability compared with
traditional systems.
70. The Mine Action Service delivered 705 in-person explosive ordnance risk
education sessions to 625 women, 267 men, 1,055 girls and 1,545 boys at risk from
explosive ordnance throughout five federal member states of Somalia.

VII. United Nations Support Office in Somalia assistance for the
African Union Mission in Somalia and Somali security forces
A.

Support for African Union Mission in Somalia operations
71. UNSOS continued to support the implementation of the AMISOM -Somali
security forces joint plan for the handover and closure of forward operating bases. In
line with the plan, AMISOM held a meeting of sector commanders on 24 and
25 August and agreed on the handover of forward operating bases in Buurne and
Gololey, in sector 5.
72. UNSOS continued to support preparations for elections through the provision
of field defence stores and search equipment to enhance the security and protection
of polling centres within the AMISOM areas of operation. UNSOS predeployed
projected field defence store requirements to the United Nations warehouses in
Baidoa, Beledweyne, Kismaayo and Baraawe, as well as to AMISOM in
Garbahaarrey and Dhuusamarreeb. It provided field defence stores through AMISOM
to the local authorities in Jawhar and Kismaayo.
73. Between 13 and 16 September, UNSOS supported the redeployment of 100
Djiboutian and 202 Ethiopian AMISOM troops to Dhuusamarreeb as part of efforts
to secure the ongoing elections in Galmudug State. A total of 15 individual police
officers and a 29-person Ugandan formed police unit were also deployed.

12/16

21-16080

S/2021/944

74.

UNSOS continued to support the vaccination of AMISOM military personnel.

75. In line with its environmental strategy, UNSOS commenced the construction of
tree seedling nurseries at the sector hubs in Baidoa, Beledweyne, Jawhar, Baledogle,
Kismaayo and Dhooble, with 5,000 tree seedlings already in its nursery at Aden Adde
International Airport. That brings the total number of trees planted by UNSOS in all
its compounds in Somalia from June 2020 to date to 32,580.
76. UNSOS is undertaking runway maintenance and expansion across the AMISOM
area of operations, as well as in Dhuusamarreeb, to improve the effectiveness and
efficiency of logistics operations and to support fixed -wing aircraft operations.
UNSOS intends to deploy one helicopter permanently in Jawhar to support the sector
with the timely delivery of logistics support.
77. In September, UNSOS purchased five additional boats for the AMISOM Marine
Unit to enhance its capacity to patrol and protect the Mogadishu coastline.
78. The Mine Action Service, with assistance from UNSOS, trained 1,625
AMISOM military and police personnel and enhanced their capability to locate and
destroy improvised explosive devices and operate safely within a threat environm ent.
The Service contributed to the safety and security of strategic infrastructure by
deploying 26 explosive detection dog teams, working with 52 detection dogs to
conduct searches of 37,320 pieces of luggage, 88,489 vehicles, 147 buildings,
37,320 m 2 of building areas and 6,827,060 m² of open areas throughout the sectors.
79. The Mine Action Service supported 107 AMISOM convoys across all six
sectors, giving 106 predeployment and 105 post-deployment briefings. It supported
AMISOM in conducting 247 searches for improvised explosive devices along the
main supply routes, of which 7 were positive. AMISOM improvised explosive device
disposal teams trained by the Service destroyed six devices.

B.

Support for Somali security force operations
80. On 3 September, the Federal Government, the United Nations and the African
Union signed a memorandum of understanding on the conditions of the provision of
United Nations logistical support for the Somali security forces in joint or coordinated
operations with AMISOM. That provides for oversight and accountability in the
partnership between the three entities, including compliance, strengthened resource
management and joint mechanisms for the human rights due diligence policy.
81. UNSOS continued to provide logistical support to the 13,900-strong Somali
security forces. As at 30 October, the United Nations trust fund in support of the
Somali security forces was completely exhausted. A pledge of $3.4 million was
estimated to be sufficient to provide the delivery of support to the Somali security
forces until 31 December 2021 through continuing austerity measures to reduce costs
in relation to rations, bulk water and the number of supported locations. The Head of
UNSOS continued efforts to appeal for more contributions to the trust fund and held
individual and collective meetings with international community representatives.
82. UNSOS facilitated virtual training provided to the Somali security forces on
subjects including radio fundamentals, information and co mmunications technology
security, intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance, a common operating picture
and Joint Operations Centres.
83. The Mine Action Service completed the training and equipping of 11 Somali
National Army multi-skilled improvised explosive device disposal teams. Five
additional teams are currently being trained, with a scheduled completion date of

21-16080

13/16

S/2021/944

December 2021. Four Somali National Army headquarters personnel were trained in
the use of mapping software and equipment.

VIII. United Nations presence
84. United Nations entities remained present in Baidoa, Beledweyne, Berbera,
Boosaaso, Dhooble, Dhuusamarreeb, Doolow, Gaalkacyo, Garoowe, Hargeysa,
Jawhar, Kismaayo and Mogadishu. As at 4 November, 430 international staff and
1,417 national staff had been deployed throughout Somalia.

IX. Observations
85. I welcome the further progress achieved towards the implementation of the
electoral agreements of 17 September 2020 and 27 May 2021 and the near finalization
of the Upper House elections. Nevertheless, the continued slippage in the electoral
timeline is disconcerting, and I call upon all actors to accelerate the implementation
of the agreements in order to hold elections without further delays. The timely
completion of the elections and a peaceful transition of power are crucial to end the
current political uncertainty.
86. Strengthening the political rights of women and safeguarding their
representation in parliament remains key priorities for the United Nations, and I regre t
that the stated commitment of Somali leaders to implementing the quota of 30 per
cent for the representation of women in the federal Parliament has yet to be translated
into practice. It is of concern that the minimum quota of 30 per cent was not met in
the Upper House elections. The upcoming elections for the House of the People offer
an opportunity to improve. In this regard, I would like to reiterate the messages of the
Deputy Secretary-General conveyed during her visit to Somalia on 12 September to
ensure implementation of the quota for women and to express the full support of the
United Nations in this regard. Somalis cannot move their country forward and build
trust in institutions and elections without the equal participation of women. Inclusive
elections will lay the foundation for a resilient, sustainable, inclusive country where
the freedom of expression and associated rights are respected.
87. I welcome the resolution of the dispute between the President and Prime
Minister, given that it had threatened to divert attention from the electoral processes
and key national priorities, including State-building linked to basic service delivery,
development initiatives, the fight against Al-Shabaab and the laying of the foundation
for the planned security transition. I urge the authorities to undertake a credible and
effective investigation into the disappearance of Ms. Tahlil in accordance with the
rule of law.
88. The political uncertainty related to the ongoing electoral process continues to
hinder implementation of the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation
Framework as well as the ninth national development plan of Somalia. Advancing the
Sustainable Development Goals remains critical, given that progress towards the
goals is not being made quickly enough for their achievement by 2030, and I call
upon Somali stakeholders and international partners to redouble their efforts and
support progress in this regard.
89. I remain concerned about the impact of climate change on Somalia. Earlier in
2021, drought conditions throughout the country, as well as an early end to the gu
rainy season, devastated livestock and crops, causing displacement and exacerbating
food insecurity. Following two consecutive seasons of below -average rainfall, in late
2020 and early 2021, drought conditions are projected for the current deyr season,
14/16

21-16080

S/2021/944

which would lead to a crippling three-season drought. Such conditions would have a
compounding negative effect on the most vulnerable Somalis, 3.5 million of whom
are expected to face crisis-level food insecurity (Integrated Food Security Phase
Classification phase 3) or worse outcomes through the end of the year.
90. I am alarmed that resources are at historically low levels while the humanitarian
needs in Somalia are growing rapidly. With less than three months left until the end
of 2021, the Humanitarian Response Plan is only about 50 per cent funded. I appeal
to all partners to provide the resources necessary to save the lives of people in need.
91. Somalia remains one of the most difficult environments for humanitarian
workers, and the ongoing conflict and violence create immense obstacles for
humanitarian partners to delivering life-saving support to the most vulnerable. I wish
to underscore the importance for all parties to armed conflict of allowing and
facilitating unimpeded humanitarian access to ensure uninterrupted assistance and
protection for people in need, and I urge all parties to comply with their obligations
under international humanitarian law.
92. The rise in conflict-related sexual violence and grave violations against children
is of great concern. I urge the Somali authorities to take steps to hold perpetrators of
the violations accountable, to expedite the implementation of their co mmitments to
ending and preventing grave violations against children and to strengthen their
commitments to ending rape and other forms of sexual violence, and I welcome
efforts to increase the respect of the Somali security forces for international human
rights and humanitarian law. I further urge the Government of Somalia to develop and
initiate a new national action plan on prevention of and response to sexual violence
in conflict, enshrined under the joint communiqué signed between the United Nations
and the Government of Somalia in 2013.
93. I remain deeply concerned about the continued ability of Al-Shabaab to conduct
attacks across Somalia that have resulted in civilian casualties. I reiterate my strong
condemnation of all acts of terrorism and violent extremism and express my heartfelt
condolences to the many victims. The effective and timely implementation of the
Somali transition plan, including security sector reform, the integration of regional
forces and force generation, is critical for progress on security. In addition, countering
terrorism requires close coordination and collaboration among all Somali
stakeholders, and I urge the Somali leadership to enhance its cooperation towards that
objective.
94. I welcome the signing of the tripartite memorandum of understanding between
the Federal Government of Somalia, the United Nations and the African Union, which
sets out modalities for the provision of a non-lethal logistical support package by
UNSOS to the Somali security forces in joint operation s with AMISOM, including
robust measures for compliance with the human rights due diligence policy, as well
as oversight and accountability in the use of United Nations resources. I encourage
the operationalization of the provisions related to compliance a nd cooperation with
the human rights due diligence policy. I remain concerned about the dwindling
balance of the trust fund in support of the Somali security forces and reiterate my
appeal to Member States for non-earmarked contributions to the trust fund to ensure
uninterrupted logistics support for those forces. Continued support for the Somali
security forces is essential to the implementation of the Somali transition plan.
95. I thank my Special Representative, James Swan, and the United Nations staff i n
Somalia for their tireless efforts to support Somalia during this critical period.

21-16080

15/16

S/2021/944

16/16

21-16080
