220

(;cncral Assemhl)-Forty-second Session

Mindful of the relevance, for the eradication of torture
and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, of the Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials 139 and of the Principles of Medical Ethics relevant
to the role of health personnel, particularly physicians, in
the protection of prisoners and detainees against torture
and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, 80
Convinced of the desirability of early finalization and
subsequent adoption of the draft Body of Principles for the
Protection of All Persons under Any Form of Detention
or Imprisonment, 140
Seriously concerned about the alarming number of reported cases of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment taking place in various
parts of the world,
Determined to promote the full implementation of the
prohibition, under international and national law, of the
practice of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment,
Welcoming the decision of the Commission on Human
Rights, in its resolution 1987/29 of 10 March 1987, 26 to
extend for one year the mandate oft he Special Rapporteur
to examine questions relevant to torture and taking note of
other important provisions of the Commission in the same
resolution, including those relating to practical measures
recommended by the Special Rapporteur to deal with this
abhorrent phenomenon,
l. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General on the status of the Convention against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment; 141
2. Welcomes with deep satisfaction the entry into force
on 26 June 1987 of the Convention as a major step in international efforts to promote universal respect for and observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms;
3. Recognizes the importance of the establishment by
States parties to the Convention of appropriate administrative and financial arrangements to enable the Committee against Torture to carry out in an effective and efficient
manner the functions entrusted to it under the Convention, and to ensure the long-term viability of the Committee as an essential mechanism for overseeing the effectin·
implementation of the provisions of the Convention;
4. Also recognizes the need for the Committee against
Torture to give early attention to the development of an effective reporting system on implementation by States parties to the Convention, taking due account of the draft
guidelines of the Secretary-General on reporting and the
activities of the Human Rights Committee, as well as of
the other human rights treaty bodies, established under
the relevant international instruments in the field of 1111man rights;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the provision of appropriate staff and facilities for the effective performance of the functions of the Committee against Torture;
6. Again requests all States to become parties to the
Convention as a matter of priority;
7. Once again invites all States, upon ratification of or
accession to the Convention, or subsequently, to consider
the possibility of making the declarations provided for in
articles 21 and 22 thereof:
139 Resolution 34/169, annex
140 A/34/146, annex.
14 1 A/42/451

8. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
Commission on Human Rights at its forty-fourth session
and to the General Assembly at its forty-third session a report on the status of the Convention against Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment;
9. Decides to consider the report of the SecretaryGeneral at its forty-third session under the item entitled
"Torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment".
93rd plenary meeting
7 December 1987

42/124.

Torture and inhuman treatment of children in
detention in South Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling the relevant provisions of the Declaration on
the Protection of All Persons from Being Subjected to
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, 137 the Convention against Torture
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment 142 and the Declaration on the Rights of the
Child, 90
Welcoming the holding of the International Conference
on Children, Repression and the Law in Apartheid South
Africa at Harare, from 24 to 27 September 1987,
Appalled at evidence that children in South Africa are
subjected to detention, torture and inhuman treatment,
l. Expresses its profound outrage at reports of detention, torture and inhuman treatment of children in South
Africa;
2. Calls upon the South African authorities urgently to
release children held in detention in that country;
3. Calls for the immediate dismantlement of the socalled •·rehabilitation camps" or "re-education centres":
4. Requests all relevant United Nations bodies and
specialized agencies to draw attention to, monitor and expose these inhuman practices;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to make available to
the Commission on Human Rights the final documents of
the International Conference on Children, Repression and
the Law in Apartheid South Africa, for action by the Special Rapporteur on Torture.
93rd plenary meeting
7 December 1987

42/125.

Interregional Consultation on Developmental
Social Welfare Policies and Programmes

The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolutions
I 985/26 of 29 May 1985 and 1987 /48 of 28 May 1987
concerning preparations for an Interregional Consultation
on Developmental Social Welfare Policies and Programmes,
Conscious of the considerable contribution made to the
preparations for the Interregional Consultation on
Developmental Social Welfare Policies and Programmes
by the regional conferences of the ministers responsible for
social welfare and the Commission for Social Develop-
