IA&
TPENTY-SIXTH

RDS
YEAR

th
MEETING:

NEW

26 MAY

1971

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l568)

Adoption

of.the agenda

. .

. . . , . . . . . . . . . , . ..

+. I . . I . . .

. . . . , .. , . . , . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . .. . , . . . . . . . .

Letter dated 26 December 1963 from the Permanqnt Representative
of Cyprus to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/5488):
Report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations operation in Cyprus
(S/10199 and Corr.1)
. , . , .. .. , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. , . . , . , . . . .

Page

1
1”

]

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document,
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly voh~mes of ResoWons and Decisions of the
Security Council The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date,

.

-

FIFTEEN

HUNDRED

AND SIXTY-EIGHTH

Held in New York on Wednesday,
President:

MEETING

26 May 1971, at 4 p.m.

sentatives in conducting a series of useful informal
tions on various important matters.

Mr. Nsanzd TERENCE (Burundi),

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France, Italy, Japan,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Svria. Union of
Soviet - Socialist Republics, U&ed Kinidbm ’ of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 568)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Letter dated 26 December 1963 from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/5488):
Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations operation in Cyprus (S/10199 and Corr.1).
Adoption of the agenda
77te agmda was adopted.

Letter dated 26 December 1963 from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/5488):
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
operation in Cyprus (S/l 0199 and Corr. 1)
1, The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): Pursuant to the decision taken at the previous meeting, I invite
the representatives of Cyprus, Turkey and Greece fo take
places at the Security Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. 2. Rossides
/Oprus), Mr. U. H. Bqiilken (Turkey) and Mr. D. Bitsios
(Greece) took places at the Security Council table.

con&ta-

4. May I express QUT very sincere appreciation to the
Secretary-General for preparing an elaborate and objective
report to the Security Council. to Ihe Special Representative, Mr. Osorio-Tifall, the Force Commander, Major
General Prem Chand, and to the United Nations personnel
of aI1 categories, military or civilian, who are under the
direction of the Secretary-General, for their devotion, high
discipline and efforts in performing the duties and functions assigned to them by the Security Council in this
matter,
5. In the introductory part of the .present report of the
Secretary-Genera’] /S/10199 and Corr.Z/, we take note that
the situation in the last six months has remained generaIly
calm, but there is a lack of progress in the intercommunal
talks and in efforts towards a return to normal conditions.
Also, we are disheartened by the Secretary-General’s
observation in paragraph 79 of his report, that the
communal situation is all the more hazardous because of
the persistent confrontation of two well-armed military
forces which continue to improve in operational capability
with the passageof time.
6. In view of such prevailing conditions in Cyprus, my
delegation supports the approach recommended in the
Secretary-General’s report that the mandate of the United
Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus should be extended
for a further period of six months. We continue to share the
conviction that the United Nations Force in Cyprus has a
vital role to play in rn?inbaini,ng calm between the two
Cypriot communities and that it has succeeded in preventing the delicate situation in Cyprus from worsening and
has contributed to maintaining international peace.
7. However, our support for the resolution adopted by the
Council this morning /29j’(I$?I~J
is not without some
feeling of reluctance. We know that there is a criticism
directed against the United Nations that the apparently
indefinite prolongation of the Mandate sf the United
Nations Force in Cyprus has produced a tendency to
perpetuate a potentially explosive situation ani? to serve as
a pretext for the indefinite postponement of the essential
compromise between the parties concerned. 1 should
particularly like to draw the attention of those parties
concerned to the last part of operative paragraph 3 of the
resolution which approves the extension of the stationing
of the United Nations Force in the etipectation that by
then-which means by 15 December 1971~sufficient pro.
gress towards a final solution will make possible a with-

2. Mr. OGISO (Japan): Mr.President, I should like to
congratulate you warmly as the President of the Security
Council for the month of May. I can assure you of my
delegation’s full co-operation, There is no doubt that under
your wise and experienced guidance the discussions in the
Security Council will be successful.
3. I also wish to express my tribute to Ambassador Ortiz
de ROZ~S of Argentina and Ambassador Longerstaey of
Belgium for their services as Presidents of the Council in
March and April, respectively. Although the Council was
not convened in the course of those months, all of us know
the remarkable statesmanship displayed by both repreI

drawal or substantial reduction of the Force. Our support
for this resolution is based exactly on the strong expectation that the parties concerned wiJ1 make most sincere
efforts in a spirit of co-operation and compromise to
accomplish sufficient progress towards a negotiated solution of the underlying problems of the island by the end of
this year.
8. Past experience shows that the greatest obstacle to
achieving this objective has been the mutual mistrust and
the depth of feeling which divides the two communities. In
the opinion of my delegation, in order to alleviate the
antagonism and recover the mutual trust between them the
following steps are imperative.
9. First, the parties and Governments concerned should be
urged to exercise utmost restraint and moderation, and
especially to avoid threats, verbal or otherwise, or the use
of drastic retaliatory measures, and atso to refrain from
making provocative public statements which tend seriously
to undermine mutual trust in the ultimate objective of each
other.
IO. Second, the parties should continue more intensively
their intercommunal talks by tackling, first of all, such
practical problems of social life as the question of the
return of Turkish Cypriot displaced persons, the freedom of
lnovement through Turkish Cypriot controlled areas for
unarmed Greek Cypriot civilians, or the promotion of
Bconomic co-operation between the two communities. If
we could achieve some break-through in such spheres of
daily life. I believe that it would accelerate the return to
normal conditions in other spheres.
L 1. Third, further intensive efforts should bc made by the
3arties concerned for de-confrontation and de-escalation of
military forces, especially in the more sensitive areas. If this
:an be achieved, it could further lead to mutual reduction
nd withdrawal of the national contingents of the Governnents concerned. In this connexion, it should be emphaized that the Special Representative of the Secretarygeneral will be able, upon~quest of the parties, to play a
lore positive catalytic role in the exercise of his good
ffices between the two communities.
2. If an atmosphere of mutual trust is restored between
ie two communities by this pragmatic approach, the door
ill be open to further negotiation for a lasting settlement
runded upon an independent and sovereign State of
yprus in which the two communities participate.
I. It should be recalled that operative paragraph 7 of
:curity Council resolution 186 (1964) of 4 March
%4-the original resolution on the question-recommends
at the Secretary-General designate a mediator, in agree%nt with the Governments directly concerned. So far this
:ans of achieving a settlement has been faced with an
passe, mainly because of mutual mistrust between the
rties concerned. When the necessary atmosphere of
dual trust is recovered, the time will be ripe for the
until, as well as for the parties and Governments
Icemed, to consider the possibility of reactivating the
Frtant concept of the mediator envisaged in the original
until resoIution.

14. It can be also expected, at that stage, that the size of
the United Nations Force in Cyprus could, as a result of
such improvement in the communal and military situation,
be gradually reduced to a nominal presence.
15. In conclusion, I wish to reiterate our desire that a
peaceful solution . to the Cyprus question be found
promptly, in a spirit of compromise on both sides. It has
been on this understanding that Japan has continued to
support the peace-keeping operations in Cyprus by voluntary contributions. We wish to take this opportunity of
expressing our gratitude to the Governments that have
patiently shouldered the burden of providing the contingents for the peace-keeping operation. We sincerely hope
that future developments in Cyprus witi not disillusion any
of us here today+
16. Before .ending my statement, may I join the previous
speakers in expressing our deep sympathy to the Turkish
people for the disaster caused by the recent earthquakes in
Turkey?
17. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): Mr. President, I wish to congratulate you on your assumption, for the second time, of the
high office of President of the Security Council. Important
decisions were adopted when the Council met under your
presidency before, and we have thus come to know the
great qualities of tact, universal culture and perseverance
with which you discharge your duties.
18. We wish also to congratulate the outgoing President,
the permanent representative of Belgium, Ambassador
Longerstaey, and also the Ambassador of Argentina, Ambassador Ortiz de Rozas. Although the Council did not
meet formally during their presidencies there were important meetings for consultation, and committee meetings
also. They both displayed genuine and great qualities of
refinement, deep understanding of the problems of which
we are seized and a great senseof responsibility concerning
the work of the Security Council.
19. We certainly regret the absence of Under-SecretaryGeneral Rolz-Bennett, who served the United Nations with
loyalty and devotion, and we welcome the new UnderSecretary-General, Mr. Guyer, a former distinguished
Ambassador of Argentina with Iong experience and intimate knowledge of the problems of the United Nations.
20. The Security Council is meeting today to discuss the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
operation in Cyprus for the period 2 December 1970 to 19
May 1971. In our view this report is outstanding in its
frankness. Our Secretary-General, U Thant, sets forth for
the international community the very diEcult problems
that beset the people of Cyprus. Every one of us who has,
read this report cannot but be. impressed with the straight?
forward account of the mounting aspects.of the crisis now
besetting Cyprus and the realistic proposals submitted by
>’
the Secretary-GeneraI,for its solution,
’
21, Those of us who have known our Secretary-General,
U Thant, for a number of years know that he has always
been motivated by the highest ideals of universaiism and
humanism. Not content with outside, ever-changing and

deceiving appearances, he delves-as is characteristic of
profound contemplative thinking-into the deeper causes of
problems, probing into the bedrock of humanity. All this
stems from a legacy of thousands of years of accumulative
culture, humanism and tolerance. Thus in the very intro.
duction to the report under review, he sets forth the
situation we are dealing with in very straightforward terms:
“The situation in the last six months with regard to the
prevention of a recurrence of fighting has remained
generally calm. However, the marked lack of progress in
the intercommunal talks and in efforts towards a return
to normal conditions has resulted in an increase in tension
and a deterioration
of the political atmosphere.”
lSj10199and Corr.l, para. 2.1
The report ends with this solemn warning:
“Such a crisis would not only have the gravest
consequences for the people of the island, but might well
also constitute a serious threat to peace and security in
the eastern Mediterranean.“/Ibid.,
para. 81.J
22. Needless to say, we are part and parcel of that area,
the eastern Mediterranean, whose history-and I mean the
history of the whole area-has been marked by great human
tragedies and unspeakable suffering for the masses of the
peoples. Hence it is our imperative duty to approach that
grave situation with all the devotion and objectivity it
requires of us. Furthermore, as I have had occasion to say
before. my own country, Syria, and indeed all the Arab
countries, have with all the parties concerned&Turkey,
Greece and Cyprus-the most intimate economic, political
and cultural relationship, apart from the historical ties of
neighbourliness and friendship that bind us all together.
And I wish on this occasion to convey to our colleague the
representative of Turkey the sincere condolences of the
delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic and the Government and people of Syria on the great tragedy that befell
Turkey as a result of the earthquake of a few days ago.
23. The report of the Secretary-General, while dealing
with the derivative aspects and manifestations of the
Cyprus problem with which the Council is now so very well
acquainted, does not ignore the basic fundamental issue. TO
mention some of the aspects of the now grave situation, the
Secretary-General informs us that “the situation continued
tobe.. 4calm on the surface” and adds:

26. One very sensitive problem is that of the displaced
persons; but we are told of a new development in the
report: “The Government, through its representative at the
intercommunal talks, has put forward a programme for
their return to their villages.” /Ibid., pura. 5I.j It is our
earnest hope that through the continuation of the intercommunal talks greater progress can be made for all
displaced persons to return to their villages and farms. This
we believe could lead to a lessening of tension in the area.
We equalIy hope that the intercommunal talks will keep the
question of dispfaced persons as well as the freedom of
movement-which
remains unchanged-under continuous
review. The good offices of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General is a positive factor in the situation; he
is available to the parties dire&y concerned and continues
to maintain close contact with the leadership of the two
communities, Greek and Turkish.
27. We voted this morning on the resolution extending for
the nineteenth time the stationing of the United Nations
Peace-keeping Force. I wish as a commentary on the
extension of the Force to quote two of our experienced
colleagues among the permanent members of the Security
Council. In their respective statements delivered at the
meeting held on 10 December 1970, and in the order in
which they were delivered, the representative of France had
this to say:
[The speaker corltinued in French.J

“But it should again be empbasized that the prksence of
the United Nations Force is justified only to the extent
that it can faciIitate such a development. The quasi-automatic prolongation in difficult fmancial circumstances of
an operation decided upon almost seven years ago could
not be viewed favourably if its only effect was to
crystallize a dangerous situation and to serve as a pretext
for the indefinite postponement of the necessary compromise.” 11564th meeting, paras. 125 and 126. J

But thanks to the efforts of the personal representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Osorio-TafaII, and thanks to the
united Nations Force Commander and all the officers and
h7en and civilian staff of the United Nations Force, they
here able, according to the report, to bring about a
relaxation in areas of direct confrontation,
QO

25. The tendency towards separate economic development
has not been reversed. There is one hopeful note, however:
we are told that there has been more co-operation in
agricultural projects undertaken by the Government with
the assistance of the World Food Programme and the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.

“In these conditions,it seems to my delegation that the
maintenance of the United Nations Force for a further
period of six months could, by avoiding fresh confrontation, heIp to facilitate what the report describes as an
arduous road with a view to finding a reasonable and
pract icaI compromise,

“While the level of tension has fluctuated, the atmosphere of mutual trust and confidence, so essential to
achieving an improvement of the situation, is still
noticeably lacking. Instead, there have been periods of
considerable military display and acute sensitivity ,”
fIbid., para. 26. /

24.

conditions, with the exception of some developments
towards a restoration of public services and in the field of
economic co-operation”. [Ibid., pam. 38./

/The speaker resumed in EngIis?z.J
28. The representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, speaking on the same aspect, said:

We are also told, in chapter III, that “there have been
significant changes in regard to a return to normal

“The report contains a recommendation that the
stationing of United Nations Forces in Cyprus should be
3

extended once again for a further period of six months.
In this connexion it should be noted that almost seven
years have already elapsed since the United Nations forces
first appeared in Cyprus, for reasons which are well
known. Such a lengthy stay in the island cannot in any
way be regarded as normal. The Soviet delegation still
maintains that this United Nations operation cannot, and
should not, continue indefinitely.” /Ibid., poras. 161
and 162.f
29. Indeed, many of the speakers who spoke today
reiterated such impressions. And those words, true as they
were when they were pronounced, still remain true today,
and they will be true six months, or one year, or one year
and a half from today if another extension is required or
asked for.
30. While the United Nations forces have played and
continue to play a salutary and beneficial role, they can
never take the place of intercommunal talks especially since
in Cyprus the two communities have coexisted and will
continue to coexist.
31. Finally, WC fully share the view of the SecretaryGeneral that it is “essential to preserve the present calm in
an effort to foster a genuine improvement in the relations
between all the peopIe of the isIand.“/S/IOIV~
and Cm.1.
pnra. SO./
37. The intcrcommunal talks remain not only the best but
in the present circumstances probably the only wny to an
agreed settlement. We also express our earnest hope that
everything will be done to help reduce the now existing and
mounting tension so that all the pcoplc of Cyprus and their
genuine friends can look forward to a briglifer future in the
whole eastern Mediterranean,
33. Mr. KOSCIUSKO-MORIZET
(iutcrprcfation
ficm
Frcrrcl~): First of all, 1 should like to add my voice to those
voices of the speakers who have preceded me and who have
communicated to our colleague from Turkey their deep
feelings and sympathy because of the cataclysm which has
so painfully struck his country. In fact these natural and,
therefore, inevitable scourges should have priority in the
collective efforts of nations and of men so as to alleviate
the sufferings engendered for the population, They should
in any case make us look into ourselves and realize how
ridiculous the artificial scourges often are as constituted by
divisions in the world, conflicts, wars, and which, nevertheless, absorb most of our activities. They should also assist us
in understanding that the solution is perhaps to be found in
showing more reasonableness and more human solidarity.

Nations forces on Cyprus, the dcfcgation of France wished
to state that it was concerned by the perpetuation on the
island of a precarious and threatening situation.
36. It B that same feeling of anxiety that Is expressed
today in the report of the Secretary-General submitted for
our consideration.
37. Certainly, as the document notes, the last six months
have been calm, at least on the surface, and the number of
incidents giving rise to gunfire have not increased noticeably as compared with the previous six months. lt is true
that some modest progress has been registered in a few
sectors, particularly in bringing certain public services back
to normal. Definitely, as we wished last year, the Govcrnment has taken some initiatives so as to resolve the grievous
problem of displaced persons and the programme which it
has prepared on the subject has been the subject of an
exchange of views between the representatives of the two
communities.
38. Nevertheless, the communities remain profoundly
divided. Mutual suspicion creates a general atmosphere of
insecurity and leads to “the persistent confrontation of two
well-armed military forces” which are constantly being
strengthened and trained in anticipation of possible confrontations. Recourse to force rather than to conciliation in
these conditions becomes a formidable temptation. So far
the vigilance and prudence of Mr. Osorio-Tafall and his
assistants, the permanent surveillance carried out by the
United Nations officers and soIdiers, under the authority of
General Prem Chand, their prompt intervention wherever it
has been proved to be necessary, their devotion and their
spirit of discipline which they have evinced in the exercise
of their delicate mission have enabled them to maintain a
fragile sfattrs quo. It suffices to read the report submitted
to us to realize how precarious the situation is. In the
overheated atmosphere of Cyprus, clearly the slightest
spark could cause a general conflagration, and our Secretary-General has emphasized that this not only would have
tragic consequences for the population of the island but
also could constitute a serious threat to peace and security
in the eastern Mediterranean.
39. How sre we to respond to the rise in such dangers?
l-low, in particular, can the United Nations, taking into
account its responsibilities, facilitate the restoration of real
peace?
40. 1n the present circumstances the Secretary-General
informs us: “I have no alternative but to recommend the
extension of UNFICYP’s mandate for a further period of
six months . . .” /S/l01 99 and Corr.I, para. 861. The
Force, he assures us,maintains good working relations with
the principal parties concerned and they seem to be agreed
to maintain it for an additional period. In these drcumstances my delegation has once again supported the
resolution which we have just adopted. But once again we
would, as did the representative of Syria a ft?W minUteS ago,
express doubts and apprehensions. The almost automatic
renewal of the mandate of the Force has enabled us until
now certainly to avoid the worst. We hope that this w8
continue to hold true for the next six months. But, and we
have said this repeatedly, this runs counter to the well

34. Mr. President, I shall follow with discipline the rule
which was adopted by the Council on the proposal of
Ambassador Yost. Accordingly, I shall refrain from comments on yourself, on our colleagues who preceded YOU and
on the new arrivals, but I would wish you-and all of them
to know-that
the silence is a sophisticated eulogy or, if
YOU prefer, an understatement brought to its extreme limit.
JS. Speaking in the Council on 10 December last /1564lJr
me’erirrgj after the vote on the resolution which, for the
eighteenth time, extended the stationing of the United
4

.-_--------_~m__l___-~--~.--_

.-...

.I

.” ._.___....

F’

understood interests of the United Nations and also counter
to the interests of the inhabitants of the island themselves if
it seems to the parties who are mainly concerned to be the
means to delay indefinitely the necessary meeting of minds
and the conclusion of an indispensable compromise.
Through the years, as many speakers have also emphasized
the tendency towards separate economic development has
been strengthened, while a part of the population has come
to consider it natural to prohibit the other part of the
population from having access to certain public roads.
Military preparations are increasing. Such a development
obviously does not lead to peace and cannot but render the
situation more difficult.
41. The Secretary-General continues:
“The prospect of an apparently indefinite commitment
for the United Nations in Cyprus poses fundamental
problems for the Organization in facing its responsibilities
for the maintenance-of international peace and security. I
do not believe that it would be either possible or wise to
postpone for very much longer a comprehensive review of
this problem.” /Ibid., pnru. 87.j
That is the warning which the Secretary-General in his last
report has invited us to ponder. We hope that this will be
taken seriously in Cyprus a!so.
42. Whatever may be the practical difficulties on the
island which hinder and delay the conclusion of an
agreement between the two parties, it is clear that the main
obstacle is a psychological one, due to patterns of thought
and behaviour which will therefore have lo change.
43. As the Secretary-General has said: “‘What is Iacting.
and needs to be restored, is the parties’ mutual confidence
in each other’s good faith and ultimate political objectives.”
/Ibid., paru. 82.j Now in these circumstances could our
Secretary-General, U Thant, fail to deplore the fact that
recent statements by responsible personalities of both
parties stem to give rise to serious misunderstandings and to
contribute to undermining mutual contidence? We cannot
fail to hope with him that the leaders of all the parties
concerned will restate publicly their determination that the
problem of Cyprus must be solved by arriving, through
peaceful means, at a lasting agreement.
44. The most promising course, in spite of any vicissitudes
they are undergoing, remains that of negotiations between
the two communities. These were started in 1968 and
should be continued. We hope that they will lead to a
general agreement in a reasonable time because, as was
recognized recently by one of the parties, any useless
prolongation is harmful to the extent that the appearance
of new elements might increase the difficulties.
45. The latter must be surmounted, and surmounted
without further delay. We are told that this can only be
done if the two parties prove themselves to be bold,
imaginative and sincere. Nobody doubts that they are
capable of this. But, being aware of the tragic consequences
of a possible failure and perhaps encouraged to follow the
Course of reason by the Governments of those countries to
which they so willingly turn, they must also have the firm
will to reach agreement.

-.

,,:-‘.

,.--

.

46. Mr. NUR ELMI (Somalia): Allow me first of all to
express to the Turkish delegation the sincere sympathy of
the delegation of the Somali Democratic Republic on the
natural disaster caused by the recent earthquake which
devastated parts of its country.
47. Mr. President, it is with great pleasure that I extend to
you on behalf of the delegation of the Somali Republic my
sincere congratulations on your assumption of the Presidency of the Security Council for the current month. I
need not dwell at length on my satisfaction that the task of
guiding our deliberations today has fallen to a colleague and
a personal friend.
48. 1 also wish to extend mv cancratulations to your
predecessors, the Ambassadors* from-Argentina andVBcl.
gium, for the quality of statesmanship they showed during
their tenure of office.
49. The Secretary-General of the United Nations and his
collaborators should be congratulated for the clear and
up-to-date report covering the activities of the United
Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus and for the efforts
they have made to implement the mandate they received
from this Council. The report of the Secretary-General
indicates, however, that there has been little improvement
in the situation on this troubled island. Indeed such a lack
of improvement in the situation does not stimulate a return
to normal conditions, especially when all the parties
concerned are reported to have adopted uncompromising
attitudes.
50. We had hoped that after years of conflict and
confrontation, the people of Cyprus themselves would
make more serious efforts in their intercommunal talks
towards the achievement of a return to normal conditions
in the island. We realize, however, that the situation
involves difficulties which cannot be solved overnight, but
the leaders of both communities must show the will and
determination to take the future of their country into their
own hands and find a modus viverrdi among their people. If
both these communities have coexisted for the past four
centuries, under the rule of one or other foreign Power that
has dominated the eastern Mediterranean, we see no reason
why they cannot coexist today as citizens of an independent sovereign State. We believe that a lasting solution
to this unhappy situation lies squarely with the leaders of
this island whose people have already suffered from the
torments and tensions resulting from the civil strife in this
divided small nation since 1963.
51. It is in the light of these brief considerations that we
stress here the necessity for the leaders of all the parties
concerned in the island of Cyprus to have the determination and courage to set to work with all their strength and
their resourcefulness to solve their problems if they want to
preserve and enjoy the independence and nationhood they
obtained with the great sacrifice of their people from a
colonial tyranny lasting for generations.
52. This, in our view, should be the mainspring of their
efforts, because we believe-and here I should like to
address myself directly to the representative of Cyprusthat unless the people of Cyprus accept this truth, no

amount of outside help or words of thoughtful resolutions
will ever solve the problems of their country,
53. It is for the same considerations so clearly expressed
by the Secretary-General in the last chapter of hjs report,
that rn+ delegation voted in favour of the resolution
unanimously adopted today by the Council, w&h extends
the presence of the United Nations Force in Cyprus for a
further period of six months until 15 December 1971, since
it appears to us that the political as well as other aspects of
the island’s life still rest, unfortunately, on a precarious
basis.
54. Mr. VINCI (Italy): In respecting the commitment I
also made at the 1565th meeting of the Security Council in
February iast not to spend our time in congratulatory
remarks, I shall abstain, as the representative of France has
done, from addressing myself to you, Mr. President, and to
the previous Presidents of the Council, Ambassador ()rtiz
de Rozas and Ambassador Longerstaey, as well as to new
colleagues. But I can assure you, Mr. President, that this
does not mean any lack of regard, respect or esteem, nor
does it diminish our sincere appreciation of the consultations and useful work that has been conducted during the
tenure of that high office by all of you.
55. I should also like to express to Ambassador Bayiilken
the sincere sympathy of my delegation for the heavy losses
in human lives and property which the recent seismic
disostcr has produced in Turkey. My country, which has
often been subject to the same natural calamities, can
understand perfectly the human suffering and the problems
which they produce. I am sure that I speak for the Italian
Government and people in saying that we share with
compassion the feelings of grief of our Turkish friends.
56. The positive vote which I have cast on behalf of my
delegation on the draft resolution submitted for the
approval of the Security Council testifies to the unswerving
support of the Italianavernment
for the United Nations
peace-keeping operations in Cyprus. That support stems
from two basic considerations: the first, of a genera1 nature,
is connected with my Government’s view of the functions
of the world Organization; and the second, of a more
specific nature, is related to the situation on an island
which, I need hardly recall, is geographically and historically very close to my own country.
57. I should like to make some general remarks on the
first point. For Years it has been the consistent policy Of
my Government to advocate an ever increasing peacekeeping capability for the United Nations, To enm
international peace and security represents the main r&n
d%tre of this Organization’s existence. Its authority and, in
the long run, its very survival as an active political factor in
the worId arena will depend on its capacity to respond and
arise to the expectations of public opinion and of governments in this field.

fifth commemorative session, emphasised the urgency and
importance of strengthening the peace-keeping machinery
of the world Organisation. In the Declaration solemnly
adopted on 24 October 1970 [see resolution 2627 (XXV)],
the General Assembly re-aftirmed its determination to take
concrete steps to reach agreement on more effective
procedures for carrying out United Nations peacekeeping
functions consistent with the Charter. Later on, by adopting the Declaration on the Strengthening of International
Security {WSO~U~~O~
2734 (XXVJ, the Assembly unanimously urged all Members to respond to the immediate
need to agree on guidelines for more effective peacekeeping operations in accordance with the Charter and to
support
the efforts of the Speci;ulCommittee to reach
agreement on all questions relating to such operations as
well as on provisions for their appropriate and equitable
financing.
59. On the second specific point, let me start by stating
that the Italian Government has from the beginning
supported, and continues to support, the United Nations
operation in Cyprus for two reasons: first, because it is
consistent with the position my country has taken on the
over-all problem of peace-keeping as well as on previous
operations like those in the Congo and in the Middle East,
where the Italian contribution in men and means is on
record; secondly, because the Organisation on this specific
occasion could prove, as it has done, its capacity to restore
peace and to avoid a situation in which a local feud might
become a hotbed of international tension and insecurity.
60. This is once more confirmed by the lucid and
comprehensive repbrt for which we feel indebted to the
Secretary-General. It is gratifying that a recurrence of
fighting has been prevented during the Iast six months, and
1 wish to associate myself with the tribute paid to the
Secretary-General’s Special Representative in Cyprus,
Mr. Osorio-Tafall, and to the Commander of the UNFICYP,
General Prem Chand. These men, together with all the
members of the United Nations operation force, have
continued to implement a most worthwhile task at the cost
of personal sacrifice; they fully deserve the acknowledgement and gratitude of us all. We think that their presence in
Cyprus is still necessary and that the Secretary-General was
right to rqommend a further six-month extension of the
mandate of UNFICYP. We welcome the fact that the
Security Council has agreed to that recommendation. I am
confident that my Government will not fail to provide its
financial contribution, in the same amount it did in the
past, to the cost of maintaining UNFICYP for another
period of six months.
61. Since I have mentioned the invaluable contribution
made by so many to the United Nations operation i
Cyprus, I wish to recall, with gratitude, the important ar
fruitful role played by Jose Rolz-Bennett in this as WC“
h other significani United Nations activities. We regrc’
reasons of health have deprived us of his inva
co-operation and we wish our good and cherished frierl
the best.

58. The Secretary-General recalled those expectations at
the meeting of the Special Committee on Peace-keeping
Operations held on 1 April of this year /49th meeli%].
And all of us certainly have in mind the strong appeal of
the Heads of State and Government who, at the twenty-

62. 1 wish at the same time to give a warm wetcome to the
new Under-Secretary-General, Roberto Guyer, who ha
already shown his great capacity, his skill and his foresigh
6

63. Peace-keeping, however successful, will never be a
substitute for peace-budding. I cannot, therefore, refrain
from voicing deep concern for the lack of progress
denounced by the Secretary-General in the intercommunal
talks and in efforts towards a return to normal conditionsthe more so, as U ‘I’hant warns that a new crisis might well
constitute a serious threat to peace and security in the
eastern Mediterranean,
64. One reason why my delegation had it in mind to
request a minor change in the resolution we have just
adopted /293(1971)/-that
is, the deletion in operative
paragraph 2 of the words ‘The present auspicious climate
and opportunities”-was because the report of the Secretary-General reflects, UnfortunateIy, rather different conditions. If we have not put forward this request, it is
because we hope that these more favourable conditions will
soon be reestablished.
65. We need, indeed, to see the precarious conditions
prevailing in Cyprus transformed into a situation of
enduring stability. We certainly recognize the complexity of
the issues involved, but we do not think that the rights and
interests of the two communities living in the island are
irreconcilable.
66. On the basis of our own experience, however different, my delegation holds the view that no problem is
jntractable provided there is a sincere joint will to settle it,
that the main parties concerned focus their attention on the
real interests, on the well-being of their peoples, and that
they concentrate their efforts on what they have in
common rather than on what divides them. In other words,
the intercommunal talks in Cyprus can lead to a lasting
s&tion
provided that both sides engage in an earnest
search for a fair and just compromise based on the
principles of independence and unity of the Republic of
Cyprus, of full respect for the freely-expressed will of the
two ethnic groups and for their respective rights and
titerests. Of course, it is essential to restore confidence in
these talks and, in order to build confidence, nothing could
help
more than if each side refrained from pursuing
advantages to the detriment of the other side. We all, I
think,
realize that today public opinion is so alert that
Whatever one says or does not say, people know or sense
exactly what is going on in the minds of those who make
Public
statements. In other words, we all know that
rfelaying tactics in a world which moves at supersonic speed
ire outdated and anachronistic.

us. The appeal addressed to us by the Secretary-General
makes our duty more incumbent.
68. Mr. KU$ACA Poland): One of the motives of our
meeting today seems to be brevity. I shall try to adapt
myself to this trend of our discussion. But I hope you will
allow me, Mr. President, to congratulate you warmly on
your assumption, for the second time, of the functions of
President of the Security Council and to reiterate to you
the feelings of friendship that my delegation and I hold for
your country and for you personally.
69. Making a brief incursion back into March and April,
one is naturally led to thank most sincerely Ambassador
Ortiz de Rozas of Argentina and Ambassador Longerstaey
of E!-eJgium, in particular for the guidance that they
provided to us in the exchanges of views on the most vital
issues of international peace and security that they initiated
and arranged.
70. The Security Council has undertaken the discussion
today of the situation in Cyprus with an evident sense of
preoccupation. The length of time during which this
question has been on the agenda of the Council, the
regularity and frequency of the Council’s meetings devoted
to the mere adoption of measures of a provisional character, on the one hand, and the fact that the problem remains
unresolved, that no progress is being achjeved and that in
some respects we have to note a deterioration of the
situation, on the other hand, cannot but give rise to serious
concern. This concern is reflected in the report of our
distinguished Secretary-General. It has clearly emerged
during the debate.
71, Many speakers who have preceded me have quoted at
length from the report of the Secretary-General. I shaI1
therefore refrain from repeating these quotations. When
discussing the problem of Cyprus, our delegation has aIways
stressed the fact that normalizatjon of the situation in
Cyprus can be achieved only through the full recognition
and respect of the independence, sovereignty, and territorial integrity of the Cypriot State and based on the
mutual understanding and agreement of the whole Cypriot
people. Such a normalization would be in the interest of
the people of Cyprus, of the lessening of tension in the
sensitive region of the world, of the role of Cyprus as an
independent peace-Ioving people pursuing a policy of
non-participation in military alliances.
72. This requires, as an external framework, respect for
the sovereign right of the people of Cyprus to decide on its
internal affairs. It therefore requires the elimination of all
imperialist, military influences which stand in the way of a
soIution of the problem.

j7 - We would like, in concluding, to add our appeal for
lmcere efforts to be made towards an early and satisfactory
ettlement
through peacefir means. And in any dispute the
est solution can always come from direct taIks and
Rderstanding between the main parties concerned, which
‘r Cyprus means the two communities. However, in the
CL%-tunate event that these talks should not produce the
‘“UIts
for which I am sure we alI wish, the Italian
“legation would be prepared to take up a comprehensive
view of this problem, as suggested by the Secretary=R@ral in paragraph 87 of his report. Whoever has at heart,
we have the irreplaceable functions of the Security
‘“Wl
in the mainte n ance of international peace and
z”rity cannot fail to face the responsibilities entrusted to

73, We look at the negotiations conducted between Greek
and Turkish communities as the internal factor of normalization in the situation in Cyprus. We share the preoccupations voiced here today in the debate that these taIks
should proceed unhindered. We hope for their earliest
possible fruitful completion, We have always supported and
:ontinue to support the aspirations of the people of Cyprus
for the strengthening of its independence and sovereignty,
Tar a peaceful solution to the problem, consistent with the
7

j,,tercsls
of all Cypriot
nation&,
Consistent
With
he
interests
of international peace and security. We have voted
f-0r the draft resolution presented to the Council this
morning
for the further extension bY six months of the
man&te
of the United Nations Forces in Cyprus, as
proposed by the Secretary-General with the concurrence of
cyprus
and the parties concerned, and on the basis of

standing

aII’angemenk3.

We wish, however, to state our belief that the presence
74.
Of United Nations forces in Cyprus for more than seven
years
now certainly cannot be considered by us as a normal
phenomenon.
When speaking in the debate last June
/1543rd
meeting/,
our delegation already drew attention to
this fact. WC also said that we should like to express OUT
belief
that the oppOtiUnity
Wti Soon arise for the United
Nations
troops to be withdrawn from Cyprus, That is what
We said in June last year, and that is what we wish to
emphasize
today.
Before ending 1 should like to add a few words to
75.
to the Ambassador of Turkey our deeply felt
express
sympathy
on the tragic occasion of the earthquakes
a few
days ago in Turkey.
Mr. LIU (China): Mr. President, may I first of all join
76.
in the tributes that have been expressed to you and to your
distinguished
predecessors in the Chair by other speakers
before
tne? This is not the first time you have presided
over OUT deliberations and, if I may say so, you have earned
our adrnir:i(iun
I’or the dynamic and dedicated manner in
which
you discllarged the responsibilities of the presidency.
77.
I would also take the opportunity to associate m)
delegation
with the expressions of sympathy for the victims
of the recent earthquakes in Turkey.

conflicts from degenerating into chaos and Interminable
bloodshed. But in the last analysis the role UNFICYP can
play is no more than preparing the ground for a final and
lasting settlement. Political settlement can come about only
through direct negotiations by the parties concerned. I
think this has been made clear by the statements of the
representatives of Turkey and Greece this morning. The
intercommunal talks that have been going on are of crucial
importance to the future of Cyprus. As long as they
continue, there is hope. The consequences would be serious
and far-reaching indeed if they were to break down. It is
the earnest hope of my delegation that these talks will be
speeded up in the months to come so that a constructive
and workable solution may be found.
82. The Cyprus operation of the United Nations, in the
view of my delegation, has implications for the whole
question of peacekeeping. On the success or failure of
UNFlCYP will to a large extent depend the future of

similar undertakings. It is utterly necessary, I think, to
avoid the impression that once a peace-keeping operation
has ,been started, it is more likely than not to become a
permanent one.
83. Before concluding I should like to take this opportunity to express my delegation’s appreciation to the
Secretary-General, as well as to former Under-SecretaryGeneral Rolz-Bennett and all the military and civilian
officers in Cyprus for their meritorious service in carrying
out with efficiency and devotion the arduous duties
assigned to them on behalf of the United Nations.
84. Mr. NICOL (Sierra Leone): Mr. President, it is a very
pleasant duty for me to congratulate you, on behalf of my
delegation, on your assumption of the office of President of
this Council for the current month. Having worked with
you in close association for some time now, I have no
doubt whatever that your personal qualities will enable you
to carry out your important tasks to the satisfaction of all.
I should also like to associate my delegation with the
tribute which you so ably paid to Ambassador Longerstaey
of Belgium a,pd Ambassador Ortiz de Rows of Argentina,
who, as Presidents of the Council for March and April
respectively, gave us important and useful leadership. We all
remember the keenness they showed in their application to
duty and the excellent briefings they gave us about matters
concerning international peace and security.

My delegation welcomes the unanimous decision of
78.
the Council to extend the mandate of the United Nations
Peace-keeping
Force in Cyprus for an additional period of

six months. In our view rrrcchextension is called for by the
conditions
prevailing on the island.
delegation notes that in the period covered by the
report of the Secretary-General from 2 December
I970 to 19 May 1971, the situation in Cyprus continues to
be relatively
calm. Breaches of the cease-fire have been of a
minor
character and shooting incidents have not been
frequent
or serious enough to disturb the general state of
tnnquillity.
It is none the less regrettable, as the SecretaryGeneral
pointed out in the introduction to his report, that
“the marked lack of progress in the intercommunal talks
and in efforts towards a return to normal conditions has
resulted
in an increase in tension and a deterioration of the
Political
atmosphere.“[Sfl0?9
and Carr.I, para. 2.J
79.

81. So long, however, as there is no general political
settlement, progress in the economic field must necessarily
be of a limited nature. The United Nations Force has in the
Past aeven years succeeded in keeping the communal

My

present

85. We should Iike to offer our profound sympathy,
through Ambassador Bayiilken, to the Government of
Turkey for the repeated earthquake disasters which have
cost so many lives and caused such great damage to
property
recently and during the past few years.

80. This does not mean, of course, that in the last six
months
there has not been any significant progress. As Was
emPhasized
by the representative of Cyprus in his statemellt , the contacts between Greek and Turkish Cypn’Ots
have beon maintained in the economic field, especially in
the Private sector and in a number of semi-autonomous and
non-governmental
institutions. There has also been further
Progress
towards norm&&ion
of public services.

86. I now come to the subject of today’s meeting. In the
view of the delegation of Sierra Leone, the Council’s draft
resolution of 25 May 1971 /S/10209], to extend the life of
the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus for
another six-month period is very reasonable, and it was
therefore supported by us. The introduction to the Secre8

taryGeneral’s report leaves us with no illusions. The general
situation in the island is now one of relative calm, but it is a
calm which might erupt very quickly into a storm. The
report notes that “the marked lack of progress in the
intercommunal talks and in efforts towards a return to
normal conditions has resulted in an increase in tension and
a deterioration of the political atmosphere” /S/Z0299 and
CorrJ, pam. 2J.
87. The report is very informative and provides us whh a
balanced assessment of the existing situation. But this
evaluation, compared with that of the previous six-month
period, shows a deterioration in the island’s intercommunal
relationship. We would have expected a general easing of
tension, especially as seven years have already elapsed since
the presence of the United Nations was first established in
Cyprus.
$8. The intercommunal talks between Mr. Denktash and
Mr. Clerides offer much hope and constitute at present the
main path towards a peaceful settlement. We have foundand this is true not only in Cyprus but also in aI1other parts
of the world-that
political leaders in such a situation
should be given strength and encouragement by their
friends to be bold when making statements to their own
followers.
89. The principle of loving thy neighbour as thyself is
embedded in the traditions of both Greece and Turkey.
This should be preached more vigorously by the leaders of
both sides in Cyprus. We know that in doing so they will
face accusations of betrayal from extremists from their own
side, and mistrust and disbelief from the other side. But
there can be no other way if leadership is to be courageous,
productive and lasting. We thus appeal for conciliation
between all the communities concerned, and a speedy
correction of ancient wrongs and humiliations,

are so temptingly near for both communities. Because of
this we would appeal to the Governments of Greece and
Turkey to use all their powers of persuasion towards
bringing about a reconciliation between the two main
communities in the island.
95. The positive side of the report, which marks the
increased cooperation in economic matters among various
sections of the Cyprus population and a progressive
extension of the public service to Turkish Cypriot areas, is
one which gives my delegation great satisfaction. It appears
to us that an improvement in the economic development of
the population is an absolute necessity for improved
relations and peaceful cooperation between the communities.
96. In conclusion, we should like to congratulate and
praise the Secretary-General for the tireless leadership he
has given over the past seven years in such difficult and
trying circumstances. Our great appreciation goes also to his
Special Representative, Mr. Osorio-Tafall, his military commander, Major-General Prem Chand, and the new Under.
SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Roberto Guyer, as we11 as to the
civilian and military staff whose contributions have averted
a war in the island. We extend our deep sympathy to
Mr. Rolz-Bennett, the Under-Secretary-General charged
with this mission, for his untimely retirement,
97. The figures in the report speak for themselves of the
achievements of the Secretary-General and his staff. The
steady decline in shooting incidents in the past three years
to a figure which is now almost 90 per cent less than that of
three years ago is most encouraging. Although there is
much yet to be done in this situation, no one can deny that
the maintenance of this peace-keeping operation has been
one of the major successes of U Thant’s administration.

33. We look forward to the day when a citizen of an
bdependent and united Cyprus can say, “I am a Cypriot”,
without
reference to the country of origin of his or her
sncestors.

98. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): Mr. President, the delegation of
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics would like to add
its voice to the congratulations and good wishes addressed
to the President of the Security Council, the representative
of Burundi, and to the Presidents for the months of March
and April, the Ambassadors of Argentina and Belgium. I
should also like to congratulate our new colleague, Ambassador Bush, who is taking part for the first time in the work
of the Security Council, on his appointment to the
important post of Permanent Representative of the United
States of America to the United Nations. At the same time
I should like to express the hope that his active participation in the work of the Security Council, along with its
other members, will help to strengthen the international
political effectiveness of the United Nations and of the
Security Council as the organ bearing the primary responsibility within the United Nations system for the maintenance of peace and security. I should also like to express
the hope that the participation of Ambassador Bush in the
work of the Security Council will contribute not only to
the adoption by the Council of decisions relating to the
strengthening of peace and security but also-and I should
like to lay particular stress on this-to the implementation
m their entirety of decisions taken by the Council.

‘4.
We do not underestimate for a moment the difficulties
merent in such an approach, since both their motherlands

99. I have already had occasion to express to the
Permanent Representative of Turkey to the United Nations

90. We support the Secretary-General’s appeal for both
sides to continue with the intercommunal talks in a genuine
spirit of give and take. Unless all parties are willing and
determined to make concessions, little progress can be
achieved.
PI. My Government concurs with the Secretary-General’s
concern that should the talks break down grave consequences will result not only for the people of the island but
also for the peace and security of the eastern Mediterranean
which will be seriously threatened.
92. The problems which face Cyprus are not unique.
Perhaps this knowledge might help the various communities
towards
a solution when they realize that the probIems
they are facing have been faced elsewhere before and are
HOW
being faced elsewhere, including Africa, sometimes
With a considerable degree of success.

9

0”~ condulcnces and heartfelt sympathy in connexion with
t]lc natural disaSttV that has befallen his countrv-, n,
this
-.
occasion 1 should like once again to offer our deepest
sympathy
on the Occasipn of the disaster suffered by a
neigtlbotkng country WIUCI~ has caused many deaths among
the Turkish people and considerabIe material damage.
100. Turning IIOW to the question under discussion, the
USSR delegation considers it essential to begin by stressing
the fact that the Soviet
Union has invariably approached
matters debated in the Security Council and the United
Nations as a whole from the standpoint of the need to
strengthen international peace and security. This approach
is fully in keeping with the main purposes
and principles
of
the LJnited Nations Charter.
101. The lwenty-fourth
Congress of the Communist party
of the Soviet Union, held recently in Moscow, adopted a
comprehensive programme concerning the struggle for
peace, the strengthening of security and international
and the freedom and independence of
cospcration,
peoples. This programme reflects the organic link in the
Soviet Union’s foreign policy between implacable opposition to aggression, arbitrary action and the intrigues of the
irnpcrinlist forces, constructive proposals Concerning ways
of solving pressing international problems, and the consistcnt defence of the Leninist principle of peaceful
cocxistcncc between States having different social systems.
102. The tasks set J’orth in Mr. I.,. 1. Brezhnev’s report and
in the decisions of’ the Congress encompass the basic
problems of international relations at the present stage in
history. Their solution would be in the interest of all
peoples alld all States, no matter what social system the)
belong to or where they are situated OR the earth’s surface.
The ta&s xct by the Congress are realistic ones, since the)
are based on the results achieved or the measures planned in
recent years in the strug& for peace and international
co-operation. They constitute a practical and promising
programme of action
for the next few years. The fulfilment
of the tasks, set, by the ongress for the defence of peace
and the strengthening of international security would
ensure a change ill international relations from tension to
diterzte and a lasting peace. This is how those taskswere
understood by a large number of States and by world
opinion.
103. In seekingto fulfil these tasks,the Sovjet Union will
act in a principled, consistentand at the sametime flexible
manner,with due regard for the legitimate rights Of all
Stateswhoseinterestsare at stake in any particular issue.
The Congressaccordedpride of place in the struggle for
peaceto the task of eliminatingexisting hotbedsof war and
preventingothers from appearing.This is undoubtedly the
most pressingtask, sinceinternational relations can never
benormalizedaslong asactsof aggression
continue.
104. Under present circumstancesthe Soviet Union considers it a realistic and feasible task to prevent the
emergenceof further hotbeds of war, provided all States
interestedin maintaining peace unite their efforts. Conditionsmust be createdin which the refusalto resort to force
0r the threat of force for the settlement of disputes
bec0mcsan immutablelaw of international lift.

105. In the interests of strengthening peace the Soviet
Union is also in favour of making the fullest possibIe use of
the resources of the United Nations, whjch was set ut~ a
quarter of a century ago in order to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war. The United Nations
can and must do much more to strengthen international
secuity. This fundamental attitude of the Soviet Union
towards the solving of contemporary international problems also governs its approach to the Cyprus question,
106. The Soviet Union’sposition on the Cyprus question
hasbeen repeatedlysetforth in statementsby the Soviet
Governmentand by USSRrepresentativesin the Security
Counciland elsewhere.
Thisposition remainsfully valid and
in force. The Soviet Unionhasalways basedand still bases
its position on the fact that the Cyprus question must be
settledby peacefulmeansin the interestsof the people of
Cyprus and in order to reducetension in that important
areaof the world. Any suchsettlement mustbe basedon
respect for the freedom,independence,sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Republicof Cyprus which, as a
sovereignState and a Memberof the United Nations, is
conducting a policy of peace and non-alignment with
military blocs. There is and can be no doubt that the
solutionof the internalproblemsof Cyprus is a matter for
the Cypriots themselves,citizens of a sovereign State
Memberof the UnitedNations.
107. The questionof Cyprus must be settled witflout
external interference.The lawful rights of all citizens, of
both Greek and Turkishorigin, must be respectedby all.
The Soviet LJnionis resolutelyopposedto any attempt to
encroachupon the sovereigntyof the Republicof Cyprus
or to settle the Cyprusquestionbehind the backs of its
people,to the prejudiceof their vital interestsand to the
advantageof the selfishimperialistaimsof outside forces.
108. It is our profound conviction that in order to ensure
the full independence,integrity and sovereignty of the
Republicof Cyprus all foreign forces must be withdrawn
from its territory andall foreignmilitary basesremoved.
109. The Soviet delegationwould also like to stressthe
need, in strict accordancewith resolution 186 (1964)
adopted by the SecurityCouncilon 4 March 1964, for all
Statesto refgain from any action contrary to that resolution which might complicatethe situation in Cyprus.
110. It shouldalsobenoted that Cyprusis situatedin the
immediatevicinity of Europeand that the state of affairs
on that continent hasa mostdirect bearingon the situation
in Cyprus.The recent trendtowardsan easingof tensionin
Europecan therefore only be welcomed.For its part, the
Soviet Union, togetherwith other socialistcountries, has
consistently advocated the implementation of further
measuresfor the strengtheningof peace and security in
Europe, the most important of them being the rapid
convening of an all-Europeanconference on matters relatingto security.
111. Today, the SecurityCouncilis onceagainconsidering
the questionof Cyprusin connexionwith the report by the
Secretary-Generalon the United Nations operation in
Cyprusfor the period2 December1970 to I9 May 1971.

C)n reading this fcport,
OllC CanWt
fail to be Struck by the
- element in determining the attitude of the Soviet Union
~t~~crrwr~l that talks arc still going on in Cyprus between
towards the resolution adopted today.
reprcscntaiives of tjre Creek and Turkish communities with
a view to solving their rn~l~al problems. We take the view
115, The USSR delegation is at the same time authorized
that these tafks arc an internal matter of the Republic of
to state that, for well-known reasons and because of the
Cyprus. We SinCCrCfy
hC)pC ht kl SUCCeSsfui,
speedy and
circumstances to which I have referred, the Soviet Union
positive
conclusion
to L~sL’ talks in the interests
of the
did not oppose the adoption today by the Security Council
Rcpubljc
of Cyprus
and all its cilizens.
There
can be no
of the resolution on this subject, on the understanding that
doubt thal it is only through such negotiations, based on
the extension of the stationing of these forces on the
mutual understanding and goodwill, without interference
territory of the sovereign Republic of Cyprus will be in full
and above alJ witflout any pressure from outside, that
conformity with the provisions of that first resolution and
condjtions can be created under which all Cypriots, all
subsequent decisions of the Security Council on the Cyprus
citizens of the sovereign State of the Republic of Cyprus,
question, that is to say that these forces will retain their
can Icad pcaccf’ul and secure lives.
present functions and the current procedure for financing
them, namely on a voluntary basis, will be retained.
) 12. ‘fhc LlSSR dclcgalion would particularly like to
cmptlasize that it slrarcs the concern expressed in the
116. Mr. LONGERSTAEY (Belgium) fb~tcrprcfarion from
Secretary-Ccncral’s report at the lack of progress towards a
~~cdJ: Mr. President,allow me first of all to expressto
solution of the underlying problems. The report also
YOU our mostcordial congratulations
on your accessionto
contains a rccommcndation
lo exlcnd once more the
the Presidencyof the SecurityCouncil. Since my arrival in
mandate of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in
New York I have beenableto appreciateyour remarkable
Cyprus for a further six-month period. In this connexion it
diplomaticqualitiesaswellasyour keen senseof responsimust bc pointed out that many years have elapsed since
bility. 1 needhardly addthat 1 feel particularly moved to
fore@ military contingents, under the name of United
see an eminent ambassador
of Burundi, a country with
Nations forces, wcrc first sent to Cyprus in circumslanccs
which Belgiummaintainsrelationsof friendship which are
as closeasthey arefruitful, directing with so much taIent
wl~ich arc well known to us all. The fact that they have
and authority the work of the organ of our Organisation
stayed CJII the island for such a long time, as my delegation
charged with the primary responsibility for the mainand many others have already pointed out, cannot bc
tenanceof international peaceand security. I should also
rcgardcd ah normal. Such a protracted United Nations
cannel
scrvc
as a nir)del
for
like to thank the manyrepresentatives
for the kind words
pcaoc-keeping operation
that theyhoveaddressed
to me.
opcr;iticJm~ of tlmt kind, rto maikr
how certain delegations
h;ivc tried to praise il. Tllc Soviet delcgatiOn continues to
117. Before stating the point of view of my Government
belicvc firmly
that this particular United Nations operation
regardingthe item on the agendafor this meeting,I should
canrtrjt and !~l~ould not continue indefinitely. In itself, the
like to expressto the representativeof Turkey the sad
prescncc CJf foreign troops on the territory of an indefeelingsof sympathy of the peopleof Belgiumin regardto
pcndcnt sovereign State, even under the auspices and in the
the many familieswho are in mourning becauseof the
name of the United Nations, can only be a short-term
disastrousearthquakeswhichhavedevastatedseveralplaces
extraordinary measure that must be terminated as rapidly
in easternTurkey.
as possible.
113. The USSR delegation hopes that such an occasion
will present itself before the expiry of the next six-month
extension of the stationing of these forces in Cyprus. In the
meantime, those responsible could usefully think the
matter over and take measures to reduce the numbers of
these forces. The idea of reducing and withdrawing forces is
a popular one at the present time and could well be applied
to Cyprus. On this understanding, and also considering the
position on this matter of the parties concerned and above
all of the Government of the Republic of Cyprus, the
Soviet delegation witI not now raise the question of the
complete withdrawal of these forces from the territory of
Cyprus.
114. With regard to the resolution just adopted or, to be
more exact, adopted at our first meeting today
/ 293 (Ig71//, the USSR delegation considers it particularly
wntial
to stress that this resolution concerning the
proposal to extend the statjoning of the United Nations
forces in Cyprus for a further six-month period confirms
tbe Principal provisions of Security Council resolution
f fid (l964j of 4 March 1964 and also subsequent decisions
*f the Council on the Cyprus
question.
The USSR
dclegatipn regards this circumstance as a decisive, key

118. Onceagainthe SecurityCouncilhasbeen calledupon
to pronounceitself on the questionof the extension, for
another six”month period,of the stationing on Cyprus of
the United Nations Peace-keeping
Force. My deIegation
voted in favour of the resolution which endorsed the
decisionof the Councilbecause
we sharethe reasoningand
argumentswhich are developedin the chapter on observations in the report of the Secretary-Generalon the United
Nations operation in Cyprusfor the period 2 December
1970to 19May 1971.
119. Chile’it is true that the latest report submitted by
,he Secretary-General
containscertain positive elementsin
C:omparisonwith the previousone-the fact, for example,
hat thereareno deathsto bedeploredbecauseof incidents
: betweenthe two communities,the reduced number of
ilncjdents,the new progressregisteredin trying to restore
it is no lesstrue that essentially
P,ubhc services-nevertheless
ii i reflects the concern and apprehensionsof impartial
0 bserverswho see the deteriorationof the political and
Paragraphs
78 and 79 leave
e conomic situation in Cyprus.
n o doubt about the grave and seriouscharacter of the
which divides the two communities. After
d issensions
which have occurred
Ci Irefully examiningthe developments
t

in many sectors of the various national activities, the
Secretary-General arrives at the following observation:
“there has been little perceptible improvement in the
situation in Cyprus and no indication of progress towards a
negotiated solution of the underlying problems of the
island. On the contrary . . .” /see S/10199 and Corr.1,
para. 78/ and later:

the Force. At the same time, however, we hope that the
suggestion contained in paragraph 87 of the report will lead
to a constructive exchange of views, in which my country
will participate. My delegation considers that the legal bases
for this operation are too empirical and therefore too
fragile.

“the situation in the island remains apparently
calm, . . .” but there is a “depth of feeling which still
divides the two communities. The continuation of this
situation is all the more hazardous because of the
persistent confrontation of two well-armed military
forces . . .” [ibid., para. 79J.

124. I should not wish to end this statement of the
attitude of my Government on the question of Cyprrur
without paying a sincere tribute to the tireless efforts made
by the officers, noncommissioned officers and soldiers of
the United Nations Force in the execution of the mandate
conferred on them by the Security Council in its resolution
186 (1964) of 4 March 1964. We can proudly affirm that in
Cyprus the United Nations has introduced a factor of order
and peace.

120. Accordingly my delegation unreservedly supports the
two immediate conclusions of the Secretary.General after
analyzing the situation, namely, first, the present calm must
be maintained so as to promote a real improvement in the
relations between all the populations of the island; and,
secondly, that it is in the interest of all the parties to
continue the intercommunal talks in a real spirit of
conciliation.
121. Regarding the maintenance of calm, my delegation
places its confidence in the tact, spirit of discipline and
general behaviour of the officers, non-commissioned of.
ficers, and soldiers of the United Nations Force which,
since 1964, has so decisively contributed to the restoration
of public order and has done everything in its power to
prevent incidents from degenerating into combat.
122. On the other hand, the efforts for the maintenance
of order cannot bear fruit unless there are continuous
parallel interconrmunal talks between the representatives of
the two communities. My Government firmly hopes that
Mr. Clerides and Mr. Denktash will continue their talks, and
have an exchange of constructive proposals and replies so as
to arrive at an over-all solution. My deregation took note
with satisfaction of the statements made by these two
personalities, according to which they will continue their
negotiations so as to arrive& a Peaceful solution, despite
the disagreements which divide them in regard to fundamental principles. In that process it is important to allow
quiet
diplomacy to take its course, We know from
experience that in a tense atmosphere public statements
further complicate matters, and we feel sure that the
responsible leaders will understand this, My delegation
Supports
the appeals of the Secretary-General to the leaders
of all the parties concerned to evince statesmanship, I
would furthermore take this opportunity to pay tribute to
the uninterrupted and wise action of the SecretaryGeneral
md of his representative on the spot, Mr. Osorio-Tafall,
fe+ned
to bring peace and to mediate among the
‘ePresentatives of the two communities. Only the main=s’Grnce of national cohesion within a realistic and positive
anception of national interests can contribute to restoring
Climate of confidence in a country which has suffered too
-8.
$3. MY Government has taken note of the growing
nancial implications of the United Nations operation on
YPros. AS it has in the past, Belgium will not fail to make
vOluntary contribution to cover the operating expenses of

125. Mr. DE LA CtJARDlA (Argentina) {interpretation
fium Spanish): First of all, on behaIf of my delegation 1
should like to express to the representative of Turkey, and
through him his entire people, our sincere condolences on
the earthquake which recently devastated a part of his
country, a country which has so often suffered similar
catastrophes.
126. May I next congratulate you, Mr. President, because
you are once more conducting the work of the Council. We
also wish to express our gratitude to the Secretariat for the
work they have done in everything pertaining to the item
we are dealing with. In this connexion, we warmly
remember and appreciate Mr. Rolz-Bennett for having done
exceptional work in this field. To his successor,
Mr. Roberto Cuyer, with whom I have an old friendship, I
augur the greatest success,as I am convinced that he will
brilliantly continue the work he started after his trip to
Cyprus. To the representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Osorio-Tafah and to Major-General Prenr Chand who
commands the United Nations Forces on Cyprus, we
express our moral support, in the certainty that they are
discharging a vital role for the attainment of our set
objectives.
127. More than once on past occasions when this same
question wasdebated in the Security Council and when my
country had the honour to be one of its members, that is,
in 1966 and 1963, the delegation of Argentina expressed its
opinjon with a feeling of combined optimism and discouragement. This is the fourth year since then and we see
no change, no reason to show greater optimism or greater
discouragement.
128. But this in itself is dangerous and should trouble us.
If the situation has not improved in four years, this in itself
indicates that it has become worse and in truth the
excellent and complete report of the Secretary-General
clearly showsthis,
129. We do believe that there is one positive fact, a very
positive one, on Cyprus; it is positive for our Organization
and positive in its results for the entire world. The presence
of an international peace-keeping force, a United Nations
Force, has made a decisive contribution towards a cessation
of violence. This is very important.

130. However, it would be more important if that
139. Mr. ROMAN (Nicaragua) (interpretation from
force-whose
material suStensnCt? entails considerable Spanish):At this late hour I shallendeavourto be asbrief
cost-could withdraw at sometime, to leavethe inhabitants
aspossible.However,I cannotfail to expressmy gratitude
of Cyprus in the full enjoyment of a well-earnedpeace,
to the delegations
of Argentinaand Belgiumfor their good
RegrettabIy the conditions for this have not been forth.
offices during the months of March and April, and
coming. The report of the Secretary-&Ieral is frank on this
congratulateYOU, Mr.President, on your brilliant second
point, as on all others, and IeaVeS II0 room for any doubt
Presidencyof the COUIIC~~.
whatever in this regard.
140. Nor, could I fail to expressour deepestsympathy to
131. The presenceof the internationaf force can bring an
the Ambassador
of Turkey in connexion with the serious
end to violence but not to a disarmamentof minds. The
earthquakewhichsodevastated
hiscountry.
officers of the army, the navy and the air force of my
country know this well; for some time they have been
141. With respectto the draft resolutionwhich wasbefore
making their effective contribution in another United
the Council,we voted in favour of it. Since the delegation
Nations peace-keeping
force elsewhere.
of Nicaraguapreviouslyexpressed
its viewsat lengthon the
132. Paragraphs2 and 26 in particular and all of chapter
VIII of the report furnish abundant and alarmingproof of
such a state of mind. In one of thesewe evenare told that
there is “an increasein tension and a deterioriation of the
political atmosphere” /see S/10199 and Corr.I, pra. 2/
and in paragraph81 we arewarned that:
“It seemsmore than likely that if the intercommunal
talks were to break down or to end in complete and
admitted failure, a new and major crisis would shortly
erupt in Cyprus. Such a crisis would not only have the
gravest consequencesfor the people of the island, but
might well also constitute a seriousthreat to peaceand
security in the easternMediterranean.”
133, In fact, maintenanceof that international force is not
and could never be an objective in itself if no progressis
madeon substantivesolutions.
134. Yet today WC are consideringonly that first task
which is certainly limited, although we recognize its
importance. Accordingly, my delegationvoted in favour of
the resolution which we adopted this morning, being fully
convinced that we thereby co-operatedin a goodcause,the
causeof peace.
135. Our agendafor today doesnot contain a discussion
on the substanceof the question, and we shall not discuss
it; my delegationwill not. But let usnot wear a blindfold to
the potential dangersof the situation.
136. We all know the fearsand distrust which regrettably
the two Cypriot communitiesfeel and the report before us
exposes them openly. In our opinion, the remedy for these
ills is indicated in paragraph83 of the samedocumentwhen
it counselsthe leadersof the communitieswho are the only
and essentialpartiesto the problemto solvethe problemof
Cyprus: “by arriving, through peaceful means,at a lasting
agreement basedon the independenceand sovereigntyof a
unitary State of Cyprus.”
137. Let it be clearly understood that we are convinced
that each of these ideas carries a certain weight and
meaning in a delicate balancewhich would doubtlessbe
sffected if more emphasiswere placed on one than on the
ather.

142. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Rend):
shallnow speakasrepresentative
of BURUNDI.

I

143. First of all it is the duty of the delegationof Burundi
to expressits feelingsof compassion
to the Governmentof
Turkey, through its representative,
in connexion with the
natural disasterswhich haverecently struck that country.
144. Secondly,I am pleased
on behalfof the delegationof
Burundi to expressmy gratitudeto the civilian andmilitary
authorities who representthe Secretary-Generalon the
islandof Cyprus,for their outstandingdevotion andservice
throughout their mandate.
145. Thirdly, with respectto the Secretary-General,my
delegation is pleasedto expressto him our feelingsof
admirationfor the very comprehensive,
frank report on the
present situation in Cyprus.Along the samelines,it is a
pleasure to see that I have seated next to me the
Under-Secretary-General,
Mr. Roberto Guyer, who has SO
greatly assistedusby providingus with a report on short
notice. I shouldthereforelike to thank him and to express
our best wishesfor a brilliant careerin his new post. I
should also like to wish his predecessora speedy and
complete recovery and hope that he will long enjoy good
health.
146. To turn now to the problemwhich hasconcernedthe
Council throughoutthe day,I mustfirst of all statethat the
categoricalimperativefor Cyprusis to build a nation based
on harmony andbrotherhoodamongits citizens.
147. As Montesquieuwrote in The Spirit Of kZWs: “The
right of peoplesis basednaturally on this principle: the
different nations, in peace,must do for each other the
greatestgood,and in war the leastevil that is possible”.
148. If this moving appealis applicable to all foreign
nations, is it not, therefore, all the more valid for the
compatriotsof a singleState,CYPruS?
149. I comenow to the unity andidentity of the human
destiny. Situated almost at the crossroadsof three continents, Europe, Africa andAsia,which are brilliant centres

I38. MY delegationfervently hopes that we shall reach
,hat substantivesoIution asearly aspossible.
13

c

problemof Cyprusand because
of the urgencyof time, we
now considerit to be unnecessary
to repeat them and
because,furthermore,they appearin the verbatimrecords
of the Security Council.May I confirm them againnow.

ofrefined civilizations and cultures which complement each
other, the idand of Cyprus is the outstanding symbol of the
unity and identity of human destiny, Indeed, the drama
taking place in that country, as described in the report of
the Secretary-General of 20 May, bears witness to the
inability of man to triumph over his inclination to
dislocation and dissociation.
150, These tendencies are unfortunately also widespread
in Asia, the Middle East, Europe, Africa and Latin America.
They generate civil wars, wars of secession, religious
conflicts and racial and colonial wars. The case of Cyprus
cannot be dissociated from the general virus which aff’bctj
man on our planet.
15 I . For my part, I believe that the onIy viable solution to
the dispute which divides the two communities resides in
their final determination to work together for the conso]idation of one and the same Cypriot identity. In that
undertaking, the leaders and spokesmen of the two parties
have the responsibility to create a national atmosphere
which is in every way favourable to fratemization.
152. However, such an atmosphere will be conceivable
only when the recriminations of one side against the other
are banished forever. Recriminations would only worsen a
situation, which already contains the seeds of a new
conflagration. A vast campaign for reconciliation and
pacification designed to eliminate rancour and resentment
should be on the programme to build an independent and
sovereign Cypriot State. To reach such a stage, the vital
reciprocal interests must be safeguarded and taken into
account. The two sides equally claim the right to live and to
citizenship and to all the privileges flowing therefrom. No
pretext, either numerical or historical, should deprive either
of the two communities of the enjoyment of civil rights.
The monopoly of powers must be excluded in relations
between Greeks and Turks. Since the allegiance to their
respective ancestoral origins diverts the two columns of the
same society from patriotic dedication, it is destined to
yield before the requirement to devote themselves body
and soul to their only homela%, Cyprus,
153. Prompted by the principles which I have mentioned
above and inspired by the intentions which I have expressed, the Government of the Republic of Burundi,
consistent with itself, has instructed its delegation to the
Security Council to support the resolution which was
adopted this morning in the light of the report of the
scretary.General and in accord with it, and which corresponds to a maxim of Aristotle’s-one of the ancestors of
*ne of the interested communities&
his Efhique d
~Wrne: ‘The main purpose of politics is to create
fi-iendsMp between the members of a city.”
lS4. One of the primary concerns of the United Nations
should be the firm resolve to bring about a profound
hrJma% cultural, economic and politicaI osmosis between
fhe races.
ls5. The situation prevailing among the Cypriot citizens
as we*] as among many others in other countries at present
‘cquires us to renounce obsolete myths, so long devised
-garding Africa, whose prestige and destiny are still

mortgaged by those who measure the continent by their
Own standards and who decree that the Africans are
monopolizers of ethnic antagonisms.
156. These developments are common to all races and
need an implacable coalition of the world community
against racial psychosis with its double Sequela, making
some men divine and others less than human. There is a
postulate: under equal conditions, races are equal; the only
difference is between individuals. Africa will Inevitably
attain the apogee of its history and of its general flourishing,
157. We perceive old theories in new forms, according to
which Africa, forever struck by a congenital powerlessness,
is incapable of looking after itself. On the one hand, the
political proselytism of African leadership, on the other
hand, tribalism, jeopardize everything according to those
hm-ies. They reflect in a servile way ancient conceptions
stigmatised by Descartes, who, in his A Discourse on
Me’fhod, describes the governors of the ancient regime as
those who by birth or fortune are called upon to manage
public affairs,

158. It appears clearly that those who hold such ideastry
to divide mankind into different camps, one of which
supposedly has a race endowed with native and acquired
political omniscience while the other only includes beings
who are forever deprived of any skill for national or
international public affairs. Being exposed to a strong dose
of racial psychosis, the advocates of these doctrines are
characterized by an ingenuity which is in every way pitiful.
159. The Organization of African Unity (OAU) is not a
giant with feet of clay and is not ready to crumble before a
faint breeze. Indeed, if that vast continent enjoyed global
homogeneity, then one might question the need for the
OAU. We must exorcise from our minds the artificial and
ingenious spectre. This is a fundamental mistake: a mechanical uniformity; cultural, religious and political would not
be desirable, nor healthy, nor beneficial, becauseit would
not be effective due to its very monotony. Based on the
variety of respective national characteristics, the continental organization will find its fulfilment in its heterogeneity and in its diversity, which is the basis for being
complementary and definite unity. Accordingly it would be
chimerical to try to be overly attached to an identity of
views, of posit&s in the African institutions or on all
problems pertaining to Africa.
I&), Assuming that tribalism is indeed at the root of some
failures in Africa, at least one should recognize that this is
not the monopoly of Africans alone. In any case, are net
the gravest wrongs caused by racial characteristics tame in
comparison with the monumental harm inflicted on mankind by nazism in the past and by apartheid its plagiarist
today? Are not apartheid and racial discrimination exotic
products imported Into Africa? Need I add that Africa has
valiantly resisted the contagion of those exotic separatisms
and that, in so doing, it has the right to propose itself as a
model of harmony and cohesion at the continental kvel
and on the international scene.
161. Speaking again as PRESIDENT, I have on my list of
;pe&ers the name of the representative of Cyprus, who has

14

asked to be allowed to speak in exercise of his right of
reply, I now call on him.
162. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cj’pr~S): Mr.President,
I wish, in
the first place, to thank YOU for your constructive
statement on this problem and also to thank a]] the other
members of the Council who brought a constructive
contribution in a positive
approach to the problem, Many
of the things that have been said by members here are
Identical to what I have been repeating in this Council
many times, particularly in the recent sessions of the
Security Council.
163. l was very satisfied to hear the representative of
Italy, Ambassador Vinci, say that the problem 1s not
intractable-that
there should be goodwill
and a spirit of
realizing that what is important iS What Unites the people
and not what divides them. That is the identical phrase I
have used at previous meetings-that the people should look
to the important things that unite them and not to the
artificial ones that divide them. I shall quote from the
record of one meeting at which I said: “One #ing
is
required to solve the question of QXUS:
understanding
and conciliation on the basis that Cyprus is and Wfi remain
an integral unit, undivided and unpartitioned . , .“/1564t}7
metirtg, para. I84J I
164. That is the problem. Once there is a recognition from
all sides that Cyprus is an integral unit that is and will
remain as such, then the whole problem will find its way to
solution. But if we want to partition it, we naturally must
keep up division; we must whip it up; WC must create
differences where there arc none, and where there are some,
magnify them.
165. That is the usual way of leading people to division,
from some or other political motivation that lies behind
that move. This has been the case all through the history of
the policy of division: to find some kind of little hole
through which to inject the division, or, if you see that
division is waning, to reinforce it by some means or other,
166. Now, the instances in Cyprus are so nunlerous that I
would not have time to explain them all. But some few
might serve as an indication of what is happening in CYPrUS.
I said this before. The whole problem in Cyprus lies in the
opposition of a policy of a united State and a consolidated
people, a people who wish to cooperate and live together,
and another influence, another force trying to keep them
separate, trying to prevent them from conciliating, trying to
make it unpatriotic for them to conciliate, trying to make
them feel that they are guilty because they have spoken to
a Greek, trying to make them realize that their duty to the
mother country is to hate the Greeks, and to keep that hate
up so that it will lead to ways aimed at the partition of
Cyprus.
167. Is this true or is it not true? If we look, we will
find-we have quoted them before-statements
by Beads of
State of Turkey, by Foreign Ministers of Turkey, saying
that the soIution for Cyprus is to break it in two and have a
part go to Greece and another part to Turkey. And how can
one do that? One must keep up the spirit of hatred. I do
not want to raise these things, but it has to be understood.
15

We have to arrive at a point where the solution must come
and must be on the basis of the people of Cyprus sharing
together and living together. Everybody here spoke about
this and I was satisfied and gratified to hear that everyone
reali&% what the problem in Cyprus is, and this indicates
the way the problem can be solved,
168. Now, let me see. The representative of Turkey,
Ambassador Baytilken, for whom I have great regard,
insinuated that there were some statements made about the
feelings of the people of Cyprus for Greece-for union with
Greece-and that this is a new issue preventing a solution.
169. Now, with respect to what was said about these
statements, I should like to point out that traditional ethnic
speeches on national celebratory occasions do not interpret
official policy and cannot be set against official declarations
of policy and concrete actions consistent with that policy.
170. Therefore, that policy for an independent unitary
State has been officially declared on repeated occasions,
and every action of the Government of Cyprus is towards
obtaining that independence in a unitary State. I repeat “in
a unitary State”, because first of all that was the agreed
basis of the talks, and, secondly, that is what the
Secretary-General asks us to do. The call of the SecretaryGeneral-and I am so glad to hear some of the delegations
here refer to that call, to which I myself have referred-says
very clearly that “the problem . . . must be solved by
arriving, through peaceful means, at a lasting agreement
based on the independence and sovereignty of a unitary
State of Cyprus”. [S/10199 and Cljrr.l, para. 83.f
171. Can we serve that unitary State and the solution for
independence otherwise than by having conciliation? It
might be said: “Welt, but it is difficult to have conciliation.
The people may not want to conciliate.” It is completely
the reverse. As the Secretary-General pointed out in a
number of his reports, the people are ready to conciliate if
they are allowed to do so. In his report of 9 March 1968,
the SecretaryGeneral noted that the ordinary Greek and
Turkish Cypriot people “desire to live in peace and
harmony and seem already prepared to accept and support
reasonable compromises [S/8446, para. 1531.
172. In his observations in another report, he said how
gratifying it was to observe the ease with which ordinary
people of both communities were beginning to resume their
former amicable relations.
173. But how can the solution of the problem be
reconciled with the attitude of the Turkish Cypriot side? I
have already quoted in the Security Council-but 1 have to
refer to it again-a document presented to the Liaison
Committee, which is composed of Greek Cypriots, Turkish
Cypriots and the United Nations Force; they look into
problems between the communities. In this, the complaint
was made that the Turkish people were not allowed to
conciliate-not allowed to have any contacts with Greeksand that those in the enclaves were kept there and not
allowed to go out of them unless they had permits-permits
allowing them so many hours, and given to those whom
they knew would be fanatic and would not conciIiate. So,
as the people were eager to get together, the Turkish

military rCgime in the enclaves imposed punishments on
those who showed a tendency towards any form of
conciliation. I quote here:

the people you keep up the tension by having the
confrontation, at least sepmratethose who are armed so that
they will be looking at each other from a distance”.

“Those who disobey the order with a view to having
trade connexions with the Greek Cypriots shall pay
E25 Ss., or shall be punished with imprisonment. A fine
of 11 will be imposed on: 1. T~OSC who converse”-just
converse-“or enter into any negotiations with the Greek
Cypriots or accompany any stranger into our sector,
2. Those who come into contact with Greek Cypriots for
any official work. 3. Those who appear before Greek
Cypriot Courts. 4. Those who visit the Greek Cypriot
hospitals.“-The Greek Cypriot hospitals arc the hospitals
of the Republic. These people are not allowed to visit the
hospitals-“A fine of 120 will be imposed on those who
have any dealings with Greek Cypriots or those who buy
from Greek Cypriots goods which they could get from
the Turkish Cypriot sector. A fine of $25, or severe
punishment and one month’s imprisonment, or whipping,
shall be imposed on those who enter the Greek Cypriot
sector for the following purposes: I. a promenade”-not
allowed-“punishment:
severewhipping; 2. friendly association with Greek Cypriots; 3.amusement; 4. conveyance of information .”

178. No, the Turkish side will not accept it. This can be
can
take any report on confrontation. As a matter of fact, I
made reference to them in my main speech; I do not want
to spend any additional time on them now. So on one of
the main problems of confrontation the Turkish side will
not give in, thus maintaining the enmity and the division.

174. It was a great satisfaction to hear everybody say that
the problem is so]ved by conciliation. But wilt the members
face the problem that is faced by my Government and the
vast majority of the people of Cyprus when the minority
community of Turkish Cypriots are so emboldened from
outside as to keep an imposed apartheid based on racial
lpartness to the extreme--no contacts. no relations, no
>uying, no entering a Greek shop.
175. A letter I sent to the Security Council the other day
‘S/10187/ cited what Mr. Kii$iik has said in tflis regard. Of

:ourse, he denied it. But we have what he said word for
word, exhorting the Turkish Cypriots not to have any
elations with the Greeks. Now, how can this be consistent
tith the idea that the Tur%sh Cypriots and those who
&de them, the Turkish Government, really want an
ndependent Siate? How can there be a viable independent
itate if the people are kept apart. How can they co-operate
without contact? That is why they prevent any move
owards normalization. Anybody who would like to see the
broblem of Cyprus and who looked through a number of
he Secretary-General’s reports would find that the problem
f deconfrontation, that is, the way of solving the problem
f confrontation, is the most important problem.
76. The Secretariat survey team that went to Cyprus,
:nt by the Secretary-General to see what could be done
Vith the Force-whether it couId be withdrawn or reuced-made a long report after careful examination and
Lid that the one problem, the greatest difficulty standing
I the way of the withdrawal of UNFICYP is the close
3nfrontation. The confrontation is so close, those who are
med are so near each other, that any kind of provocation
likely to occur.
77. It is a matter of psychology. So the United Nations
Drce says: “]F you do not want to eliminate the
lnfrontation, if, in spite of a]] this period of calm among
16

seen in the reports. I need not refer to them;anybody

179. Next is freedom of movement: freedom of movement is essentjal to having the necessary contacts and
association. My colleague Ambassador Bayi.ilken said-and 1
agree with him-that what is needed is trust. Surely there
can be no solution of the problem if there is no trust. That
is why we have had disarmament negotiations for twentyfive years, and before that, for another twenty, because
there was insufficient trust. Any problem, without trust, is
insoluble. Therefore, what is needed is trust.
180. But trust needs a spirit of friendliness-associationto overcome suspicion. The more you separate people, the
more suspicious they become: the more you put them into
separate camps, the more they think that the people in the
other camp are the enemy. Any study of mass psychology
will bear that out,
181, Therefore, to have trust you must have conciliation;
and to have conciliation you must have association. And to
have association you must have freedom of movement, and
not walls of separation. You cannot have association if
people are punished the moment they are seen talking to
Greeks. Norcover, one cannot see the people with whom
one tiants to conciliate if the military rdgirne in the enclave
forces them not to conciliate by punishment. When 1 staled
this before in the Council, the representative of Turkey,
Mr. Eralp, did not deny it. He said: “That is correct; you
are not supposed to have contacts with the enemy”. There
you are.
182. Therefore, I had some mixed feelings when I heard
all the various speakers in this Council. My heart was going
out to them. Yes, we want conciliation and peace and
harmony. But a? the same time I was thinking: “But how
can we do that if normalization is prevented-if deconfrontation is prevented by the Turkish attitude? ”
183. Now, the representative of Turkey said something
which might be true or might be False. Let us examine it.
He said that normalization could come only when there was
a restitution of the Constitution-when everything was
agreed. Therefore, normalization must follow the solution.
But that is completely upside-down; it is the same thing as
was said just now-that we cannot have a cease-fireuntil we
have signed a peace treaty. But a cease-fire servesonly to
help towards signing a peace treaty. The Secretary-General
answered that view by saying that if we want a normalization we must have agreement on the Constitution and
have everything restored. The Secretary-Genera] stressed
that there has been al] along and continues to be what he
considered to be a misunderstandi;lg on the part of the
Turkish community in Cyprus and of the Turkish Govern-

I

.~

ment as to the function and duty of the United Nations
Force in Cyprus.
184. By “return to normal conditions”
the Security
Council did not mean, in the view of the Secretary-General
as he explained it there, a restoration of the situation in
Cyprus exactly as it was before December 1963, including
the constitutional situation.
185, Therefore 1 think this is a very important meeting
because it stresses the need for normalisation as a step
towards solving the problem and helping the talks. We have
to help the talks. Everybody has said the talks are so
important; everybody is agreed that this problem must be
solved by the talks-that
the Cyprus problem must bc
solved by the Cypriots themselves. And I say here very
solemnly that the Cypriots from both sides are ready to
solve their problem if they are not prevented from outside.
186. Now, it is not enough to speak words: words may be
empty; words may be uttered in a moment of passion, in a
moment of enthusiasm, in a moment when a word does not
reflect what we can see the actions are.
187. What have been the actions towards strengthening
the independence of Cyprus? The Government of Cyprus,
as I have already said, has made very constructive proposals,
particularly in the last proposals. At three stages the Cyprus
Government made concessions, and more concessions,
towards meeting the other side. It went so far as to divide
the State merely to accept the views of the other side SO
long as it did not destroy the State; and in the “package
deal” it made such proposals. But the Turkish Cypriot
side-not the Turkish Cypriot people, but those who deal in
their name-came not only without any concession on the
question of local government, but with more intransigent
claims, claims that would split the State in two and that
would make it unworkable. For example, to give just one
idea that I mentioned before. In a State in which there is a
majority and a minority, a Greek majority and a Turkish
minority, where the villages are interspersed, every town
and district having a proportion of both, and not a single
district having a predominance of Turkish people, can one
imagine the possibility of saying, ‘We are going to have
local government in this island; we shall divide the island
into local governments, not on the basis of geographical
areas but by ethnic criteria. Wherever there is a Turk, no
matter where he lives, he wiJl come under one administration, and wherever a Greek lives, even if it is at one
extreme end, he will come under another local administration? ” And from there one proceeds to a second stage
Where again there is a separate chamber, up to the very top
separate, at no time linking with the central Government.
188. This is unprecedented in the history of all constitutional problems. Therefore, that is our problem. And
therefore if that difficulty could be overcome there would
3e no question about solving the Problem; it could be
rolved within the next few months. But I do not want to
%ect pessimism. No, we are optimistic. We know about
I&se difficulties, but life is full of difficulties. Difficulties
rre there to be overcome. If one follows the line one
“eJieves is the straightforward and proper one-and I believe
hat in all my statements it can be seen that I have followed

the same line followed in the statements made here-we
believe we shall be able to obtain agreement and concilia.
tion. AJI we want is that Cyprus should be conciliated and a
centre of unity between Greeci: and Turkey, not a focus of
trouble. But we believe that all these difficulties will be
overcome, and they will be overcome in an atmosphere of
conciliation.
189. What I am saying here is not intended as a reflection
on anyone-not on the Turkish Government nor on the
Turkish Cypriots. Situations arise and people take that
attitude. I am speaking thus only to see how we can
overcome the problems, how we can get them solved
without having the difficulty I have already mentioned.
190. Now, another part of the report that is relevant to
this matter is paragraph 80, which has been quoted by a
number of representatives, in which the Secretary-General
says that he and his collaborators “have repeatedly urged all
the parties concerned in the Cyprus problem to exercise
restraint and moderation and especiaUy to avoid the threat,
or the use, of drastic retaliatory measures”. Now, this part
of the report refers to Security Council resolution I86
(1964) of 4 March 1964, which says
“Heving irr mi?rd the relevant provisions of the Charter
of the United Nations and . . . its Article 2, paragraph 4,
which reads . . .”
and then it cites the whole Article concerning Members
refraining in their international relations from the threat or
use of force. In its first operative paragraph the resolution
states the following:
“Calls up011all Member States, in conformity with their
obligations under the Charter of the United Nations, to
refrain from any action or threat of action likely to
worsen the situation in the sovereign Republic of Cyprus,
or to endanger international peace”.
Now, that is a clear call to the Members of the United
Nations not to threaten to use force against Cyprus for any
reason, as this be a violation of the Charter.
I91. On this matter I sent a letter to the Security CouncJJ
[S/10185/ referring to exactly that point: the threat of
intervention in respect of retaliation, the use of force. That
is another problem that creates tension in Cyprus-the
threat of foreign intervention, the continous threat of
danger in that regard.
192. So we have first a threat of danger from outside that
is constantly returning. Then we have the difficulty of
getting the Turkish Cypriots to be allowed by their
leadership to get together. Those are the problems we face.
But I hope and trust that with goodwill-and
we have
shown a great .deaJ of it in the normalization measures the
Government has taken-we shall reach a moment when that
goodwill will meet with a response.
193. Now there are a few matters I must mention in reply
to my colleague. I said that one thing that disturbs my
Government is the very feverish activity of the Turkish
Cypriots mentioned in the report-their
military parades

17

and the heavy weapons in their possession, The representative of Turkey said that was not true. So I shali give
him the details so that he can verify them. Maybe he is
right; maybe he is wrong. But let us have the details. We
know the information is very positive, but let us see:
sub-machine guns, 530; machine guns, A4 and A-6, 500;
machine guns, Hot&kiss, 40; light machine guns, 40;
anti-aircraft machine guns, 30; mortars, 60-81 mm., 130;
anti-tank guns, bazookas, 236-305 mm., 104; recoilleas
rifles, 57 by 75, 32. Recoilless rifles are the ones the
Turdyk has, but I must say that those weapons are even
much heavier than the Turdyk is allowed to have, The
Turdyk is the Turkish contingent. I passthat information
to my colleague for him to check so that we can see what is
happening.
194. Secondiy, the Turdyk, through the alliance under
w,hich the Treaty was terminated by Cyprus-but under
that Treaty they have the Turdyk in Cyprus-has 50
officers, 503 men and 47 non-commissioned officers. They
are rotated, and this last rotation washalf. Therefore, the
number of officers rotated should have been about 25.
‘There were not 25; there were 46. If 46 were rotated the
total could not be 50. And according to our information
there are 152 officers instead of 50; there are 98 noncommissioned officers instead of 47; and there are 1,200
men instead of 650. Now, again, that may be wrong. But
those are the figures in our possession. I mention those
details because it is necessary to clear up this matter and to
have an idea of what the Turdyk is and what it is not.
195. Another point I must answer concerns economic
assistance to the Turkish Cypriots. There is a whole book
listing the assistance given. Because of the kind of rebellion
they had started the Turkish Cypriots refused to pay for
electricity, refused to pay for water, refused to pay for
everything. But for the sake of peace and quiet they are
supplied with everything without charge. Perhaps there are
a few casesof their paying, but on the whole they do not.
The Welfare Insurance Fund is losing at least 2331,000
annually because the Turkdo not pay. And yet E120,OOO
is paid to them each year.
196. Another point concerns the repairing of Turkish
houses: we have done everything to repair them, but, as I
said before, they are not allowed to return in all cases.TWO
hundred and eighty seven houses have been built and
repaired. Almost $48,000 has been spent on those houses
and we are going on. So let us hope that-not in the years
to come, but that by the next meeting of the Security
Council on this question-we may have some better reports
to give with regard to the situation in Cyprus. And those
better reports can only come in the way that it was
mentioned in this Council, through the solution of the
Problem by the peopIe of Cyprus themseIves looking to
V&at unites them and by putting aside what divides them.
197. I think there is one other thing I ought to mention:
the representative of Turkey said that three Turkish
Cypriots residing in the enclaves were assaulted by the
Police in Famagusta. I have the statement issued on this
hatter.

koniko signalled to a passing car to stop. The driver of the
car faiIed to respond to the police call. The car was
followed by the police car to the outskirts of Famagusta
and was stopped there. This is something that would
happen anywhere that the police called upon a car that did
not stop. It wasascertained there that the passengersof the
car were Ismet Kotak of Nicosia, Ali &zeal from Famagusta and Hussein Zapri and Ali Genograd. They were asked
why they did not stop when they were called by the police.
Their answer was that they did not know it was a police
sjgnal. The Turkish Cypriots were searched. There was
nothing incriminating in their possession except a switchblade knife which was confiscated by the police. The
Turkish Cypriots were left free to go on their way.
199. AS I said in my statement before, the report of the
Secretary-General mentions that there has been transportation of arms from one side to the other by the Turkish
Cypriot armed elements from the time that freedom of
movement was given to them. Therefore, it was not wrong
for the police, when they signalled to the car and it did not
stop, to suspect that the occupants were armed and
therefore they were searched. But there was no assault,
nothing happened to them at all; it was a natural stop and
searchin the car.
200. But why do these Turkish Cypriots object to being
stopped and searched; this was done regularly before the
complete freedom of movement. If it had been Greeks who
entered the enclave from which they came, they would not
be stopped by the police for a traffic light; they would be
stopped, immediately arrested, and put in custody merely
because they were Greeks and were in the Turkish quarter.
201, It is stated in the report that UNFICYP has to go and
free men who by mistake stray into the Turkish quarter.
The fact is that when a Greek Cypriot strays by mistake
into a Turkish quarter he is arrested and put into custody
until UNFICYP intervenes. why should they do this? The
reason is simple: to prevent contact, to make it understood
that the Greeks cannot get into this part of the island, and
that the Turks on the other side should not go there unless
it is for some very special reason. Meanwhile, in the rest of
Cyprus there is the other half of the Turkish population
who live together with the Greeks and there are no
problems. The probIems arise with regard to those Turks
who live in th; enclaves. Therefore, we seethat the division
and the separation by walls in the enclaves creates not
security but the opposite. It does not create a State but
destroys a State. We hope that this attitude will change.
When this attitude changes-and there is every reason for it
to change, because the people’s feelings are friendly-then
we will have solved the problem,
202. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from l+ench): The
representative of Turkey has asked to be allowed to speak. I
am very happy to calI upon him,
203, Mr. BAYaKEN
(Turkey) (interpretafion from
French): At this late hour I have no intention of delaying
the members of the Council concerning points which have
just been explained by Ambassador Rossides and which, I
think, in no way reflect reality. I feel sure that my
statement of this morning has shed light on all the matters
which he touched on once again.

198. At about 12.45 on Sunday, 23 May, a police patrol
carrying out normal trafic duties at the village of Lef18

Evefl in Mr. Rossides’ vcrslon of tile incident the admission
is there that the Turkisb Cypriots were searched simply
becausethey did not See the police signa~~g to them. Thidi
very patently shows the manner in which Turks are treated
Jfl the part controlled by the Greek Cypriots.
211 + 1 believe I explained quite clearly this morning that
the Turkish enclaves are far more limited In ti than the
“m~~~v~” military regions, regions controlled by the
Greek Cyprk.
I also mentioned the statement of the
VicePresident of the Republic of Cyprus that unarmed
Greeks who have a legitimate reason to do KJcp11enter the
Turkish enclaves.
205, A pat deal is said, but I would say that, as has been
proved in several documents which I hnd the honour to
qJraw to the attention of the mcmbcrs of the Co~nojl, jt jg
aJ~ay$ enc~sis whjch is at the hear! of the problem. One can
find ,olutbnr to other problcmx. So as not to delay the
rncrnbcrr of the Council, J should llke to lrlrk Mr. Rossides
one question which might perhaps filcilitatc matters in a
really rtriking manner.
I should like to rcfcr to the letter of
ihe Vicc?rcsidcnt of the Republic of Cyprus, Mr. KU$Llk,
in document S/10200. And there, after having explained
t)~c main pojnts and essential conflicts of the question, he
a&x Ambassador Roaides whether he is ready to make a
~~~mcnt here in the Council, rcnounclng mosis as a policy
tlf tftc Creek Cypriot community and to work towards a
~r~mpromisc
solution
which would safeguard the legitimate
infcrcst’, and rights of both partics.

206. I am curious to see whcthcr there will be a reply
frfirrt Arr~huswdor I<ossides. Tbc nbjccfivcs arc always
prcirdy
rcrcrfcd
lr, when
it canstitutcb ii negation of the
icpvl rigftts of tfx Turkish community and when in fact
thcrc is notfling but silcncc arld rather arc pretexts sought.
207, As I have said, J shall not try to reply point by point.
I simply wish to clarify some points which perhaps I did
nr~t touch 011ifl my statement this morning,
20X.

jn the
the
tircok and Turkish Cypriots, I am oleepfy sorry that
nmbassador Rossidcs could think that I would ever make
luch a rtatemcnt.
Council

First., f sliould like to say that J never stated
that
there is no need for u~c~ntact befWeen

2CEJ. AI times, there arc situations In which the excuse is
worse than the explanation, Indeed, ~cb & fhe case! when
vlr. Kossidcs tries to give explanations on the Turkish
Cypriots who were arrested in Famagusti,

! JO. Jn my statement this morning I referred ,to the
reatment of three members of the Turkish comm@Q and
said that they were visiting
a mixed
village,
Greek
and
bkjsh--this means that there are cuntati-and
that on
flair return from this mixed vi&e they were not treated in
civilized manner by the Greek police, Im;rgine, these three
wrnbers of the community, who play an active part in the
‘olitics of that community; accomp;my the Vice-President
1f the Republic of Cyprus, or. Kti@k, during his *it and
‘m returning they are arrested and are taken to Ihe Police
tation for not having Seen a traffic
light,
I am sire
tha*
LlcY $brJWcdtheir identity cards, but, this was not enough.

2 12. Rotation is mentioned so are munitioas, the artinery,
the officers, etc. But J shall not waste your time. rhere was
a great effort on the part of Ambassador Rossides to
preparea new report for the Security Council. Yet I believe
he has no special mandate to present us such a report now,
We alreadyhave a comprehensive and detailed report. So I
shall not dwell on this; but I can say that I reject all the
allegations he has made which, I feel sure, are not based on
facts. In any case, I believe that Ambassador Rossidcs will
have ample opportunity to ascertain the real facts in the
next report of the Secretary.General.
213. AIthough at the United Nations it happens that a
speaker announces he will be brief and then makes a long
speech. I hope that I shall adhere to my custom and be
brief.
214. The debate which has been taking place since this
morning in the Security Council very cleady demonstrates
tnat an atmosphere of insecurity and tension exists in
Cyprus at present. This is a serious matter, asthe report of

the Secretary-General has emphasized. Members of the
Council, in the statements they made this morning, set
forth the reasons for this situation. As for myself, having
stated the views of my Government on the subject in my
main statement this morning, I shall refrain from going
back to this once again. What I should like to say, however,
jg that jt is with mixed feelings of regret, at the situation
existing at present in Cyprus, and of hope, that in the next
months things may improve there, that I have participated
in the debate today. In spite of aIf, it wasa relief; a PleaSUre
for me to perceive at this meeting of the Council a message
of encouragement for the representatives of the two
communities in Cyprus, the Turkish and Greek communitjea, in their arduous task, namely, to work with all
good will and in a spitit of mutual accommodation so as to
arrive at a substantive agreement for a constitutional r&me
which would insure for them a harmonious and prosperous
fife as well as relations based on mutual respect for their
legitimate rights and interests, while safeguarding the
security they need.
215, The express and sincereabandonment of the policy
of enasis is doubtiess at the source of any progress
to be
made in the intercommunal talkr. I would venture to say
that a message of this kind emerged today from the
discussions in the Security Council. I should like to express
my gratitude and appreciation to the representatives seated
around this table who, in their statements, contributed to
such an atmosphere.

19

2f6. Before concluding my statement, J shau]d fike to say
that my delegational,d J have been very moved by the
expressionsof sympathy and condolencesexpressedby
you, Mr. President,by the membersof the Security Council
and by my colleaguefrom Greeceon the occasion of the
disastrousearthquakewhich struck my country recently.
2 17. I want to expressmy thanksand gratitude. J shallnot
fail to communicateto my Governmentthe expressionsof
sympathy of my col]cagues,imbuedwith friendship and
understanding.J am sure,that theseexpressionsof sympa.
thy will be deeply apprecratedby my Government and by
the Turkish nation.
218. The PRESIDENT(inferprefnfion from Frenc\lf; 1call
on the rePrcsentaliveof Cyprus for the secondtime.
219. Mr. ROSSHXS (Cyprus): 1 know it is very Iate and J
should not keep the membershere, but J wish to saya few
words with regard to the question put to me by the
rel)rescntativeof Turkey, namely, whether, as it is Put in
the letter. we are willing to renounce
emsis
and
work
for
the independenceof Cyprus on the basisof a compromise
solution which
shouldinclude both political and economic
elementsand protect the vested rights and the legitimate
interestsof both communities.Well, we know what arethe
legitimate interestsof both communities.Al] that is linked
together. We have to agree with all those things. The
legitimate interestsof both communities,asthey put them,
is to have a divided State-as I said. They say that the
legitimate interestsof the Turkish community in Cyprusis
to divide the State. We do not accept that division of
Cyprus, and therefore we cannot accept any of those
suggestions.Nor is this the place to make renunciations.
However, it is the placeto heedwhat the Secretary-Genera]
saidin his report. Hepointed the way to the solution of the
problem in paragraph83, and J acceptedthat indication
very clearly and very emphatically in my statement. J said
that we are for that solution, and take the statement of the
Secretary-Genera]to be a reaffirmation that that so]ution?s
the proper solution of the problem. We said that we are
going to follow thabline, as we have been following it,
which can be seen,

could not answerand could not renouncethe policy of
e’nXi&Possiblyif hedid, we wouldnot seehimat this table
at the next meeting.It wasclear to me,and it is goodthat
0 isnow clearto the Councilalso.
223. Ambassador
Rossides
now turns to the report of the
Secretary-General.J think that to take phrasesof an
important documentout of context andtry to obtain some
advantagefrom doing so is the worst possibleway to
succeed in conciliation. One should never allow the
Perversion of words.I know very well that in hisreport the
Secretary-Genera]
stalesthings in order to help the two
Paflies. Jn fact, in his report of 2 December1970 the
Secretary-Genera]
of the United Nations said-and let me
addet! passantthat Mr. Rossides
seemed
to pin so muchof
his hopes to this phraseologyand tried hard to have
somethingon these lines in the document which the
Council adoptedtoday-as follows: “The two sideshave
alsoindicatedthat a settlementcan be worked out on the
basisof an independent,sovereignand unitary State of
Cyprus in which the two communitiesparticipate.” /S/
10005.para.J20.J
224. So, in the context of all the eventsand documents,
any suggestionof the Secretary-Generalis madeonly to
help the parties, and .that is in consonance,as many
membersof the Councilhave made clear, with Security
Councilresolution186(1964) of 4 March 1964.
225. If Ambassador
Rossides
would kindly refer to that
resolution, he would understand that the SecretaryGeneral’ssuggestion
isnot a suggestion
to makehim happy.
instead,it is a suggestion
which is intendedto be helpful to
the parties,and one should not look at one word or at
another word, but shouldtook at the problem.As one of
the members
of the SecurityCouncilsaidtoday, no amount
of resolutionscansettle the question.The partiesshould
try to have the feelingof nationhoodand try to have Ihe
consciousness
of belongingto Cyprus. I do not seeany
answerto that, 1 knew that the answerwould not be
forthcoming.

226. I repeatwhat I saidat the morningmeeting,with this
220. But J have not heard one word from the represen- difference: the Turkishcommunity wantsto be helpful in
the solution of the problem; seemingly Ambassador
tative of Turkey about that paragraph. Most of the
Rossides
wantsvery muchto find a solutionhereright now.
membersof the Security Council did speak about that
We tlifi that the representatives
of the communitiesare
paragraph,which is the important paragraph.It is not what
trying
to
do
that.
happens,but what the Secretary-Generalin his wisdom
suggests
in the report. And thereforethe sidethat doesnot
want independenceandwants enosisisthe side that accepts 227. As I saidin the GeneralAssembly:
it and the other sidethat is working for independenceis the
“The Turkishcommunityis one of the partnersin the
one that doesnot acceptit. Why? Becauseit makes it clear
State of Cyprusandin its independence
andsovereignty.
that it must not be a partitionist kind of independence,
Cyprus is the homeland of the Turkish and Greek
which will divide the State and partition it under the guise
Cypriots,
and not an extension of any one country.
of that State. Therefore, would the representative Of
Cyprus is a unity where the two communities can
Turkey agreenot to talk of renunciationbut to accept what
continue to live with eachother within their traditional
the Secretary-Generalproposeshere-or does he reject it?
and constitutionalpersonalities;
Cyprusis disunitedwhen
That is my question
to him. And that, J think, should
one of the two communitiesbrushesasidethe integral
requirenothing moreto be saidabout this issue.
personality
and sxxrity
of the other. It is O& in that
manner that the democratic principles as Well as the
221. The PRESIDENT @terpretofion from %‘rzch): J
precepts
of bur Chartercan prevail.“I
IIOW call on the representativeof Turkey.
222. Mr. BAY ijLKEN (Turkey): I shallspeak for only one
minute. It wasclear in my mind that AmbassadorRossides
20

Plerrory Meerings,

1882nd meeting, para. 268.

That is what 1 said at the twenty-fifth
United Nations, and I repeat it here.

anniversary

of the

business,
nor isthis the forum to dealwith what Mr. Ktlctik
wants to put in his letters. What we have here is the
Secretary-General’s
call. That is the call, and not the other
statements.Wearenot goingto takeall the statements.We
are goingto take his call, and his call is clear, I knew
Ambassador
Baytilkenwould not acceptit.

228. The PRESIDENT (interprelation
fronr
Fre/lc}~): 1
have the impressionthat the repl’NXltative
of Cyprus feels
the needto speaka third time. If SO,I cdl

on him.

229. Mr. ROSSIDES (CyprUS):
Our statements are becomingshorter and shorter until they will get down to one
word. The one word here wflI be that I knew the
representativeof Turkey wasnot in a position to accept the
distinct suggestionmadeby the Secretary-General.I do not
know what other thingshave appearedin his other reports,
but they did not contain a cali. This is a call which ismade
and it is the call we are concerned with. We are not
concernedwith other parts. AmbassadorBayiilken insists
t/tat I answer the call of Mr. Kuciik. That is not my

21

L

230. The PRESIDENT(interpretation
from French): In
turn, the representativeof Turkey seems
to feel the same
needto speak,andI call on him.
231. Mr. BAYijLKEN (Turkey): I cansay that I do agree
to the suggestion
of the Secretary-General
in the context of
all hisreportsand all the documentsand in the context of
the resolutionof 4 March1964.
The meeting rose at 7.30 p.m.

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nolionr
publications
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

may be obtained
bookstore
or write

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

SE PROCURER

Les publicotionr
der Notions
Unier
sent
d&posit&es
du monde
entier.
Informer-vovr
Nations
Unicr, Section
der venfes, New York

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

from bookstores
ond distributors
to: United
Notions,
Scaler Section,

DES NATIONS

in United

Nations,

New

York

Price:

$U.S,

1.00

DE LAS NACIONES

(or

UNIES

en vcnte
dons
ICI libroiries
et Ia ogcnccs
ouprbs
de votre librairic
ou odrerser+ous
b:
ou Genbve.

Los publicocioner
de lar Nociones
Unidor
ertdn
en todar perter
dcl mundo.
ConsuIte
o IV librero
Ventos, Nvevo
York o Ginebra.

Lifho

throughout
New York

equivalent

UNIDAS

en vento en librerios
y cons dirtribuidoror
o dirljose
(I: Nacioncs
Unidos,
Seccibn

in other

currencies)

de
