A /74/PV.53

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fourth session

53rd plenary meeting

Tuesday, 14 January 2020, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Muhammad-Bande  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nigeria)

The meeting was called to order at 10.50 a.m.
Agenda item 139 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations
Letter dated 7 January 2020 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of
the General Assembly (A/74/642)
Letter dated 9 January 2020 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of
the General Assembly (/74/642/Add.1)
The President: Before proceeding, I would like, in
keeping with established practice, to draw the attention
of the General Assembly to documents A/74/642 and
A/74/642/Add.1. Document A/74/642 contains a letter
dated 7 January 2020 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the General Assembly,
in which he informs the Assembly that 11 Member
States are in arrears in the payment of their financial
contributions to the United Nations, within the terms
of Article 19 of the Charter. I would like to remind
delegations that, under Article 19 of the Charter,
“A Member of the United Nations which is in
arrears in the payment of its financial contributions
to the Organization shall have no vote in the
General Assembly ... The General Assembly may,
nevertheless, permit such a Member to vote if it is
satisfied that the failure to pay is due to conditions
beyond the control of the Member.”

In document A/74/642/Add.1, the SecretaryGeneral informs the President of the General Assembly
that, since the issuance of his communication
contained in document A/74/642, Suriname has made
the necessary payment to reduce its arrears below the
amount specified in Article 19 of the Charter.
I should also like to inform members that, since
the issuance of document A/74/642/Add.1, Lebanon has
made the necessary payment to reduce its arrears below
the amount specified in Article 19 of the Charter. That
information will be reflected in document A/74/642/
Add.2, to be issued.
May I take it that the General Assembly takes note
of the information contained in those documents?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 123 (continued)
Strengthening of the United Nations system
Draft resolution (A/74/L.5)
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the Observer State of Palestine to introduce draft
resolution A/74/L.5.
Mr. Bamya (Palestine): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Group of 77 (G-77) and China to
introduce draft resolution A/74/L.5, on the enlargement
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions (ACABQ), under agenda item
123, “Strengthening of the United Nations system”.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-01091 (E)

*2001091*

A/74/PV.53

The
ACABQ
has
undergone
successive
enlargements to take into account the increase in
membership of the United Nations. However, the last of
the enlargements took place in 1977. As all the members
know, the United Nations membership has grown by
25 per cent since then. The current distribution between
regional groups within the Committee is incompatible
with the objective of broad geographical representation
enshrined in the successive resolutions on enlargement
and constitutes an unfair situation that should not have
lasted this long.
The draft resolution put forward by the G-77 and
China addresses this important matter, which has been
discussed in plenary in previous years without being
resolved. It is an overriding consideration that cannot
be conditioned or be subject to any other. Previous
resolutions adopted since 1977 were focused solely on
enlargement, and this draft resolution is no exception.
Other matters, including the working methods of the
Committee and the conditions of service of its members,
can be dealt with separately. In that regard, the Group
stresses its willingness and readiness to engage in
the first resumed session of the Fifth Committee on
those issues and is confident that an agreement taking
into account an increased and more representative
membership of the ACABQ can be reached.
Previous
resolutions
regarding
ACABQ
enlargement referred explicitly to increasing the
participation of developing countries, without ensuring,
however, that the regional groups of which developing
countries are part are duly represented in the ACABQ.
The draft resolution presented by our Group offers a
more balanced and just distribution that corresponds to
the reality of the United Nations membership in each
regional group and ensures increased participation of
developing countries. As such, it is fully in line with
previous resolutions adopted by the Assembly on the
matter and furthers their implementation
The Group welcomes all statements made in
support of broad geographical representation. Action
on those matters is long overdue and will only
strengthen the United Nations. Given the importance
of the ACABQ and its role for the entire Organization,
broad geographical representation should not be denied
or further delayed. We therefore call on all delegations
to vote in favour of draft resolution A/74/L.5.
The President: I call on the representative of Japan
on a point of order.
2/17

14/01/2020

Mr. Hoshino (Japan): Before we move forward,
Japan would like to raise a point of order under rule 71
of the rules of procedure.
As the members can see, draft resolution A/74/L.5,
which is before us, proposes to amend rule 155 of the
rules of procedure of the General Assembly. Rule 163
stipulates that the rules of procedure may be amended by
a decision of the General Assembly after a Committee
has reported on the proposed amendment. In this case no
Committee has had an opportunity to consider the draft
resolution, and the General Assembly does not have
before it the report of any Committee on the proposed
amendment. Therefore, the General Assembly should
not take action on draft resolution A/74/L.5 until a
Committee, or at least the Fifth Committee, reports on
the proposal. Accordingly, Japan proposes to postpone
action by the General Assembly on the draft resolution.
The President: I call on the observer of the
Observer State of Palestine on a point of order.
Mr. Bamya (Palestine): I take the floor in response
to the motion put forward by Japan. Our understanding
is that the purpose of rule 163 concerns how we draft an
amendment to the rules of procedure and ensuring that it
is legally sound. That is evident when reading annex II,
paragraph 1 (c), of the rules of procedure. It is our belief
that in this case the amendment to the rules of procedure
we are proposing only changes a number — from 16 to 20
members of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions — and does not pertain to
drafting. Therefore, we do not consider that the plenary
is precluded from taking action on the draft resolution
presented by the Group of 77 and China.
Before we proceed to the voting, may I ask the
President to clarify what a “yes” vote would entail and
what a “no” vote would entail?
The President: I shall now put to a recorded vote
the question of whether draft resolution A/74/L.5 should
be postponed until the Fifth Committee has reported on
the proposed amendment in accordance with rule 163 of
the rules of procedure.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
20-01091

14/01/2020

A/74/PV.53

Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New
Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Against:
Afghanistan,
Algeria,
Angola,
Argentina,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo
Verde, Cameroon, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Gabon, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Viet Nam, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Belarus, Costa Rica, Russian Federation, Serbia
The motion was rejected by 50 votes to 114, with
4 abstentions.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/74/L.5.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): This oral statement
is made in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly.
Under the terms of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of draft
resolution A/74/L.5, the General Assembly would first
decide to increase the membership of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
from 16 to 20 members, beginning from 1 January 2021;
secondly, also decide that seats shall be distributed as
follows among regional groups — five from the Group
of African States, five from the Group of Asian and
Pacific States, two from the Group of Eastern European
States, four from the Group of Latin American and
Caribbean States and four from the Group of Western
European and other States; thirdly, further decide to
amend, with effect from 1 January 2021, rule 155 of
the rules of procedure of the General Assembly to read:
“The General Assembly shall appoint an
Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions consisting of twenty
members, including at least three financial experts
of recognized standing.”
Pursuant to the decisions contained in paragraphs
1, 2 and 3 of the draft resolution, it is envisaged that an
increase in the membership of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions from 16 to
20 members would lead to an extension of the meeting
time of the Committee by four weeks per year, as it is
expected that a higher number of queries would be raised
at each hearing of the Committee, making the sessions
longer. A higher number of questions would need to be
answered in writing and the executive sessions of the
Committee would be longer, with further information to
be synthesized to produce the reports of the Committee.
As a result of the increased workload of the Advisory
Committee, it is envisioned that there would be an
increase in resource requirements starting in 2021,
under section 1, “Overall Policymaking, Direction
and Coordination”, section 2, “General Assembly and
Economic and Social Council Affairs and Conference
Management”, section 29, “Management and Support
Services”, and section 36, “Staff Assessment”.
For section 1, “Overall Policymaking, Direction
and Coordination” for the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, resources
estimated at $1,173,300 would be required in 2021
to cover the cost of four additional members to the

20-010913/17

A/74/PV.53

existing 16 members, the cost of four additional weeks
for existing and new members, and two additional posts
for the Committee’s secretariat — one P-3 and one
GSOL — and associated non-post resources.
For section 2, “General Assembly and Economic and
Social Council Affairs and Conference Management”,
resources estimated at $336,000 would be required to
cover the cost of four additional weeks of meetings,
with interpretation in all six official languages.
For section 29, “Management and Support
Services”, under subsection 29 B, “Department of
Operational Support”, resources estimated at $125,700
would be required in 2021 to cover the one-time cost
of modifications needed to the existing office space of
the Advisory Committee to provide for four additional
Members of the Committee and two additional staff of
the Committee’s secretariat, which would include the
installation of new workstations with power and data
cabling, ceiling work connected to a possible relocation
of sprinklers and finishing work such as patching,
repainting and flooring.
In addition, resources estimated at $19,200 would
be required under section 36, “Staff Assessment”, to be
offset by a corresponding amount under income section
1, “Income from Staff Assessment”.
The draft resolution, if adopted, is also expected
to require additional support from the Department of
Management Strategy, Policy and Compliance, related
to longer Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Question sessions of its expanded
membership. The extent to which those requirements
can be absorbed, however, would be further assessed in
the context of the proposed programme budget for 2021.
For information purposes, resource requirements
for 2022 are also reflected in the table contained in
the document that was distributed to Member States
in November, reflecting the cost of the new posts,
with continuing vacancy rates and the removal of
non-recurrent requirements.
Accordingly, should the General Assembly
adopt draft resolution A/74/L.5, additional resource
requirements estimated in the amount of $1,635,000,
net of staff assessment, would be included in the
proposed programme budget for 2021 — $1,173,300
under section 1, “Overall Policymaking, Direction and
Coordination”; $336,000 under section 2, “General
Assembly and Economic and Social Council Affairs
4/17

14/01/2020

and Conference Management”; $125,700 under section
29, “Management and Support Services”, under
subsection 29 B, “Department of Operational Support”.
For section 36, Staff assessment is estimated at $19,200
for the year 2021.
The proposed programme budget for 2021 would
be considered by the Fifth Committee during its
main seventy-fifth session, as per the established
budgetary procedures.
A copy of this statement will be made available on
the PaperSmart portal.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/74/L.5.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of vote before the voting, may I remind delegations
that explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
I give the floor to the representative of Croatia to
introduce a draft oral amendment.
Mr. Dogan (Croatia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the 28 States members of the European
Union (EU). In that capacity, let me state that the States
members of the EU would like to introduce the following
draft oral amendment to draft resolution A/74/L.5. The
draft amendment would delete paragraphs 1, 2 and 3
and replace them with a new paragraph, to read:
“Decides that the Fifth Committee shall
discuss in the first part of its resumed seventyfourth session the membership and functioning of
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions.”
The member States of the EU strongly believe that
issues pertaining to the functioning and expansion
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions (ACABQ) should be considered
in the Fifth Committee, as was the case in the past.
The memer States of the EU continue to believe that
issues pertaining to the membership and functioning
of the ACABQ belong entirely and exclusively to the
Fifth Committee and that the proposed text in draft
resolution A/74/L.5 is not in line with established
procedures, rules and regulations.
The member States of the EU are resolved to engage
constructively on the issue of ACABQ expansion
during the first part of the resumed seventy-fourth
session of the Fifth Committee in March. We therefore
20-01091

14/01/2020

hope that this draft amendment will be adopted by the
General Assembly.
Mr. Fifield (Australia): I take the floor on behalf of
Canada, New Zealand and my own country, Australia.
Our delegations attach great importance to the
questions of membership of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (ACABQ)
and its working methods and overall functioning.
Let me be very clear at the outset. Our delegations
do not support the expansion of the ACABQ. But let
me be equally clear that we acknowledge that equitable
geographic representation is of great importance to
many delegations and that we are willing to engage in
dialogue on the proposal in draft resolution A/74/L.5.
I should emphasize that none of our delegations has a
national representative serving on the Committee. We
have no vested interests either way. A well-functioning
Committee and United Nations effectiveness, writ
large, are our principal interest and concern.
We have deep concerns about the way in which this
proposal in draft resolution A/74/L.5 has been brought
forward for consideration by the General Assembly.
We appreciate that informal consultations were held
on Friday, but we regret that those consultations were
held so close to taking action in the General Assembly
today. Bear in mind that the draft resolution has been
in circulation since 7 October 2019, but there has been
no substantive or inclusive discussion through the
Fifth Committee.
It is important to note that previous expansions
of the ACABQ went through the Fifth Committee.
An enlargement of the ACABQ, as proposed in draft
resolution A/74/L.5 and highlighted by the oral
statement, would have a significant impact on the United
Nations budgetary process and the overall functioning
of the Organization. Those are matters rightly within
the purview of the Fifth Committee.
The current process clearly undermines the rules of
procedure as well as the long-established principle that
the Fifth Committee work on the basis of consensus.
Not all forums in this building operate on the basis
of consensus. Those that do need to be protected,
not undermined. We do not have such a high level of
consensus in this place that we can afford to take it
for granted.
Every Member State has an interest in both
the effective operations of the Organization and

A/74/PV.53

accountability for the use of its taxpayers’s money.
We therefore understand the intense interest here, but
consensus is vital to ensure that the budget reviews
of all Member States — whether they be developed,
developing, large, medium or small — are taken into
account. The Fifth Committee works by consensus
so that it can achieve the broadest possible agreement
that reflects diverse views. Let me reiterate that we are
willing to engage constructively and in good faith in
that forum.
Expanding the ACABQ will have impacts on
the Committee’s working methods as well as the
Organization at large. Our delegations appreciate
the hard work and the recommendations provided by
the ACABQ representatives and its secretariat. We
acknowledge that their workload is immense. However,
in recent years the ACABQ has not been working
as effectively as it could be. That is reflected in the
frequent late-issuing of reports, which contributes to
delays in the work of the Fifth Committee. Expanding
the Committee will not alleviate those problems. To
the contrary, it runs the real risk of exacerbating them.
Accordingly, we think that it is timely to consider the
ACABQ as a whole in order to see if we might be able
to make some incremental improvements that we think
should enjoy consensus.
At both the sixty-eighth and seventieth sessions,
the Secretary-General and the Chair of the ACABQ,
respectively, put forward ideas and recommendations
concerning the operational arrangements of the
ACABQ. Our delegations believe that it is timely to
consider new ideas and proposals that would improve
the efficiency and functioning of the Committee and
would enhance its accountability and independence.
For instance, we could look at the expertise level,
which has not increased despite multiple membership
expansions since the Committee’s establishment. Is it
appropriate that so few Committee members are required
to have relevant expertise in finance? In addition, the
gender balance of the Committee is embarrassingly
lopsided for an Organization that champions gender
equality. Only two out of 16 representatives are women.
We are confident that there are qualified women
from all regional groups who could be put forward as
candidates. We could also consider ways to improve
the working methods of the Committee to enable the
timely issuance of reports to help improve the Fifth
Committee’s working methods.

20-010915/17

A/74/PV.53

In conclusion, our delegations would be open
to discussing and reaching consensus on the issue of
ACABQ enlargement, working methods and overall
functioning. I restate that our preference remains for
this discussion to take place in the Fifth Committee.
That is the most relevant body to consider this important
matter. That is the best place to reach consensus. That
is where previous enlargements were discussed and
agreed. We therefore support the draft oral amendment
proposed on behalf of the EU, namelly, that this matter
be put the before the Fifth Committee. We encourage
all delegations to support it. In the event that does not
occur, we would encourage all representatives to vote
against the substantive draft resolution.
Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America):
The United States attaches great importance to the
work of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions (ACABQ). The ACABQ’s
technical expertise and recommendations have formed
the basis for decisions by the Fifth Committee on many
complex issues. All Member States have a vital interest
in the work of the ACABQ and its overall functioning,
composition and working methods. With that in mind,
we do not support an enlargement of the ACABQ. We
further reject the assertion by the Palestinian observer
that geographic representation overrides all other
principles, including the good of the Organization.
Furthermore, historically, all decisions to make
changes to the functioning, composition or working
methods of the ACABQ have been taken up in the
Fifth Committee. This key fact has been left out of the
justification of draft resolution A/74/L.5. We have a
regular standing agenda item in the Fifth Committee
for that purpose, and that is where the discussion of
the issues raised in the draft resolution introduced on
behalf of the Group of 77 (G-77) and China should have
taken place. An expansion of the ACABQ would impact
the United Nations budgetary process and overall
functioning of the Organization, and those matters are
clearly within the purview of the Fifth Committee.
My delegation wishes to express our deep concern
regarding the action of the G-77 and China to put forward
this draft resolution in this forum, ignoring the clear
prerogative of the Fifth Committee and with no attempt
to reach consensus. That action demonstrates bad faith
on the part of the penholders and sets the precedent that
any group of Member States may circumvent consensus
when it suits them. That undermines the spirit of
trust, compromise and consensus that underpins
6/17

14/01/2020

budgetary and administrative decisions and serves as
a disincentive to reach consensus on difficult issues
in future negotiations. That, in turn, puts at risk the
orderly financing and functioning of the Organization.
When the ACABQ was previously enlarged — in
1961, 1971 and 1977 — the Fifth Committee deliberated
and decided on those enlargements by consensus. There
is no legitimate reason to change precedent, particularly
when all other delegations, including the United States,
have repeatedly expressed our willingness to engage
on this issue in the next Fifth Committee session,
which begins in seven weeks. The only rationale from
the penholders has been that this is a priority issue
for the G-77 and China, which thereby precludes the
need for consensus. My delegation does not accept
that argument.
Considering the expansion of the ACABQ in
isolation, without any discussion of how that will impact
the ACABQ’s functioning, is also irresponsible. At a
minimum, this expansion will further delay the issuance
of ACABQ reports, which will, in turn, negatively
impact the already lengthy decision-making process
in the Fifth Committee. The proposed expansion also
maintains the requisite number of financial experts at
three, further diluting the expertise and administrative
acumen currently held in the ACABQ.
My delegation is open to discussing all issues related
to the functioning, composition and working methods
of the ACABQ, with a view to achieving a consensusbased outcome, consistent with the working methods
and procedural mandate of the Fifth Committee. In
that regard, my delegation supports the draft oral
amendment proposed on behalf of the European Union.
Mr. Bessedik (Algeria): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries (NAM) on agenda item 123, “Strengthening
the United Nations system”, in connection with draft
resolution A/74/L.5, entitled “Enlargement of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions: amendment to rule 155 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly”.
At the outset, the Non-Aligned Movement would
like to thank the Secretariat for providing the General
Assembly with the oral statement issued on 15 November
2019, in connection with the draft resolution A/74/L.5.
We would like to underline that the eighteenth
Summit of Heads of State and Government of the
20-01091

14/01/2020

Non-Aligned Movement, held in Baku on 25 and
26 October 2019, formally expressed its full endorsement
of this initiative and called for its adoption. In that
context, NAM would like to stress the following points.
First, the composition of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (ACABQ)
has been reviewed three times in order to progressively
correct that situation. The main criterion that is involved
in achieving that objective is the growing number of
Member States in the United Nations, given the fact
that 46 new Member States have joined the United
Nations since the most recent decision was taken on the
issue, in 1977.
Secondly, enlarging the ACABQ is a matter of
political nature rather than a technical issue. Therefore,
no rule of the rules of procedure impede the General
Assembly from examining and adopting the draft
resolution on the enlargement of the membership of
the ACABQ.
Thirdly, the initial proposal for the enlargement of
the ACABQ was submitted by NAM during the seventysecond session of the General Assembly, before the Ad
Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of the Work
of the General Assembly and before being taken up by
the Group of 77 (G-77) and China.
Fourthly, in line with the flexibility regularly
expressed by NAM in various opportunities,
particularly during the different sessions of the Ad
Hoc Working Group, we have accepted the alternative
proposal made by the co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working
Group during the seventy-second session. Unortunately,
that alternative proposal was opposed — and I can say,
strongly — by partners. However, the enlargement
is in line with the United Nations principle of broad,
equitable and balanced geographical representation,
as stipulated in the relevant United Nations legal
instruments, including, inter alia, the Charter of the
United Nations and resolution 1659 (XVI), adopted on
28 November 1961, and reaffirmed in resolution 32/103,
adopted on 14 December 1977, which amended rule 156
of the rules of procedure to state that
“The members of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,
no two of whom shall be nationals of the same
State, shall be selected on the basis of a broad
geographical representation”.

A/74/PV.53

We also wish to recall that NAM organized in
December 2018 and January 2019 two open informal
meetings to discuss and negotiate the draft resolution,
but a group of Member States maintained its inflexibility
on the issue.
Finally, and in the light of that, NAM reiterates
its full support to the G-77 and China and calls on all
Member States to vote in favour of the draft resolution.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Bamya (Palestine): In line with our introduction
of draft resolution A/74/L.5, on the enlargement of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions (ACABQ), the Group of 77 and China
reiterates that the objective of broad geographical
representation, which is enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations and United Nations resolutions, is
required to be implemented and not to be conditioned
or subjected to other considerations.
The current situation in the ACABQ does not uphold
or reflect that principle. There are regional groups with
many more members that have fewer members in the
ACABQ than other groups. That situation needs to be
remedied, and the draft oral amendment put forward
on behalf of the European Union again brings together
the issue of membership, which we want to be able
to tackle here, as well as the issue of the working
methods. We are ready to discuss the working methods
and conditions of service during the first resumed
session of the Fifth Committee, and we hope that we
can arrive at consensus on those important matters. But
our intention is to ensure that, in the meantime, there
is broad geographical representation, which is both
required and enshrined in the text that we all adopted
together. We therefore call on all delegations to vote
against the draft oral amendment.
Mr. Favre (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland and Liechtenstein would like to underscore
the importance of the work of the United Nations
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions (ACABQ). We are very grateful for the
technical advice that it gives Member States.
The smooth functioning of the ACABQ is essential
to the work of the United Nations in general, and that
of the Fifth Committee in particular. Our delegations
understand the concerns of the proponents of
equitable geographic distribution and the importance

20-010917/17

A/74/PV.53

of the issue, on which we stand ready to engage
constructively. However, given the nature of the work
of the ACABQ, such discussions must take place within
the appropriate body. Given its impact on the work of
the Fifth Committee and the budgetary implications of
the proposed enlargement, the appropriate forum is the
Fifth Committee. According to established procedure,
any amendment related to the functioning and size
of the ACABQ entailing substantial and significant
budgetary modifications must first be considered in
depth and agreed upon during informal consultations
of the Fifth Committee, before being presented at a
plenary meeting of the General Assembly.
The search for consensus is the cornerstone of
all processes involving States Members of the United
Nations in deciding budgetary issues; it must not be
hastily cast aside. We regret that the current process
chosen by the proponents fails to accord sufficient
attention to a process that would be more fitting for
Member States. We wholeheartedly disagree with the
approach adopted by the authors of draft resolution
A/74/L.5, and we foresee that it will have unprecedented
and far-reaching consequences that will have a negative
impact on reaching agreements on budgetary issues and
the future functioning of the Fifth Committee and the
General Assembly.
An increase in the membership of the ACABQ
would negatively affect the functioning of the Advisory
Committee. Even at its current size and make-up, the
timely publication of reports is not always a given and is
made possible only through the commendable efforts of
the members of the Advisory Committee. The proposal
to expand the ACABQ would increase the time needed
to hold Advisory Committee meetings to four weeks,
which would even further compromise the timeliness
of publications.
We therefore believe in the need to hold a
comprehensive debate on the composition of the
ACABQ in tandem with a debate on its working
methods, conditions of employment and the efficiency
and effectiveness of the Advisory Committee. Fender
parity and the strengthening of the purview of the
Committee must also be duly taken into account during
such a debate.
In conclusion, we reaffirm the willingness of
Switzerland and Liechtenstein to constructively
participate in debating both the legitimate concerns
addressed in draft resolution A/74/L.5 and the many
8/17

14/01/2020

other relevant issues related to the working methods of
the ACABQ in connection with the Fifth Committee.
In that regard, our two countries support the draft oral
amendment proposed on behalf of the European Union.
Mrs. Furman (Israel): Allow me to join some of the
previous speakers in expressing our deep concern about
today’s proceedings. While we understand the need
to address concerns about geographic representation,
we believe that bringing the issue directly to the
General Assembly creates a dangerous precedent on
budgetary issues that should have been discussed in
the Fifth Committee, as has been done in the past. In
addition, we also agree that limiting the discussion to
solely enlargement issues does not address many other
important issues relating to improving the work of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions, such as gender parity and working methods.
We therefore support the draft oral amendment
proposed on behalf of the European Union.
Mr. Glanois (France) (spoke in French): France of
course associates itself with the draft oral amendment
introduced on behalf of the European Union and the
reasons underpinning it, as well as the arguments made
by a number of our colleagues. Nevertheless, given the
importance of our discussion today and the precedent
that draft resolution A/74/L.5 seeks to establish, I
would like highlight the following points.
At the outset, we must say that we very much
regret the process that led us here today, namely, to
consider in a General Assembly plenary meeting the
issue of the composition of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (ACABQ)
without having had an opportunity talk about it
in the body — the Fifth Committee — to which it
obviously pertains.
As others said earlier, we are thereby contravening
own rules. But, beyond the question of strict adherence
to procedure, it is most regrettable that the path that
the Group of 77 and China chose is one that we should
proscribe. It is the path of majority rule rather than
that of seeking consensus, which has long prevailed
in the work of Fifth Committee with regard to all
administrative and budgetary considerations, which are
so vital to the functioning of the Organization.
As everyone knows, that principle, established by
Member States, is of crucial importance. It ensures
that no Member State, or group of Member States,
20-01091

14/01/2020

monopolizes the administrative and budgetary
decisions in an Organization to which all Members
contribute financially. Reaching consensus is therefore
essential to ensuring that the goals of Member States
are taken into account, as every Member has an interest
in both ensuring the welfare of the Organization and
responsibly using its taxpayers’ money.
In undermining the spirit of trust, compromise and
consensus that, until today’s discussion, has prevailed,
the proposed process is therefore creating a precedent
the scope and consequences of which should not be
underestimated. For my delegation, it is sufficiently
clear that its repercussions will be felt in a number of
future budget debates, and I say once again that this
situation is altogether regrettable. We should reject
succumbing to it in unison. I say this all the more
stridently given that, in our view, choosing this path is
senseless, as a serious, honest and credible alternative
has been proposed.
No solid argument was made to explain why the
current session of the Fifth Committee, scheduled
to resume for the first time in several weeks, could
not have included this item on its agenda. We have
underscored on several occasions that we are open to
constructively discussing the matter. The question of
geographic representation within the Organization and
its bodies and committees is of the utmost importance
for France. To suggest the contrary, or even that we are
incapable of hearing out our partners as they express
their ambition in that regard, is an insult.
Moreover, to postulate that enlarging the ACABQ
will have no direct affect on its functioning and
effectiveness, or that the issue of the number of its
members, for example, could be addressed separately
from the issues concerning the number of experts
among them, or of gender diversity, shows, in my
delegation’s view, a glaring level of bad faith.
In conclusion, the ACABQ is a body that is vital
to the Organization, but apart from it, our negotiation
methods themselves and the culture of seeking
consensus are undeniably the most precious asset at
our disposal. Draft resolution A/74/L.5 and the entire
process that led us hear today carelessly run roughshod
over that asset. For that reason, my delegation calls on
all who attach importance to the smooth functioning
of the Organization to return to their senses, support
the draft oral amendment introduced on behalf of the
European Union, sit with us around the table of the Fifth

A/74/PV.53

Committee for a transparent, inclusive and constructive
conversation and find a mutually satisfactory consensus.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote before the voting.
Before we proceed to take action on draft resolution
A/74/L.5, in accordance with rule 90 of the rules of
procedure, we shall first take a decision on the draft
oral amendment proposed by the representative of
Croatia on behalf of the European Union.
With regard to the required majority for the draft
resolution and the oral amendment thereto, may I take
it that a simple majority of members present and voting
is required for the adoption of draft resolution A/74/L.5
and the proposed oral amendment?
It was so decided.
The President: A recorded vote on the proposed
draft oral amendment has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Canada, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
North Macedonia, Norway, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
Against:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cameroon, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Eswatini,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic

20-010919/17

A/74/PV.53

Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Kitts
and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Viet Nam, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Armenia, Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina
The draft oral amendment was rejected by 52 votes
to 115, with 3 abstentions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Russian Federation on a point
of order.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): In view of the situation, we would like to
make an oral amendment to draft resolution A/74/L.5.
(spoke in English)
In paragraph 2, replace the number “two” with the
number “three”, as applied to the seats for the Group of
Eastern European States.
In paragraphs 1 and 3, replace the number “twenty”
with the number “twenty-one”.
The President: In connection with the oral
amendment just put forward by the representative of the
Russian Federation, I propose to suspend the meeting
for 30 minutes to ask the Secretariat to circulate the
oral amendment to draft resolution A/74/L.5 in the Hall
for review by Member States.
The meeting was suspended at 11.45 a.m. and
resumed at 12.20 p.m.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Secretariat.
10/17

14/01/2020

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): The following statement
is made in accordance with rules 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly.
Under the terms of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of draft
resolution A/74/L.5, as well as the draft oral amendment
introduced at the 53rd plenary meeting by the
representative of the Russian Federation, the General
Assembly would decide to increase the membership
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions from 16 to 21 members, beginning
from 1 January 2021, and would also decide that seats
shall be distributed as follows among regional groups:
five from the Group of African States, five from the
Group of Asian and Pacific States, three from the
Group of Eastern European States, four from the Group
of Latin American and Caribbean States and four from
the Group of Western European and other States.
The General Assembly further decides to amend,
with effect from 1 January 2021, rule 155 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly to read:
“The General Assembly shall appoint an
Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions consisting of 21 members,
including at least three financial experts of
recognized standing.”
Pursuant to the decisions contained in paragraphs 1,
2 and 3 of the draft resolution, it is envisaged that an
increase in the membership of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions from 16 to
21 members would lead to an extension of the meeting
time of the Committee by for weeks per year, as it is
expected that the higher number of queries would be
raised by at each hearing over the Committee, making
the sessions longer. A higher number of questions
would need to be responded to in writing and executive
sessions of the Committee would be longer, with further
information to be synthesized to produce the reports of
the Committee.
As a result of the increase in the workload of the
Advisory Committee, it is envisaged that there would
be an increase in resource requirements starting in
2021 under section 1, “Overall Policymaking, Direction
and Coordination”; section 2, “General Assembly and
Economic and Social Council Affaris and Conference
Management”; section 29, “Management and Support
Services; and section 36, “Staff Assessment”.
20-01091

14/01/2020

For section 1, “Overall Policymaking, Direction
and Coordination”, for the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, resources
estimated at $1,377,500 would be required in 2021 to
cover the cost of five additional members or to the
existing 16 members, the cost of for additional week
weeks for existing and new members and two additional
posts for the Committee’s secretariat, one P-3 and one
GSOL, and associated non-post resources.
For section 2, “General Assembly and Economic and
Social Council Affairs and Conference Management”,
resources estimated at $336,000 would be required to
cover the cost of four additional weeks of meetings,
with interpretation in all six official languages.

A/74/PV.53

for 2021: under section 1, “Overall Policymaking,
Direction and Coordination”, $1,377,500; section 2,
“General Assembly and Economic and Social Council
Affairs and Conference Management”, $336,000;
and section 29, “Management and Support Services”,
under sub-section 29 (b), “Department of Operational
Support”, $125,700. For section 36, staff assessment
is estimated at $19,200 for the year 2021 the proposed
programme budget for 2021 would be considered by the
Fifth Committee during its main seventy-fifth session
as part of the established budgetary procedures.
The President: A recorded vote has been
requested on the draft oral amendment proposed by the
Russian Federation.

For section 29, “Management and Support
Services”, under sub-section 29 (b), “Department of
Operational Support”, resources estimated at $125,700
would be required in 2021 to cover the one-time cost
of modifications needed to the existing office space of
the Advisory Committee to provide for five additional
members of the Committee and two additional staff
of the Committee secretariat, which would include
installation of new work stations, including power
and data cabling, ceiling work connected to a possible
relocation of sprinklers and finishing works such
as patching, repainting and flooring. In addition,
resources estimated at $19,200 would be required
under section 36, “Staff Assessment”, to be offset by
the corresponding amount on the income section 1,
“Income from Staff Assessment”.

I give the floor to the observer of the Observer
State of Palestine on a point of order.

The draft resolution, if adopted, is also expected
to require additional support from the Department of
Management, Strategy, Policy and Compliance related
to longer Advisory Committee sessions of its expanded
membership. The extent to which those requirements
can be absorbed, however, would be further assessed in
the context of the proposed programme budget for 2021.

Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Who requested a recorded vote on our draft
oral amendment?

For information purposes, resource requirements
for 2022 are also reflected in the table contained in the
document circulated earlier today, reflecting the cost
of new posts with continuing vacancy rates and the
removal of non-recurring requirements.
Accordingly, should the General Assembly adopt
draft resolution A/74/L.5 as well as that proposed
draft oral amendment by the Russian Federation,
additional resource requirements estimated in the
amount of $1,839,200, net of staff assessment, would
be included in the proposed programme budget

Mr. Bamya (Palestine): Before we proceed to
the voting, I have a few words to say on behalf of the
Group of 77 (G-77) and China regarding the draft oral
amendment proposed by the Russian Federation.
The draft oral amendment proposed by the Russian
Federation is compatible and consistent with the
objective of broad geographical representation pursued
by the G-77 and China in introducing draft resolution
A/74/L.5. We therefore call on all delegations to vote in
favor of the draft oral amendment.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of the Russian Federation on a point of order.

The President: A recoded vote on the draft oral
amendment was requested by Australia.
I shall now put to the vote the draft oral amendment.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,

20-0109111/17

A/74/PV.53

Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Gabon, Grenada,
Guinea, Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritius, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Republic of Moldova,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Viet Nam, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Canada, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, North
Macedonia, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Romania, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining:
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Guatemala
The draft oral amendment was adopted by 118
votes to 50, with 2 abstentions.
The President: I shall now give the floor to
delegations that wish to make statements.
Mr. Dogan (Croatia) I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the 28 States members of the European Union
to present our unified and principled position reflected
in all actions taken today on the procedure, the oral
amendment and draft resolution A/74/L.5 as a whole.
The member States of the European Union attach
great importance to the question of the membership
12/17

14/01/2020

of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions, as well as its working methods
and overall functioning, through the prism of both the
effectiveness and relevance of the work of the Fifth
Committee. We would like to reiterate our firm view
that those issues pertain exclusively to the agenda of the
Fifth Committee of the General Assembly. We deeply
regret the circumventing of its working methods, despite
our willingness to exchange views constructively in that
forum on the basis of consensus during the upcoming
first resumed session of the Fifth Committee.
The Fifth Committee functions on the premise
that no effort should be spared in the pursuit of
consensus. That principle carries crucial importance
for the functioning and orderly financing of the United
Nations. In an Organization where all Member States
contribute financially, it is our responsibility to strive
for shared ownership of administrative and budgetary
decisions and to ensure that the views of all Member
States are taken into account. In that context, we would
also like to express concern that the draft resolution
under consideration is not in line with established
procedures, rules and regulations. As well, we regret
the lack of an inclusive, substantive discussion among
all parties prior to its submission for consideration
during a General Assembly plenary meeting.
We are deeply concerned that the adoption of
the draft resolution under consideration would not
only undermine the spirit of trust, compromise and
consensus in the Fifth Committee, but would also serve
as a disincentive for reaching the broadest possible
agreement on difficult issues in future negotiations.
It would leave an unwelcome legacy, jeopardizing the
ability of the Organization, our common home, to
continue to manage its administrative and budgetary
matters in the appropriate forums based on maximum
efforts towards unity — as has been the case for many
years and should continue to be so.
For those reasons, we will vote against the draft
resolution as a whole, and we call on other delegations
to follow suit.
Mr. Bientzle (Germany): We fully align ourselves
with the statement just delivered by the representative
of Croatia as current president of the Council of the
European Union. Please allow me to make some
additional remarks.
20-01091

14/01/2020

First, any item with budgetary implications needs
to be discussed in the Fifth Committee. Anything else
is completely unacceptable.
Secondly, a well-functioning and highly qualified
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions (ACABQ) is of crucial importance to the
United Nations. Past experiences show that we must
make the Committee more efficient and effective.
Enlarging the Committee would have the opposite
effect. The ACABQ is supposed to serve Member
States through its expertise on budgetary, financial,
administrative and management matters. We will
continue to use the technical quality of its work as a
yardstick for its relevance.
Thirdly, we need to address issues like the
qualifications, experience and expertise of members,
term limits, a cooling-off period, gender parity, a code
of conduct and working methods.
Fourthly, introducing a draft resolution on enlarging
the ACABQ goes against our understanding of the rules
of procedure of the General Assembly and constitutes
a breach of the Fifth Committee consensus approach to
administrative and budgetary matters. All past ACABQ
enlargements were discussed in the Fifth Committee.
Not trying to find consensus is a breach of trust.
Finally, we strongly regret that today’s debate will
further increase the politicization of the work of both
the ACABQ and the Fifth Committee.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): It is unusual for
individual States members of the European Union to
take the floor on matters related to Fifth Committee
budgetary management issues. Given the importance
of the issue before us today, however, I must make an
exception and speak out in my national capacity. This
is in addition to the European Union statement read out
earlier by the representative of Croatia, with which we
align ourselves.
We have three objections to the draft resolution
(A/74/L.5) before us: first, the undesired politicization
of the work of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions (ACABQ);
secondly, the circumvention of the long-established
precedent and principle that budgetary and management
issues are decided upon by consensus; and, thirdly, the
undermining of the functioning of the ACABQ and the
Fifth Committee.

A/74/PV.53

On my first point, we regret the politicization of
the work of the ACABQ. We attach great importance
to its independence, which should serve to safeguard
the impartiality and technical nature of the advice
given to Member States in their deliberations. By
introducing a draft resolution here today to address
perceived geographical misrepresentation directly
through the General Assembly, thus circumventing the
Fifth Committee, the matter of the composition of the
Committee is being politicized. That process breaks
established practice of past ACABQ enlargements. The
future functioning of the ACABQ is being jeopardized
by that process.
My second point, on breaking with consensus in
decision-making, the introduction of the draft resolution
before us sets a dangerous precedent. It undermines
the Fifth Committee’s working methods and breaks
with the established practice of working on the basis
of consensual outcomes — and this on a matter where
that consensus is crucial. Consensus could have been
achieved through adherence to normal procedures.
For that reason, we joined others in pleading to hold
the discussion on this issue during the upcoming first
resumed session of the Fifth Committee, to be held in
March. That would also have allowed for a debate on
the necessary improvements to the working methods of
the ACABQ. Such improvements are long overdue and
would be even more critical if the ACABQ were to meet
in an expanded composition of 20 or more members.
That brings me to my third point, namely, our
concern about the functioning of an enlarged ACABQ.
Even in its current composition, it is already very
complicated and arduous to produce timely advice for
the Fifth Committee. The number of questions asked by
ACABQ members to the Secretariat has increased. The
time it takes to reach consensus within the ACABQ has
proven to be increasingly difficult. We cannot afford
risking an ACABQ quagmire, given the bruising recent
experiences in Fifth Committee deliberations. We
cannot afford a practice where Committee deadlines
are increasingly slipping. It does not make sense to
increase the cost incurred with an ACABQ extension
and, in return, get more muddled and delayed advice.
In the view of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, we
should all subscribe to the principles of efficiency,
effectiveness and value-for-money.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
strongly regrets that not enough time was allowed
to weigh the pros and cons of enlargement. We also

20-0109113/17

A/74/PV.53

regret that amendments put forward to improve the
working methods of the ACABQ were not given
serious consideration. The issue is rushed through for
political reasons. If adopted, we see a system in need
of an even-more urgent fix. We would prefer for other
Member States to place the functioning of the system
above national interests. We would prefer a review of
the ACABQ, its effective functioning and composition
holistically, during the first resumed session of the
Fifth Committee. Given the fact that no room for such
considerations has been allowed, we request other
Member States to vote against this draft resolution. Let
me very clear: we do not consider the process on the
issue at hand a precedent for future decision-making on
Fifth Committee issues. We will continue our efforts
to make the United Nations system more efficient and
effective. The financial contributions of Member States
should benefit the poorest of the poor in the world and
should not be used to create additional bureaucracy and
red tape here in New York.
For those reasons, we will vote against this draft
resolution. We call on other States to do the same.
The President: Since the draft oral amendment
proposed by the representative of the Russian Federation
has been adopted, we shall proceed to take a decision
on draft resolution A/74/L.5, as orally amended.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Eswatini,
Ethiopia, Gabon, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
14/17

14/01/2020

of), Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, South
Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Viet Nam, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Canada, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
North Macedonia, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Romania, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining:
Armenia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Republic of
Moldova, Serbia
Draft resolution A/74/L.5, as orally amended, was
adopted by 120 votes to 48, with 4 abstentions
(resolution 74/267).
The President: Before giving the floor to those
wishing to speak in explanation of vote after the voting,
I would like to remind delegations that explanations are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations
from their seats
Mrs. Bernal Prado (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
With regard to the adoption of resolution 74/267,
which was introduced by the observer of Palestine on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China, Chile would like
to reiterate the importance of the goal of achieving
equitable geographic representation within the United
Nations, which is why my delegation showed its support
by voting in favour of the resolution.
However, my delegation also would have liked
to have seen a resolution as important as the one
20-01091

14/01/2020

that we just adopted enjoy broad support on the part
of all the States Members of the United Nations. We
are convinced that consensus is always the best way
to reach understanding across the board. In the light
of that, we hope that this will not set a precedent for
the future to undermine consensus on the work of the
Organization, and, in this case, of the Fifth Committee.
Mr. Kvalheim (Norway): Norway places strong
emphasis on the importance of a well-functioning
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions (ACABQ). We recognize its crucial role
in providing advice to the General Assembly. We are
therefore always open to consider proposals, including
on adjustments to the membership, that may enhance
the work of the ACABQ.
Norway is a consistent supporter of stronger
participation by developing States in the United Nations.
Consequently, we viewed the proposal introduced by
the observer of Palestine on behalf of the Group of
77 and China positively. However, we have sincere
concerns about the process. Norway is concerned about
the precedents created by a plenary decision on this
matter. We believe that issues related to the functioning
of the ACABQ, including membership, should have
been discussed in a consensus-driven Fifth Committee.
That would have allowed for more thorough discussion
on the issue and increased the chances of achieving a
compromise proposal to be adopted by consensus.
Our vote should therefore not in any way be
interpreted as a signal of Norway’s recognition of the
path being taken by the proponent of this particular
issue, but rather a voice of support for an ACABQ that
reflects the sizes of the various geographical groups at
the United Nations.
Mr. Hoshino (Japan): Japan deeply regrets that
resolution 74/267 was submitted directly to the plenary
of the General Assembly and was put to the vote
without prior deliberations in the Fifth Committee. The
issue of the membership of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (ACABQ)
is clearly and critically related to the mandate of the
Fifth Committee. There is no need to repeat that; it
is obvious.
Japan has maintained that the issue must first be
deliberated on in the Fifth Committee, ever since the
idea of enlargement was first floated by the proponents
of the resolution. The implication of bypassing the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary

A/74/PV.53

Questions goes far beyond the Committee and
extends to engendering risks to the overall delivery
of the United Nations mandate and sound operation of
the Organization.
On the three past occasions when the ACABQ
membership was enlarged, the matter was deliberated
in the Fifth Committee before it was forwarded to the
plenary. The expansion of the ACABQ membership
also entails financial implications, and therefore should
be brought to the Fifth Committee as per rule 153 are
the rules of procedure of the General Assembly. The
Fifth Committee makes every possible effort to achieve
the broadest possible agreement on any of its agenda
items. Building consensus may sometimes be difficult,
but the Committee always exhausts its efforts to that
end, in order to maintain the sound functioning of
the Organization.
It is with that concern that Japan sincerely attempted
to engage the proponents in good faith. We regret that,
for all the rationale put forward, the Group of 77 and
China did not respond to our repeated calls to bring the
matter to the Fifth Committee. Circumventing the Main
Committees on matters of such critical importance
within their purview is a serious defiance of the central
role of the Committees and to the long-established
modus operandi of the Assembly.
We therefore voted against the resolution and, for
the record, we strongly believe that the whole process
leading to today’s voting should not be considered as a
precedent on this matter. Japan reiterates its deep regret
and disappointment that all opportunities to engage in
the Fifth Committee were denied. Japan also expresses
its serious concerns about the negative impact that this
may bring forth.
Mr. Kpayedo (Togo) (spoke in French): I have
the honour of speaking on behalf of the Group of
African States following the adoption of resolution
74/267, under agenda item 123, “Strengthening the
United Nations system”, entitled “Enlargement of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions: amendment to rule 155 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly”, during the main
part of the Assembly’s seventy-fourth session. The
African Group has taken note of the comments made
today by all delegations and would like to make the
following observations.
The Group wishes to recall that the African
continent, with its 54 member States, was represented

20-0109115/17

A/74/PV.53

only by three seats in this important consultative
Committee. We believe that the resolution introduced
today on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, which
was just adopted, is a step forward towards taking into
account the historic progress that is being made at the
United Nations.
While today the United Nations has 193 States
Members, in 1977, the last time the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (ACABQ)
was enlarged to represent the membership of that
time, the Organization had only 148 Members. The
Group recalls that the composition of the ACABQ was
last considered in 1977, about 42 years ago, at a time
when most current Member States had yet to achieve
autonomy or independence. The number of Members
has increased significantly since the adoption of
resolution 32/103, which enlarged the composition of
the Advisory Committee in 1977.
The status quo risks continuing to deny certain of
today’s Member States and regions that had no voice
at that time the right to be heard and to continuing
inevitably to deny those Members the opportunity to
participate in and craft a United Nations agenda that
works for all.
The goal of today’s resolution is to recognize today’s
reality within the United Nations and move towards
attaining full geographic representation in the United
Nations system. The reasons that drove the expansion
of the Advisory Committee in 1977 are not only still
with us today: they are even more compelling. The
General Assembly, in previous resolutions, including as
recently as December 2019, has reiterated the need for
Member States to be able to participate fully throughout
the programme budget planning process. We believe
that enlarging the Advisory Committee is a step in the
right direction.
The Group recognizes that there are financial
implication to enlargement of the ACABQ. We are
not unaware of the fact. However, we reflect on the
following question: what is a good price for fair and
equitable representation in the United Nations and its
bodies? In response, we believe that price should not
come into it. That is why we welcome the adoption
of this resolution as part of the reform seeking to
strengthen the United Nations system.
The Group assures you, Sir, of our continued
commitment to participating actively and constructively
on this important agenda item and any related to it.
16/17

14/01/2020

In conclusion, the Group of African States reiterates
its full support to the Group of 77 and China and
thanks the Group for having initiated and introduced
this resolution.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): The Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
is an important technical body on which all Member
States rely. There are a number of issues that we need to
address around its effectiveness and efficiency, which
need to be discussed holistically.
The United Kingdom was disappointed by
the lack of consideration given to the risks of
deliberately circumventing established decision-making
procedures today. The United Kingdom, alongside
other Member States, has repeatedly committed to
engage constructively on issues of enlarging the
ACABQ, including geographic representation, in the
Fifth Committee, and express our confidence that a
reasonable outcome could be achieved there. The United
Kingdom and others expressed that position in person
and through a letter to you, Mr. President, copied to all
members. In response, there has been a total absence of
meaningful, substantive or inclusive engagement with
all parties in pursuit of consensus, despite this being
the long-established principle for decision-making on
budgetary and administrative matters. Our proposal to
discuss these issues, in good faith and in short order,
was ignored. Those behind this proposal did not even
try to seek consensus. They did not even try.
We heard that taking this issue straight to plenary was
justified on the basis that geographical representation
is considered a political matter, described as paramount
and overriding. Geographical representation is indeed a
very important consideration, but it is always considered
in balance with other considerations.
As the representative of Australia set out so
eloquently, there is a reason that consensus is such a
long-established principle on these matters. It serves to
ensure that, for the issues with financial implications,
the views of all Member States are taken into account,
as every Member has an interest in the well-being of the
Organization, its own State’s national interests and the
use of that taxpayers’ money. Consensus ensures the
smooth operation of a well-funded multilateral system.
Instead, those behind this proposal took an
aggressive approach, which has driven apart Member
States. I fear that those who pressed so hard to adopt
resolution 74/267 without consultation risk serious
20-01091

14/01/2020

damage to cooperation and constructive outcomes in
the Fifth Committee. The consequences could be farreaching and very damaging. That is why the United
Kingdom voted against it.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Our delegation agrees on the importance
of consensus in the General Assembly. It was only
having understood that consensus would be impossible
that we took these steps. At the same time, we can
reconcile ourselves to the statements made by number
of delegations about consensus, which are hypocritical
and apply double standards in labelling as a precedent
our bringing forth a confrontational proposal to
the plenary. I would encourage them in future to
refrain from such measures and from putting forth
confrontational proposals. Otherwise, today’s action
will simply continue further. I would also like to take
this opportunity to thank those States that understood
our approach.
Mr. Ham Sang Wook (Republic of Korea): My
delegation fully understands the necessity of increasing
the membership of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions (ACABQ),
considering that the current membership does not

A/74/PV.53

appropriately reflect the reality of the increase in States
Member of the United Nations since the last expansion
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions, in 1977. However, my delegation
voted against resolution 74/267, as we believe that this
matter should be discussed in the Fifth Committee
prior to being considered in plenary meeting. This issue
clearly falls within the purview of the Fifth Committee,
and all previous decisions on this question have been
taken through that process.
Furthermore, we believe that an enlargement of
the ACABQ membership needs to be addressed in
a comprehensive manner together with the working
methods and overall functioning of the Advisory
Committee. My delegation will continue to do
its part to ensure a comprehensive reform of the
Advisory Committee.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote after the voting.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 123.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

20-0109117/17
