113

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

and aspirations of the peoples therein with respect to
their future status,
Mindful that those Territories require the continued
attention and assistance of the United Nations in the
achievement by their peoples of the objectives embodied
in the Charter of the United Nations and in the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples,
A ware of the special circumstances of the geographical location and economic conditions of the Territories
concerned and stressing the necessity of diversifying
their economies as a matter of priority in order to reduce their dependence on fluctuating economic activities,
1. Approves the chapters of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to American Samoa, Guam and United States Virgin
Islands;48
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of
those Territories to self-determination and independence
in accordance with the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
3. Reaffirms its conviction that the question of territorial size, geographical location and limited resources
should in no way delay the implementation of the Declaration with respect to the Territories concerned;
4. Calls upon the Government of the United States
of America, as the administering Power, in consultation
with the freely elected representatives of the people, to
continue to take all the necessary steps to ensure the
full and speedy attainment of the goals set fo$ in the
Declaration with respect to the Territories;
5. Strongly deprecates the establishment of military
installations on Guam as being incompatible with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and of General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV);
6. Calls upon the administering Power to take all
possible steps to diversify the economies of the Territories listed above and to work out concrete programmes of assistance and economic development for
those Territories;
7. Calls upon the administering Power to reconsider
its attitude towards receiving United Nations visiting
missions and to permit access by such missions to the
Territories;
8. Urges the administering Power, with the cooperation of the Governments of the Territories concerned, to safeguard the inalienable right of the peoples
of those Territories to the enjoyment of their natural
resources by taking effective measures which guarantee
the rights of the peoples to own and dispose of those
natural resources and to establish and maintain control
of their future development;
· 9. Requests the administering Power to continue to
enlist the assistance of the specialized agencies and the
organizations within the United Nations system in accelerating progress in all sectors of the national life
of those Territories;
10. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
seek the best ways and means for the implementation
of the Declaration with respect to American Samoa,
48 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/10023/Rev.l ), chaps. XXITI and
XXVI.

Guam and United States Virgin Islands, including the
possible dispatch of visiting missions in consultation
with the administering Power, and to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-first session on the implementation of the present resolution.
2431st plenary meeting
8 December 1975
3430 (XXX). Question of the Seychelles

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the Seychelles,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 49
Having heard the statement of the administering
Power, 50
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
all other resolutions and decisions of the United Nations
relating to the Territory,
Noting with satisfaction that, as a result of the constitutional conference held in London in March 1975,
in which the Territory's political parties-the Seychelles
Democratic Party and the Seychelles People's United
Party-fully participated, a coalition Government was
established in the Territory,
Noting the expressed desire of the Government of the
Seychelles that the Territory should attain independence
not later than June 1976 and the continued readiness
of the administering Power to grant independence to
the people of the Seychelles in accordance with their
wishes,
Further noting that an electoral review commission
has been established with a view to agreeing on the
system of elections and the size and composition of the
~egislature and that a renewed conference is envisaged
m early 1976 to work out the provisions of an independence constitution,
Mindful of the stated position of the Government of
the Seychelles with regard to the territorial integrity of
the Seychelles and bearing in mind, in particular, the
statements made by the representatives of the Government of the Seychelles in that regard at the 1019th
meeting of the Special Committee on 20 August 1975,111

1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Comm~ttee on the Situati~n with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
the Seychelles ;52
2. Takes note of ~e u_nited wish of the people of
the Seychelles to achieve mdependence in accordance
with the peclaratio~ on the Granting of Independence
to Colorual Countries and Peoples, contained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
49 Ibid., chaps. IV and XIV.
50 Ibid., Thirtieth Session, Fourth Committee, 2166th meeting.
5 1 See Al AC.109/PV.1019.
52 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth Ses-

sion, Supplement No. 23 (A/10023/Rev.1), chap. XIV.

lH

General Assembly-Thirtieth Session

3. Requests the Government of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as the administering Power, to continue to take all the necessary
steps to assist the people of the Seychelles in their
efforts to achieve self-determination and independence
not later than June 1976 and to continue to keep the
United Nations fully apprised of developments relating
to the Seychelles;
4. Stresses the responsibility of the United Nations
to render all possible assistance to the people of the
Seychelles in their efforts to consolidate their national
independence and, to that end, invites the specialized
agencies and the institutions associated with the United
Nations to work out concrete programmes of assistance
to the Seychelles;
5. Requests the Special Committee to keep the situation in the Territory under review.
2431st plenary meeting
8 December 1975
3431 (XXX). Question of the Solomon Islands

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the Solomon
Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 53
Having heard the statement of the administering
Power, 54
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
all other resolutions and decisions of the United Nations
relating to the Territory,
Noting with satisfaction that, as a result of the constitutional talks on the future of the Solomon Islands,
held in London in May 1975 between the Governments
of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and the Solomon Islands, it was agreed that:
(a) The Territory should achieve internal selfgovernment not later than 31 December 1975,
( b) Independence should fol.low from twelve to
eighteen months after the achievement of internal selfgovernment, subject to the requisite legislative approval
of the Government of the United Kingdom,
(c) A constitutional committee would be appointed
to work out an independence constitution and to submit recommendations thereon to the authorities of the
Solomon Islands not later than April 1976,
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
the Solomon Islands ;55
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
the Solomon Islands to self-determination and independence in accordance with the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples;

3. Requests the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as the
administering Power, to continue to assist the people
of the Solomon Islands towards the achievement of
independence, as agreed, within the prescribed period
following the Territory's attainment of internal selfgovernment in December 1975;
4. Requests the Special Committee to continue its
examination of the question, including the dispatch, as
appropriate and in consultation with the administering
Power, of a United Nations visiting mission to the
Solomon Islands in connexion with the processes leading to the Territory's accession to independence, and
to report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirtyfirst session.
2431 st plenary meeting
8 December 1975
3432 (XXX). Question of Belize

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Belize,
Having examined the relevant chapter of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,116
Having heard· the statements of the representatives
of Belize,57
Reaffirming the principles established in the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples set out in its resolution 1S14
(?(V) of 14 December 1960, ~ particular the princ_1ple that ~11 peoples ~ave ~e ri~t to self-determinat101;1, by. ~rrtue of which nght ihey freely determine
the1! pohtical status and freely pursue their economic,
social and cultural development,
Firmly convinced that the principles referred to
above apply to the people of Belize with no less force
than to the people of other colonial Territories,
Noting the firm desire of the Government and people
of Belize, which has been ftequently expressed for
many years past, to exercise their right to self-determin_ation_ and to proceed to independence as soon as pos~1ble 10 peace and security and with their territory
mtact,
Bearing in mind the repeated assurances by the
Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
~nd Northern Isl~nd, as the administering Power, that
1t stands ready, m accordance with resolution 1514
(XV), to take the formal steps necessary for Belize
to exercise its right to self-determination and independence,
Regretting that certain differences of opinion between the administering Power and the Government
o~ Guatemala concerning the future of Belize have
hJt~erto ~rev~nted the people of Belize from exerc1smg _theu nght to self-determination and independence m peace and security, in accordance with their
freely expressed wishes,
Considering that these differences of opinion can
and should now be speedily resolved by negotiations
carried out in close consultation with the Government
of Belize and in full acceptance of the principles referred to above,

53 Ibid., chaps. IV and XXI.

HJbid., Thirtieth Session, Fourth Committee, 2166th meeting.
Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/10023/
Rev.I), chap. XXI.
55 Jbid.,

56 Ibid., chap. XXX.
57 Ibid., Thirtieth Session,

2173rd meetings.

Fourth Committee, 2162nd and
