S/PV.8498

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8498th meeting

Friday, 29 March 2019, 5.30 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Le Drian. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Yao Shaojun
Mr. Amon-Tanoh
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Bourisly
Mr. Duclos
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Repkin
Ms. Mapisa-Nqakula
Mr. Clay
Mr. Hunter

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Letter dated 15 February 2019 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2019/159)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2019/218)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-09166 (E)
*19XXXXX*

S/PV.8498

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The meeting was called to order at 5.30 p.m.

resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2463 (2019).

Adoption of the agenda

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs of France.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Letter dated 15 February 2019 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2019/159)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2019/218)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2019/263, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by France.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/159, which contains a letter
dated 15 February 2019 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council, and
document S/2019/218, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Belgium, China, Côte d’Ivoire, Dominican
Republic, Equatorial Guinea, France, Germany,
Indonesia, Kuwait, Peru, Poland, Russian
Federation, South Africa, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America
The President (spoke in French): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
2/8

29/03/2019

France welcomes the adoption of resolution 2463
(2019), which renews the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). By unanimously
adopting it, the Security Council has again demonstrated
its unity on the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
First of all, I would like to highlight the progress
made by the Democratic Republic of the Congo on
the road to stability and democracy. The December
elections, held with the support of MONUSCO, enabled
the peaceful transfer of power with the election of Félix
Tshilombo Tshisekedi. I would like to pay tribute to all
Congolese, as they have been patient in exercising their
right to vote and in expressing their desire for change
and the transfer of power, even after elections had
been postponed for two years. Those elections are an
important step.
I would like to stress that the United Nations
has played an important role in such progress. In 20
years, the United Nations Observer Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and MONUSCO
have stood resolutely with the Democratic Republic
of Congo. We take note of recent developments and
invite the country to go further in the exercise of its
sovereignty. Nevertheless, and this is the reason for the
mandate renewal, MONUSCO’s action is still essential
for meeting existing security challenges, in particular
those posed by armed groups in the east of the country.
The mandate that has just been adopted marks
a transition. The nine-month period will allow the
Secretariat time to conduct a strategic review of
the Mission, with the objective of gaining a better
understanding of issues and needs and adapting the
Mission’s mandate accordingly. It will then give the
Security Council, as well as the Secretariat, time for
discussions with the Congolese authorities. We are all
convinced that a country that hosts a peacekeeping
operation on its soil must have a voice. In that regard, I
welcome President Tshisekedi’s commitment to greater
cooperation with the Mission. Lastly, the nine-month
period will allow us to reflect on what happens after — a
gradual disengagement that goes hand in hand with the
effective exercise of the full sovereignty of the State
over the entire territory.
19-09166

29/03/2019

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Two priorities have been identified for the
mandate: the protection of those under greatest threat
and support for the stabilization and strengthening
of institutions. To implement them, we will rely on
the full and exemplary commitment of MONUSCO’s
military, police and civilian personnel, who work
with the armed and domestic security forces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Council
strongly encourages MONUSCO to use the mandate to
implement the internal reforms it has already initiated.
The Mission made initial adjustments, which were
necessary. It must become increasingly responsive
and mobile, in particular the Intervention Brigade,
whose robust mandate helps in effectively combating
armed groups.
Considerable challenges remain, of course, but I
hope that the mandate will lead to significant progress.
It is particularly essential in the east of the country,
in terms of combating armed groups, in particular the
Allied Democratic Forces. That is a genuine concern
that requires enhanced regional cooperation. The
issue of security in the east is inseparable from the
fight against the Ebola epidemic, since armed groups
disrupt humanitarian efforts in a manner that is cause
for serious concern. The fight against Ebola is one of
the elements of the protection of civilians mission of
the new mandate. Above and beyond the situation in
the east, we believe that the election of Mr. Tshisekedi
provides a window of opportunity to address, through
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
processes, the issue of armed groups continuing their
abuses in the Kasai region and Ituri, in particular. We
will continue to support the Congolese authorities on
all of those issues, as we have always done.
Lastly, I would like to point out that respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms ensures
peace, stability and confidence. Such criteria are vital
to ensuring that the Democratic Republic of Congo
will approach its future with a renewed sense of calm.
President Tshisekedi’s initial commitments on that
issue are very encouraging. I welcome them. I would
mention in particular the release of those imprisoned
for political reasons and of measures taken to open up
the public space.
In our view, those are the conditions under which
MONUSCO will be able to fulfil its peace mission and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo will continue to
make progress on the path of sovereignty. Rest assured
of France’s commitment in that regard.

S/PV. 8498

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Council who wish to make statements.
I call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Côte
d’Ivoire.
Mr. Amon-Tanoh (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2463 (2019), which renews the mandate of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
We congratulate the French penholder for the excellent
work done, which made compromise possible in the
ongoing quest for a result.
As part of the renewal of the MONUSCO mandate,
which takes place in a post-election environment
marked by the need for stabilization in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, as mentioned, resolution
2463 (2019) assigns two priorities to the Mission: the
protection of civilians and support for the stabilization
and strengthening of State institutions, governance and
reform of the security sector. In view of the fragility
of the situation, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
needs the support of the international community, in
particular the United Nations, to ensure the protection
of civilians against all forms of violence and guarantee
peacebuilding and stability in the country.
It is understood that it is not intended for
MONUSCO to remain in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. That is why resolution 2463 (2019) provides
for an independent strategic review of the Mission
within nine months, in order to develop a phased and
gradual exit strategy, with the agreement of country’s
authorities. Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its full support to
MONUSCO personnel and encourages the Mission to
continue its efforts with a view to restoring peace and
stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The President (spoke in French): I call on
the Minister for Defence and Military Veterans of
South Africa.
Ms. Mapisa-Nqakula (South Africa): We thank
the French delegation in its capacity as penholder
for its tireless efforts and commitment in facilitating
resolution 2463 (2019), which we adopted today.
The renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic

19-091663/8

S/PV.8498

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) is a significant
undertaking by the Security Council in support of the
Government. The renewal of the mandate takes place
against the backdrop of the peaceful elections and
peaceful transfer of power from former President Kabila
Kabange to President Tshisekedi Tshilombo. South
Africa notes the renewal of the MONUSCO mandate
for another nine months as a significant demonstration
of the Council’s commitment in addressing perennial
instability, in particular in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We join others in expressing concern about the
security situation in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the illegal exploitation and
trafficking of natural resources. In that regard, there is
an urgent need for the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to strengthen the capacity of
State institutions, with the support of MONUSCO. In
addition, there is a need for the protection of civilians
and the establishment of an effective disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process, as well as
financial support as requested by the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
As we extend the mandate of MONUSCO, it is
appropriate to underscore the vital role that the Mission
has played since its deployment in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo almost two decades ago. It is
equally important to express our gratitude to all troopand police-contributing countries, including Tanzania
and Malawi, which, with us, are part of the Force
Intervention Brigade, for their commitment to ensuring
peace and stability in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. In that context, we pay tribute to all our brothers
and sisters who have sacrificed their lives in the quest
for peace and stability in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
In conclusion, the development and prosperity of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo is paramount not
only for that country but for the region and continent at
large. We therefore reiterate our commitment to peace
and stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to ensure that the Congolese people finally reap the
rewards of the abundant natural resources with which
that country is endowed. Furthermore, we call upon
the Council, as well as the international community,
to support the new Government to ensure peace,
stability and development in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
4/8

29/03/2019

Mr. Hunter (United States of America): The
United States strongly supports the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and is pleased to
have voted in favour of resolution 2463 (2019) today.
We thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Zerrougui and her team for their stewardship
of MONUSCO at an important moment in the country’s
history and commend their engagement in support of
the Congolese people.
MONUSCO’s new mandate seeks to align
the Mission with the new Administration’s
priorities
—
tackling
corruption;
increasing
transparency; fostering accountability; improving
security throughout the country, particularly in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo;
improving human rights practices; and providing
opportunities for all Congolese people. MONUSCO’s
new mandate also prioritizes the safety and wellbeing of the Congolese people. Through its focus
on the protection of civilians, stopping sexual and
gender-based violence and preventing violations and
abuses committed against children, the Council has
ensured that the Mission’s fundamental responsibility
is to support those who have suffered from conflict,
instability and violence for far too long.
Today’s resolution includes new language on
peacekeeping performance to help ensure that
MONUSCO is composed of the best-performing
civilian and uniformed personnel. As a result, we expect
to see improvements in MONUCO’s implementation
of its mandate to neutralize armed groups and
prevent conflict, including through disarmament and
mediation. The mandate also emphasizes the important
role that MONUSCO can play in the response to the
ongoing Ebola outbreak. If requested, MONUSCO can
provide security assistance to responders providing
life-saving support.
Perhaps most important, thanks to its emphasis
on strengthening Congolese institutions within
existing resources, the Council has given MONUSCO
the mandate to work closely with the Congolese
authorities to provide technical assistance and build
capacity in areas of strategic importance, such as
security, the rule of law and the management of natural
resources. Those efforts are critical to the long-term
success of MONUSCO and the eventual transition of
responsibilities to the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
19-09166

29/03/2019

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

We note that resolution 2463 (2019) contains
references to the International Criminal Court (ICC).
In that connection, we refer to the United States policy
on the ICC, as announced by the White House on
10 September 2018, as well as to Secretary Pompeo’s
announcement on 15 March regarding visa restrictions
on Court officials in furtherance of that policy. In
particular, the United States reiterates its continuing
and long-standing principled objection to any assertion
of ICC jurisdiction over nationals of States that are not
parties to the Rome Statute, including the United States
and Israel, absent a referral by the Security Council or
the consent of such a State. We also wish to reiterate
our serious and fundamental concerns with the ICC
Prosecutor’s proposed investigation of United States
personnel in the context of the conflict in Afghanistan.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo is a State
party to the Rome Statute and, as recalled in resolution
2463 (2019), has consented to the Court’s exercise of
jurisdiction. We understand that MONUSCO’s mandate
with respect to the ICC will be limited to working
with the authorities of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in circumstances in which all the relevant States
have consented to the ICC’s activities. The United
States remains a leader in the fight to end impunity
and continues to support justice and accountability
for international crimes, including war crimes, crimes
against humanity and genocide. We respect the decisions
of those nations that have chosen to join the ICC and,
in turn, we expect that our decision not to join and not
to place our citizens under the Court’s jurisdiction will
also be respected.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): We welcome the adoption of
resolution 2463 (2019) today. The resolution is a product
of compromise that takes into account the concerns
of the new Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The peaceful transfer of power in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is a turning point in
the country’s history. The United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) played an important role in
the process and will play the same vital role in making
sure that peace will last in the country. We welcome the
resolution, which ensures the ability of MONUSCO to
continue its role until the end of the year.
Indonesia also welcomes the resolution’s
appropriate recognition of the important use of
community engagement to enhance MONUSCO’s
ability to support the Mission’s protection and

S/PV. 8498

implement its mandated tasks, including to protect
civilians. We look forward to the Secretary-General’s
strategic review of the Mission and hope that the review
will be carried out in consideration of what is needed
by the Congolese people. Therefore, consultations
involving the Government, MONUSCO’s leader and
the troop- and police-contributing countries (TCCs/
PCCs) are essential.
The peacekeepers’ safety and security should also
be part of the review as they are becoming a cause for
concern in the field. We were saddened to hear the
reports of attacks directed against peacekeepers and
pay our respects to those who have fallen.
We recognize the leadership of France, as penholder,
in leading the discussions of resolution 2463 (2019). As
we look forward to the next mandate renewal, we stand
ready to engage in discussion at the earliest opportunity
in order to adopt a more comprehensive draft resolution
and better accommodate the concerns of the Congolese
people; the Secretariat, which provides resources to
MONUSCO; the TCCs/PCCs, which send their men
and women to the field; and the members of the region
in the Council that are affected.
Indonesia is one of the largest TCCs/PCCs in
MONUSCO, and the role that it plays in the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of armed groups in
the province of Tanganyika has been demonstrated.
Guns have been transferred to peacekeepers, showing
trust and confidence in our peacekeepers, but much
still needs to be done.
I should like to conclude by reiterating my
delegation’s wish that the resolution that we have just
adopted will contribute to the promotion of lasting peace
and stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
based on full respect for its sovereignty and territorial
integrity. We need to support the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): I commend the French delegation for its
leadership in drafting the text of resolution 2463 (2019).
We know that it was not an easy task, and we reiterate
our appreciation and gratitude to the various highlevel Government officials who have joined us in the
Chamber today.
We take the floor briefly to express our satisfaction
with the adoption today of resolution 2463 (2019), the
first of its kind adopted by the Council on the situation

19-091665/8

S/PV.8498

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

in the Democratic Republic of the Congo since the
momentous holding of elections in December 2018,
which enabled the first peaceful transfer of power
in that country. It was important for us that, without
lapsing into complacency, the new mandate given to the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
should reflect the important historic moment that
the country is experiencing. That is why we insisted
that the provisions should constitute a hopeful way
forward, based on a positive but at the same time
realistic approach. During the first months of his term
in office, President Tshilombo Tshisekedi will require
both the support of the international community and
the time and space necessary to form a Government
and consolidate his legitimate authority throughout that
immense country. In recognition of that, the members
of the Council have agreed to a nine-month mandate
extension, without many technical adjustments, in order
to respect the trust that the sovereign Congolese people
has placed in the new Head of State. We will meet again
at the negotiating table at the end of that period.
My country is convinced that, following the
effective conclusion of the political and electoral
processes that we have been following in recent years,
the attention and multisectoral efforts of the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, MONUSCO
and the international community now must, without
neglecting the capital, go towards moving the epicentre
of operations from Kinshasa to the eastern part of the
country, with a view to decisively dealing with the acts
of the insurgent rebel groups operating in the area. They
are the cause and consequence of the prevailing chaos
that we are seeing. To that end, it will be necessary
to have the political will and courage of all national
and international political stakeholders, particularly
of the countries of the region. We hope to sustain that
conversation not only in the Security Council but also
in the relevant regional bodies to continue to make
progress on the noble goal of silencing the guns on
the continent.
In conclusion, we would like to thank MONUSCO
for the role that it has been playing in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the successful conclusion of
which is ever-nearer. Similarly, we would like to thank
all the countries that contribute with troops, funding
or any other way to the quest for peace and stability in
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
6/8

29/03/2019

Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic):
I would like to congratulate the French-German
presidency for resolution 2463 (2019). But I would
also like to take this opportunity to congratulate the
French presidency on the first part of the FrenchGerman presidency, which sends a significant message
of European Union unity. I must congratulate your
excellent team, Mr. President, and express my hope
that my friend the German Ambassador has learned
many tips from this presidency and that of the
Dominican Republic.
The President (spoke in French): Starting on
Monday, we will have the opposite experience.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Gata Mavita Wa Lufuta (Democratic
Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): As the
French presidency of the Security Council comes to an
end, allow me to note the presence of His Excellency
Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian, French Minister for Europe
and Foreign Affairs, who has done us the honour of
presiding over this meeting. His presence here testifies
to the importance that his country has always attached to
the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
I would also like to thank him for this opportunity to
address the Council at this meeting, which is devoted to
the adoption of resolution 2463 (2019), on the renewal
of the mandate of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO).
I would like to especially thank Secretary-General
António Guterres for his determination and personal
involvement in the quest for a solution and lasting
peace to the situation in the eastern part of my country.
I would also like to express to the Council the gratitude
of the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and its people for the efforts that it has continued
to make for more than two decades to bring peace and
stability back to my country.
I would be remiss if I did not also thank Ms. MapisaNqakula, Minister of Defence of South Africa, and
Mr. Marcel Amon-Tanoh, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Côte d’Ivoire, who have personally come to attend
this meeting, thereby demonstrating the friendship and
fraternity their countries share with mine.
My delegation welcomes the Security Council’s
adoption of resolution 2463 (2019), which renews the
19-09166

29/03/2019

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

mandate of MONUSCO for a period of nine months.
That minimal period will enable the Government of my
country to take charge of the matter, become familiar
with it and be able to take an informed decision on a
number of the issues that require its attention. That
time will also be used to calmly prepare the strategic
dialogue and exit strategy of MONUSCO.
My delegation is pleased to note that the protection
of civilians is at the top of the mandate’s priorities. That
will allow MONUSCO to benefit from the necessary
means to provide support to the Government, which
has the primary responsibility to protect persons
and property throughout the national territory. The
complex situation in the eastern part of my country
and the suffering of our people affected by the abuses
of the various armed groups oblige us to combine our
efforts and fight together for their eradication and the
restoration of lasting peace in that part of the country.
In the same vein, my delegation welcomes
the consensus reached on the importance of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process, even if it does not figure among the priorities
of the mandate. In our opinion, that programme can
effectively contribute to the eradication of armed
groups, if sufficient financial resources are available to
enable the successful social reintegration of combatants
who lay down their arms.
We welcome the continuation of the Force
Intervention Brigade in its current configuration with
a mandate that remains offensive. As we stressed
in our statement to the Council on 18 March, the
operational capabilities of the Brigade, as well as of
all MONUSCO’s troops, must be strengthened with
the appropriate equipment to enable it to deal with
asymmetrical warfare (see S/PV.8486). With regard to
the armed groups that are wreaking havoc in the eastern
part of my country, my Government will formally
request the Security Council, within the framework of
the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, to include the Allied Democratic Forces on the
list of terrorist groups.
My delegation is pleased to note that the resolution
recalls, as we stressed before the Council on 26 March,
the importance of the involvement of the signatory
countries in the effective implementation of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework to help establish

S/PV. 8498

lasting peace in the region, and more particularly in the
eastern part of my country (see S/PV.8491).
With regard to the resizing of troops, it is regrettable
that the Council has not adopted the Government’s
point of view, or the Secretary-General’s proposals,
and that the strategic dialogue must conclude before a
decision is taken. However, we welcome the principle
of organizing that dialogue in collaboration with the
Government, in accordance with the stipulations of
resolution 2277 (2016).
Moreover, as clearly stated in the letter addressed
to the Secretary-General of the United Nations on the
subject, the highest authority of my country expressed
the wish that the political mandate entrusted to
MONUSCO should be limited solely to supporting
the Government in the implementation of reforms. My
delegation hopes that the wording of resolution 2463
(2019) with regard to the mandate accurately reflects
the view of my Government and that the mandate will
effectively provide it with the support it needs to carry
out its reforms in order to succeed in the challenge of
restoring peace and rebuilding the country. In addition,
my delegation believes that taking into account the
evidence of the illicit trafficking in natural resources
in the solution of the crisis in the eastern part of my
country is a positive option on which to be capitalized.
My delegation appreciates the Security Council’s
recognition of the first steps taken by the President
of the Republic in the area of human rights. My
country recognizes that the road ahead is long and that
challenges remain, and promises to continue its efforts
to make a reality of the Head of State’s desire for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to be a State of
rights and a haven of peace for all Congolese, as well
as for all those who have chosen our country as their
second homeland.
On the issues of the protection of children, sexual
violence, the humanitarian situation and so many
other matters of concern covered by the resolution,
the Government remains committed and will pursue
the actions laid out in our President’s programme in
order to improve the situation on the ground in those
various domains.
I would like to conclude with two observations.
The first relates to the agreed language in several
resolutions, which my delegation believes is in some
instances outdated and should adapt to the current
circumstances and times. The second has to do with

19-091667/8

S/PV.8498

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

the translation of the resolution, the French version of
which does not seem to match the original English,
particularly in paragraph 11, where the translation does
not reflect the development of the text. It is therefore
important that the translation service reread the entire
text in order to produce a faithful translation that
reflects the adopted version.
I wish to assure the Council, without abandoning
our substantive concerns about the various issues
covered in the resolution, that my Government has
taken note and will continue to work with the United
Nations, as it has done in the past, for the benefit of the
Congolese people.
Finally, I would like to thank MONUSCO, its
Intervention Brigade and all troop-contributing
countries for their work throughout the mandate that
has just ended. We hope that MONUSCO’s new mandate
will be the culmination of efforts to bring sustainable
peace and stability to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

8/8

29/03/2019

The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
Before adjourning the meeting, as this is the last
scheduled meeting of the Council for the month of
March, I would like to express the sincere appreciation
of the delegation of France to the members of the
Council and the Secretariat for their support. After a
busy month, we can congratulate ourselves on reaching
consensus on several important issues within our
purview. We could not have done it alone or without the
hard work, support and positive contributions of every
delegation and the representatives of the Secretariat,
including the conference service officers, interpreters,
translators, verbatim reporters and security staff.
As we end our presidency, I know I speak on behalf
of the Council, beginning with the representative of
the Dominican Republic, in wishing good luck to the
delegation of Germany during its presidency in the
month of April.
The meeting rose at 6.05 p.m.

19-09166
