the general convention on privileges and immunities, which determines the details of the application of these articles.
Therefore the General Assembly instructs the
Secretary-General to ensure that the drivers of all
official motor-cars of the United Nations and all
members of the staff, who own or drive motor-cars,
shall be properly insured against third party risks.
Thirty-first plenary meeting, 13 February 1946.

( b) disputes involving any official of the Unitcd
Nations who by reason of his official ,position cnjoys
immunity, if immunity has not bccn waived by thc
Secretary-Gcneral.

c.
RESOLUTION ON THE PRIVILEGES AND IMMUNITIES 0F THE INTERNATIONAL CouRT OF JusTICE.

l. The General Assembly, with a view to ensuring that the lnternational Court of Justice shall
enjoy the privilcges, immunities and facilities necessary for the exercise of its functions and the fulfilment of its purposes, in the country of its seat
and elsewhere, invites the members of the Court at
their first session to consider this question and to
inform the Secretary-General of their recommendations.
2. The General Assembly decides that the question of the privileges and immunities of the Court
shall be considered as soon as possible after the receipt of the recommendations of the Court.
3. The General Assembly recommends that, until further action has been taken, the rules which
have been applied to the Permanent Court of
lnternational Justice should be observed by Members in relation to the lnternational Court of
Justice.
Thirty-first plenary meeting, 13 February 1946.

F.
RESOLUTION RELATING TO ARRANGEMENTS TO BE
MADE SO THAT OFFICIALS OF MEMBERS WHO ARE
TRANSFERRED OR SECONDED FOR SERVICE WITH THE
UNITED

ON

THE CO-ORDINATION

NOT LOSE THEIR AC-

Therefore, the General Assembly recommends
that:
after such discussion with the Secretary-General
as may be necessary to settle details the governments of Members adopt such legislative or administrative measures as may be required to preserve such pension rights.
Thirty-first plenary meeting, 13 Febru.ary 1946.

OF THE

PRIVILEGES AND IMMUNITIES OF THE UN!TED NATIONS AND THE SPECIALIZED AGENCIES.

The General Assembly considers that there are
many advantages in the unification as far as possible of the privileges and immunities enjoyed by
the United Nations and the various specialized
agencies.
While recognizing that not ali specialized agencies require ali the privileges and immunities which
may be needed by others, and that certain of these
may, by reason of their particular functions, require privileges of a special nature which are not
required by the United Nations itself, the General
Assembly considers that the privileges and immunities of the United Nations should be regarded,
as a general rule, as a maximum within which the
various specialized agencies should enjoy such privileges and immunities as the appropriate fulfilment
of their respective functions may require, and that
no privileges and immunities which are not really
necessary should be asked for.
Therefore the General Assembly instructs the
Secretary-General to open negotiations with a view
to the re-consideration, in the light both of the
General Convention adopted by the United Nati??' and of the considerations above, of the prov1s1ons under which the specialized agencies at
present enjoy privileges and immunities.
Thirty-first plenary meeting, 13 February 1946.

23 ( 1) • REGISTRA TION OF TREATIES AND
INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS

The Executive Secretary sent a circular letter
to the Members of the United Nations on 8 November 1945 informing them that from the date
of the entry into force of the Charter treaties and
international agreements would be received and
filed on a provisional basis until the adoption of
detailed regulations prescribing the procedure to
be followed in the registration and publication of
treaties and international agreements under the
provisions of Article 102 of the Charter. The Executive Secretary also invited the Government:s of
Members to transmit to the Secretariat for filing
and publication treaties and international agreements not included in the treaty series of the
League of Nations and entered into in recent years
before the date of the entry into force of the Charter.
lt is desirable, as a matter of practica! convenience, that arrangements should be made for
the publication of any treaties or international
agreements which non-member States may voluntarily transmit and which have not been included
in the treaty series of the League of Nations. These
arrangements should not, however, extend to treaties or international agreements transmitted by any
non-member State such as Spain, the Government
of which has been founded with the support of the
Axis powers and does not, in view of its origin, its
nature, its record and its clase association with the
aggressor States, possess qualifications necessary to
justify membership in the United Nations under
the provisions of the Charter.

E.
RESOLUTION

SHOULD

In order to facilitate the engagement, as members of the staff of the United Nations, of persons
who have accrued pension rights as officials, either
of the central government of Members, or of subordinate governmental or other administrative authorities within the territory of Members, it is desirable that arrangements should be made to secure
that accrued pension rights are not lost when such
persom accept posts on the staff of the United
·Nations, by way either of transfer or of secondment.

D.
RESOLUTION

NATIONS

CRUED PENSION RIGHTS BY REASON OF SUCH TRANSFER OR SECONDMENT.

RELATING

TO
THE
INSURANCE
AGAINST THIRD PARTY RISKS OF MOTOR-CARS OF
THE ÜRGANIZATION ANO OF MEMBERS OF THE
STAFF.

It has been found that a frequent source of difficulty is road accidents in which motor cars, owned
or driven by persons possessing immunity from
legal process, are involved.
It is the intention of the United Nations to prevent thc occurrence of any abuse in connection
with privileges, immunities and facilities granted
to it under Articles 104 and 105 of the Charter and

33

Therefore, the General Assembly instructs the
Secretary General:
l. To submit to the General Assembly proposals

agreements entered into after the date of entry
into force of the Charter.
3. To receive, from the governments of nonmember States, treaties and intiemational agreements entered into both before and after the date
of entry into force of the Charter, which have not
been included in the League of Nations treaty
11eries and which they.may voluntarily transmit for
filing and publication; and to dispo&e of them in
accordance with the foregoing provisions, and subject to such detailed regulations and other measures
as may hereafter be adopted.
Twenty-ághth plenary meeting, 10 Febr1UJry 1946.

for detailed regulations and other measures designed to give effe'Ct to the provisions of Article 102
of the Charter;
2. To invite the govemments of Members of the
United Nations to transmit to the Secretary-General for filing and publication, treaties and international agreements enterl'd into in recen! years,
but before the date of entry into force of the Charter, which had not been included in the League
of Nations treaty series, and to transmit for registration and publication treaties and intemational

34
