38

General AMembly-Twentieth Sel!11ion

3. Invites the Economic and Social Council to
request the Commission on Human Rights to continue
its consideration of the question of the further promotion and encouragement of respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms ;
4. Recommends that the Economic and Social Council should, in studying the question of transferring the
resources released as a result of disarmament, bear in
mind the economic needs of all countries, particularly
of the less developed countries, in order to help them
to achieve the safeguarding of human rights and
fundamental freedoms. "
1381st plenary meeting,
18 November 1965.
2034 (XX). Assistance in cases of natural disaster

The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1049 (XXXVII) of 15 August 1964 requesting the
Secretary-General to make a study of the types of
assistance the United Nations might appropriately
provide, the order of magnitude of the resources the
Secretary-General might require for the purpose and
the alternative methods of providing such resources,
including the establishment of a United Nations fund
for assistance in cases of natural disaster, financed
through voluntary contributions, and to report to the
General Assembly at its nineteenth session,
Recalling that in resolution 1049 (XXXVII) the
Economic and Social Council also requested the
Secretary-General to consider possible improvements
in the arrangements for co-ordinating international
assistance and to report to the Council at its thirtyninth session,
lf aving,. considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral to the General Assembly at its nineteenth
session,3 the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions thereon• and
the report of the Secretary-General to the Economic
and Social Council at its thirty-ninth session, 5
Noting the Secretary-General's readiness to be at
the disposal of international non-governmental organizations concerned with emergency relief to assist them
in pursuing the question of co-ordination,
Further noting that, in co-operation with the League
of Red Cross Societies, the United Nations can offer
both guidance and technical assistance in formulating
pre-disaster plans to countries requesting it, and also
assistance, immediately after a disaster, in drawing up
comprehensive plans for rehabilitation and reconstruction,
Welcoming the Secretary-General's statement that
the procedures set out in the twenty-eighth report
of the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination6
for the co-ordination of assistance from mei'nbers of
the United Nations family are working satisfactorily,
l. Invites States Members of the United Nations
or members of the specialized agencies and the Ina Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentieth
Session, Annexes, agenda item 53, document A/5845.
4 Ibid., document A/5883.
5 Official Records of the Economic aind Social Council,
Thirty-ninth Session, Annexes, agenda item 5, document
E/4036.
6 Ibid., Thirty-sixth Session, Annexes, agenda items 4 and
document E/3765.

ternational Atomic Energy Agency which have not
already done so:
(a) To consider the advisability ?f setting_ up appropriate national planning and operatmg t?achmery most
suited to their own conditions, and designed to determine the degree and character of the relief _required ~nd
to give unified direction to relief operations, Umted
Nations resident representatives being suitably associated with such work;
( b) To consider setting up national Red Cross or
Red Crescent societies;
2. Requests Member States, whe? offering. emergency assistance in cases of natural disa~ter, to m_form
and make use of the appropriate standmg. machmery
set up in the stricken countries and to mfor!ll the
Secretary-General of the type of emergency assistance
they are in a position to offer;
3. Notes with satisfaction the existing arrangemer.its
which the United Nations and the specialized agencies
have for providing emergency assistance, ir.iclu_ding
their relationships with non-governmental orgamz~tt~ns,
particularly with the League of Red Cross Societies;
4. Invites the executive heads of the organizations
and programmes within the United Nations system,
under the leadership of the Secretary-General, to continue and intensify their efforts to ensure the full coordination of the assistance made available by and
through those organizations and programmes to countries stricken by natural disasters;
5. Approves the proposal of the Secreta_ry-Gen~ral
that he be authorized to draw on the Workmg Capital
Fund in the amount of $100,000 for emergency aid in
any one year, with a normal ceiling of $20,000 per
country in the case of any one disaster ;
6. Decides to review at its twenty-third session the
experimental arrangements referred to in paragraph 5
above.
1390th plenary meeting,
7 December 1965.
2035 (XX). World social situation

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
concerning the measures taken to implement General
Assembly resolution 1916 (XVIII) of 5 December
1963,7
Taking note with satisfaction of Economic and Social
Council resolution 1086 E (XXXIX) of 30 July 1965,
by which the Council, inter alia, invited the Social Commission to re-examine, at its seventeenth session, the
role which it should play within the framework of
United Nations programmes in order to meet the needs
of Member States, and to submit its proposals regarding the action to this effect to the Council at its fortyfirst session,
Recalling its resolution 1916 (XVIII) which, inter
alia, requested the Economic and Social Council to
review its resolution 496 (XVI) of 31 July 1953 entitled "Programme of concerted practical action in the
social field of the United Nations and the specialized
agencies" in the light of the Report on the World
Social Situation, 1963, 8 and of the objectives of the
United Nations Development Decade,
7 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentieth Srssion, Annexes, agenda item 54, document A/6016.
8 United Nations publication, Sales No.: 63.IV.4.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Noting with deep concern the unsatisfactory social
situation in many parts of the world,
Convinced that the activities of the United Nations
in the social field should, above all, be concentrated
on measures aimed at accelerated economic and social
development, particularly of developing countries,
1. Requests the Economic and Social Council a_nd
the Social Commission, when considering the role which
the United Nations should play in the social field, to
bear in mind, inter alia, the following general principles:
(a) The responsibility of the Council, as set forth
in Articles 55 and 58 of the Charter of the United
Nations:
(i) To promote higher standards of living;
(ii) To promote full employment and conditions of
economic and social progress and development ;
(iii) To promote solutions of international economic,
social, health and related problems;
(iv) To promote international cultural and educational co-operation;
( v) To make recommendations for the co-ordination
of the policies and activities of the specialized
agencies;
( b) The necessity to direct the main efforts of ~he
United Nations in the social field towards supporting
and strengthening independent social and economic
development in the developing cou_ntries, with fu_ll
respect for their permanent sovereignty over their
natural resources, in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 1803 (XVII) of 14 December 1962;
( c) The interrelated character of economic and social
factors and the basic requirement that economic and
social development should go together with a view to
promoting better standa_rds of life. in_ large: freedom.
the importance of planning for achieving this end and
the role of Governments in promoting balanced and
sound economic and social development ;
( d) The necessity for mobilizing national resources
and encouraging creative initiatives of all peoples for
the achievement of social progress ;
( e) The significance of adequate structural social
and economic changes for the achievement of social
progress;
(f) The necessity for the widest possible utili~ation of the experience of the developed and developing
countries with varying economic and social systems;
2. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the specialized agencies and in the light of relevant
discussions and decisions of the Social Commission, the
Economic and Social Council and the General Assembly, to prepare, for submission by the Council to
the Assembly at its twenty-first session, a draft longrange social programme of the United Nations and a
report on the implementation of Assembly resolution
1916 (XVIII);
3. Requests the Economic and Social Council, in
co-operation with the specialized agencies, to submit
proposals in respect of vital social problems on which
the General Assembly might appropriately take action
and make recommendations in accordance with Article
13 of the Charter ;
4. Decides to consider at its twenty-first session the
possibility and advisability of preparing a declaration
on social development-based on the purposes and
principles of the United Nations and the specialized

39

agencies and on the resolutions o~ the Ge~eral ~ssembly and the Economic and Social . Co~ncil-whi~h
would lay down broad lines for the obJe~ti~es o_f social
development and for the means of achieving it, an~,
for this purpose, requests the Secreta_ry-General, . in
co-operation with the specialized agencies, to provide
the relevant documentation, data and any other appropriat<c information.
1390th plenary meeting.
7 December 1965.
2036 (XX). Housing, building and planning in the
United Nations Development Decade
The General Assemblv,
Noting that in count;ies throughout the world inadequate housing is one of the most urgent problems
necessitating immediate solution.
Recognizing that the housing problem can be successfully solved only by mobilizing the efforts and resources
of the nations,
Recognizing further that social reforms aimed at accelerating social and economic development ha_ve an
important part to play in the successful solution of
the housing problem.
1. Recommends that :VIemher States should:
(a) Assume a major role in the solution _of the
housing problem in every country and, to this e!ld,
make provision in their national development plannmg
for the necessary activities and resources ;
( b) Establish for this purpose central and other
organizations or bodies in charge of housing and town
and country planning and empowered with the necessary authority ;
( c) Take all necessary measures to develop a bujlding materia~ industry utilizing local raw m~tenals
to the maximum. and to promote or establish, as
appropriate, building design and construction organizations which will improve efficiency, lower costs and
establish designs and standards that are appropriate
to the relevant cultural. social and economic requirements;
( d) Prepare and implement programmes for training
architects, construction engineers and workers in sufficient numbers to carry out national development
programmes ;
( e) Bring about conditions in the spheres of land
ownership and land use by basic reforms, if such conditions have not already been achieved, that will ensure
a speedy and rational solution of housing and industrial
construction problems, harmonious town and rural
development, the elimination of speculation in plots of
land and a more equitable use of housing resources in
the interests of the whole population:
2. Recommends that international assistance to developing countries in the field of housing, building and
planning, whether multilateral or bilateral, should be
directed towards the financing of housing, the establishment of a national or. if necessary. State building
materials and components industry and of national or,
if necessary, State building design, construction and
financing organizations. the training of national cadres
of architects and construction engineers and workers,
the establishment of national bodies in charge of
housing construction and town building. and the
planning and execution of emergency programmes in
urban and rural areas and pilot projects contributing
to the earliest possible solution of the housing problem;
