THIRTY-SECOND

YEAR
th

MEETING: 24MAY1977
..
‘1

NEW

Y0R.K

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2007)

..,. . ... ,. .. . ..... .. ,....,....

Page

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . , . . . , . . . . . . . . , . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

I

Complaint by Lesotho against South Africa:
Note by the Secretary-General (S/123 15) . . . . . + . . . . . , . . . . . . . . , . . . .

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.

Supplements

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

-

2007TH
Held in New York.on

MEETING

Tuesday, 24 May 1977, at 3 p.m.

President: Mr. Thomas S. BOYA (Benin).
Besent: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2007)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. Complaint by Lesotho against South Africa:
Note by the Secretary-General (S/ 123 15)

matter at its 1981st and 1982nd meetings, held on 21 and
22 December 1976, the Council adopted resolution
402 (1976). The Council now has before it document
S/12315 of 30 March 1977, in which the Secretary-General
transmits the report of the Mission sent to Lesotho in
pursuance of that resolution. I would also draw the
attention of the Council to document S/12325, which
contains the text of a letter dated 18 April 1977 from the
Secretary-General to all States. Furthermore, I would draw
the attention of the Council to document S/12335, which
contains the text of a draft resolution introduced by Senin,
India, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama and Romania.
4. I now call on the Secretary-General, who will introdude
the report.

The meeting was called to order at 3.55 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Complaint by Lesotho against South Africa
Note by the Secretary-General (S/1231 5)
1, The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): The
representatives of Lesotho and Sierra Leone have addressed
letters to the President of the Security Council in which
they request to be invited to participate in the debate on
the question just placed on the agenda. In accordance with
past practice and with the consent of the Council, I propose
to invite those representatives to participate in the debate,
without the right to vote, in conformity with the relevant
provisions of the charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure.
2. I now invite the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lesotho
to take a place at the Council table, I invite the representative of Sierra Leone to take the place reserved for him at
the side of the Council chamber, on the understanding that
he will be invited to take a place at the Council table
whenever he wishes to speak.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. C. D. Molapo
(Lesotho) took a place at the #until table and Mr. S R.
Nicol (Sierra Leone) took the place reserved for him at the
side of the Council chamber.

3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): The
Security Council will now resume consideration of the
question on its agenda. I recall that, after considering this

5. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
In its resolution
402 (1976), the Security Council appealed to all States to
provide financial, technical and material assistance to
Lesotho to enable it to overcome the economic difficulties
arising from South Africa’s closure of certain border posts
between that country and Lesotho. I was requested to
organize a programme of international
assistance to
Lesotho and to keep the situation under constant review.
Furthermore, I was asked to maintain close liaison in this
matter with Member States and regional and other inter
governmental organizations, as well as with the specialized
agencies and international fmancial institutions, and to
report to the Council at its subsequent meeting on the
question.
6. It is within that context that I wish to submit for the
consideration of the Security Council the report [see
S/1231.5/ of a mission which I appointed to visit Lesotho
in January for the purpose of obtaining an assessment of
assistance required by that country as a preliminary step to
the organization of an international programme of assistance.
7. As will be seen from the report, the Mission ekamined
in detail the present economic situation in Lesotho. It is
quite evident from the description of the economic
conditions prevailing in Lesotho that the country has a
fragile economy and is greatly dependent on external
sources for the majority of its vital goods and services.
8. This report is not the first that has been prepared by
the United Nations on the economy of Lesotho. In the
months preceding its independence in 1966, a Mission
dispatched by the General Assembly found that the
country was confronted with a deplorable economic and

emphasis on road transport and agricultural development, It
also includes development projects for hydra-electric
power, education, health services,industry and mining.

social situation arising primarily from its underdevelop
ment.1 In the years that have followed independence, the
Government of Lesotho has made considerable efforts to
establish a basic infrastructure for the development of the
country. While it has been able to achieve relatively modest
progress in some sectors of the economy, it has not been
able, because of a lack of resources, to overcome many of
the major constraints to its development.

14. There is no need for me to elaborate on the fact that
the various projects recommended in the report of the
Mission are beyond the means available to Lesotho. The
projects are all worthy of support, but their realization
depends on the generosity of the international community.
It is my hope that the Security Council wil1 endorse the
two programmes recommended in the report and that all
Member States, as well as the international organizations
concerned, will not hesitate to respond generously and
promptly to the appeal which I addressed to them on 18
April [S/12325/.

9. In the circumstances, the closure of the border posts, as
well as other measures taken by South Africa, have
seriously compounded those problems. That is why it is
vital for Lesotho to receive from the international community the assistance necessary for its economic progress. It is
only by those means that the country will be able to
increase its capacity to implement
the resolutions on
apartheid and bantustans and to overcome the economic
difficulties with which it is faced.

15. I have designated the Assistant Secretary-General for
Special Political Questions to be responsible at Headquarters for co-ordinating action by the United Nations
system as a whole. His office, which will work in close
co-operation with the Government of Lesotho, will serveas
a clearing-house for information on all aspects of the
assistance programme.

10. Of the many problems faced by Lesotho, I should like
to emphasize the problem relating to migrant employment
in the Republic of South Africa. Last year it was estimated
that South Africa provided employment
for 175,000
workers from Lesotho, of whom 126,000 worked in the
mines. While their earnings constitute a substantial part of
the national income, Lesotho’s dependence on that income
economic
and social
obviously
creates political,
problems.

16. I had the opportunity earlier today of meeting the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lesotho and discussing with
him further measures for mobilizing assistance to his
country. I informed him that on 6 June next I would
convene a meeting at Headquarters of representatives of
Governments and organizations interested in participating
in the programmes of assistance recommended in the report
of the Mission.

11. In 1974, I was approached by the Government of
Lesotho with a request for urgent assistance in the
resettlement of 10,000 mine workers who had suddenly
returned to Lesotho as a result of disturbances in the mines.
In my view, there is an urgent need for that Government to
prepare for the day when there will be a return of migrant
workers from South Africa, either for political or economic
reasons or because of increasing automation. This problem
by itself would overburden the scarce resources of Lesotho.
It is my hope therefore that the international community
will co-operate with the Government of Lesotho in generating labour-intensive projects which will be able to absorb
large bodies of returning migrant workers and also increase
employment opportunities.

17. I cannot overemphasize the fact that Lesotho is a
country in need of considerable financial and economic
support, and I would urge all States and organizations
which are in a position to assist to do so.
18. Mr. RAMPHUL (Mauritius): I salute the presence
among us of His Excellency Mr. Charles Molapo, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Lesotho.
19. On 26 October 1976, when the General Assembly
unanimously adopted a resolution calling upon all States
not to recognize the so-called independence of the Transkei
[resolution 31/6A,f, many of us knew that States bordering on South Africa would expose themselves to
considerable danger by complying with that resolution
should the Government of South Africa apply economic
measures to coerce them into giving recognition to the
Transkei. The most vulnerable of those States is Lesotho,
which not only suffers the handicap of being land-locked
but is also land-locked within the territory over which the
South Africa racist regime exercisespower and control.

12. As members of the Council will observe, the recommendations in the report of the Mission are grouped under
two headings: the emergency programme and the accelerated development programme. The cost of the projects
included in the emergency programme amounts to $66
million. Those projects are primarily concerned with the
development of internal road transport facilities in the
south and south-east of the country, with external and
internal civil aviation, and with increasing food supplies
both by agricultural development and by the establishment
of substantial reserves of basic food grams.

20. AS expected, South Africa did exert pressure. Matters
came to a head in December when the Government of
Lesotho found it necessary to lodge a formal complaint in
the Council [S/l 225 71.

13. The accelerated development programme comprises
selected projects the cost of which amounts to $47 million.
would quickly contribute
to
Their implementation
strengthening Lesotho’s economy and thereby diminish its
dependence on South Africa. The programme places heavy
1 See Official Records of the General Assembly,
Session, Annexes, agenda item 23, document A/595 8.

21. The Foreign Minister of Lesotho at the time presented
the Council with a description of the measures which South
Africa had found fit to take against his small country in an
effort to compel it to acquiesce in the apartheid policies of
the South African Government and to accord recognition

Twentieth

2

to South Africa’s bantustan policies. As the Foreign
Minister put it then [1981st meeting/ :

needs are many. That is not the fault of its people or its
Government. For almost 100 years, while it was under
colonial rule, a very little was done to develop the country.
The existing social and economic infrastructure is the result
of efforts of its Government and people since independence
11 Years ago. We are all too familiar with the efforts which
South Africa made from the beginning of the nineteenth
century until the 1960s to absorb Lesotho and incorporate
it into the Union of South Africa. Long wars of attrition
which Lesotho had to suffer in order to retain its
independence constitute a valiant period, the heroic strug
gle of that small country for independence.

“The geopolitical situation of Lesotho has always
presented us with problems of such magnitude that ours
is a life of hard choices. For us, apartheid is a day-to-day
reality, a nightmare which haunts US.”
He added that for Lesotho recognition of the so-called
independent Transkei
“would be not only an approval of the racist apartheid
policies of South Africa but also an actual and active
participation in the oppression of the black majority of
South Africa”.

26. Paragraph 20 of the report draws attention to the fact
that, on the eve of Lesotho’s independence, the General
Assembly recognized even then the special geopolitical
situation in which the new State was to be placed and “the
deplorable economic and social situation” which confronted the country, arising primarily from its underdevelopment. The report continues:

His country chose to defy South Africa.
22. The Foreign Minister of Lesotho then went on to
describe the political, economic and social problems which
the Transkei’s so-called independence would cause for
Lesotho. In order to provide Lesotho with a capacity to
resist some of the pressures that were being applied to it,
the Minister asked for an international programme of
assistancethat would make it possible for the population to
travel from one part of the Country to another without
having to travel via South African roads or those located in
the Transkei. He also asked for economic assistance to
provide Lesotho with the necessary services and infrastructure that would enable the courageous people of that
country to become more self-sufficient and less dependent
on South Africa for those basic needs for which it has the
capacity, if assisted, to fulfil.

“Since then, Lesotho’s difficulties have been compounded by South Africa’s determination to implement
its apartheid and bantustan policies, The designation of
the Transkei as a so-called independent State on Lesotho’s borders not only presents serious problems but
provides additional opportunities for pressures by South
Africa.”
27. I recall that, at the time that the Government of
Lesotho complained that South Africa had closed three
border posts through which. traffic entering or leaving
Lesotho passed, there were contradictory press statements
to the effect that the border posts had not been closed and
were in fact functioning. So I am glad that the Ad&ion was
able to visit two of these posts and ascertain the situation.
Paragraphs 23-31 of the report deal with this aspect quite
clearly. There is no doubt in my mind that South Africa, by
removing its border officials and closing down the border
facilities which it was obliged to maintain under agreements, has in fact closed the three border posts. It is not
sufficient to state that, because they are now being manned
by officials of the so-called independent Transkei, those
posts are functioning under normal conditions. Because of
the absence of alternative routes, traffic has to pass under
duress. Quite rightly, as is indicated in paragraph 28, the
Lesotho Government’s non-interference with such traffic
“in no way implied its recognition of the Transkei rbgime”.

23. The Security Council, at its meeting on 22 December
1976, unanimously adopted a resolution /402 (19 76)]
condemning any action by South Africa intended to coerce
Lesotho into according recognition to the bantustan Transkei. It called upon South Africa to reopen the border posts
to the Transkei and appealed to all States to provide
financial, technical and material assistance to Lesotho SO
that it could carry out its economic development programmes and enhance its capacity to implement fully the
United Nations resolutions on apartheid and bantustans.
24. My Government, like other Governments, welcomed
the Security Council resolution at the time. Today we are
here to discuss the letter of appeal [S/12325] which the
Secretary-General has addressed to all Member States and
to regional and intergovernmental organizations for contributions to assist Lesotho in developing a capacity which
would enable it to resist social and economic pressures by
South Africa and to build the necessary economic infrastructure which would assure for the people of Lesotho an
economy that would utilize the natural resources of the
country to the maximum extent possible and make it less
dependent on services and products which it has the
capacity to develop itself.

28. Anyone who has read the report of the Mission cannot
fail to be concerned by Lesotho’s remarkable dependence
on South Africa for the employment of a great proportion
of its population. Neither can one fail to be concerned by
Lesotho’s dependence on South Africa for most of its food
and consumer, manufactured and industrial goods, as well as
social, technical and economic services. It is very unhealthy
for Lesotho to be dependent on migrant employment in
South Africa, as is the case today. 1 note from paragraph 47
of the report that, in 1976, 175,000 nationals of Lesotho,
representing one third of Lesotho’s labour force, were
employed in South Africa. I am glad to note from
paragraph 53 that the long-term aim of the Government is
to make it possible for all Basotho to earn a living in their
own country. Of course, in a problem of this magnitude,

25. I should like to express our appreciation to the
Secretary-General for having sent such a competent team to
Lesotho to assess the situation and provide us with an
objective picture of conditions as well as of needs. As the
report of the Mission indicates /see S/12315], Lesotho’s
3

i

32. In view of the need to implement some of the projects
without delay, it is the hope of the sponsors of this draft
resolution that the Secretary-General will arrange for the
assistance programme to be reviewed, in consultation with
the Government of Lesotho, before the next sessionof the
General Assembly so that a further report can be made to
the international community.

particularly when there is always the risk that South Africa
may return these migrant workers at little or no notice,
some international assistance must be made readily ,available so that contingency planning for such an eventuality
can proceed while there is still time.
29. In view of the special character of Lesotho’s social and
economic needs and the particular urgency of some of
them, it is my delegation’s view that the approach taken by
the Mission represented a most constructive and realistic
way of coming to grips with the situation. Paragraphs
114116 of the report describe the concept of the emergency programme as well as the accelerated development
programme. The emergency programme, I note, is concerned with the development of internal road transport
facilities in the south and south-east, with internal and
external civil aviation, and with the strengthening of food
supplies. It also provides for some development in telecommunications and in health facilities. I am sure that the
sum of $66 million, which would cover all projects under
the emergency programme, is both a fair and a realistic
figure, the raising of which should present no difficulty to
the international community.

33. The PRESIDENT (interpretation fram Rench): The
next speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lesotho,
His Excellency Mr. Charles Molapo. I welcome him and give
him the floor.
34. Mr. C. D. MOLAPO (Lesotho): Mr. President, allow
me to extend to you my sincere congratulations upon your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of May. It is proper and fitting that this debate
on Lesotho should be conducted under your presidency.
You dedication and diplomatic skills as an illustrious son of
Africa and a representative of the sister country of Benin,
with which we enjoy the best of relations, is an assurance
that you will guide our deliberations to a successful
conclusion. May I thank you and, through you, the
members of the Council for giving me this opportunity to
address the Council.

30. The accelerated development programme places heavy
emphasis on road transport and agricultural development. It
also includes development projects for hydro-electric
power, education, health services, industry and mining. The
total cost of projects under the accelerated development
programme would be $47 million. Again, this is a figure
which is well substantiated and justified by the evidence
accumulated by the Mission, and assistance of this scale is
particularly necessary if Lesotho is to be provided with a
capacity to carry out its economic development programmes, withstand unfair pressures by South Africa, and
enhance its capacity to implement fully United Nations
resolutions on apartheid and bantustans.

35. I should also like to express, on behalf of my
delegation, a warm welcome to the new Permanent Representative of the People’s Republic of China to the United
Nations and to wish him well in his new appointment.
36. I wish also to thank the Secretary-General for his
statement in introducing the report now before the
Council.
37. Five months ago, I brought to the attention of the
Council [1981st meeting] a grave situation that had been
created by the Government of the Republic of South Africa
by the establishment of the so-called independent Transkei
along the south-eastern borders of our country. At that
time, I explained in clear and no uncertain terms the
problems that my people were facing. I mentioned that,
since 26 October 1976, the Government of the Republic of
South Africa had unilaterally closed three border posts
-namely, Qacha’s Nek, Ramats’eliso’s Gate and Tele
Bridge-which lie along the border of what is called the
Republic of the Transkei. Representatives will recall that
the Council, at the end of its deliberations, adopted by
consensus resolution 402 (1976), in which, inter a&, it
requested the Secretary-General to organize all forms of
financial, technical and material assistance to Lesotho to
enable it to overcome the economic difficulties arising from
the closure of the border posts by South Africa owing to
our refusal to recognize the so-called independence of the
Transkei. In pursuance of that resolution, the SecretaryGeneral appointed a mission to visit Lesotho to assessthe
situation and formulate appropriate recommendations.

31. Having made those remarks, I now have the privilege
of introducing, on behalf of the non-aligned members of
the Council, the draft resolution in document S/12335. So
far, the sponsors of the draft resolution are Benin, India,
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Pakistan, Panama
and Romania. I hope it will be adopted unanimously by the
Council. The preambular paragraphs of the resolution are
straightforward and require no comment by me. In the
operative paragraphs, the Council would: as in the case of
an earlier resolution, commend the Government of Lesotho
for its decision not to recognize the so-called independent
Transkei. The draft resolution would have the Council
express its appreciation to the Secretary-General as well as
to the Mission which he appointed to visit Lesotho for the
excellent work produced. It would have the Council fully
endorse the assessment and recommendations of the
Mission as well as the appeal made by the Secretary-General
to all States for immediate assistance to Lesotho. Furthermore, it contains a request to the United Nations and other
concerned organizations, including various organs of the
United Nations system, to assist Lesotho in the fields
identified in the report of the Mission. Finally, the draft
resoIution would have the Council request the Secretary
General to give this question his continued attention and to
keep the Council informed.

38. We have now heard the Secretary-General introduce
the report [see S/1231.5] of the Mission which he dispatched to Lesotho in January 1977. The Mission was
under the very able leadership of Mr. Farah, Assistant
Secretary-General for Special Political Questions. We were
honoured to act as host to the Mission for 18 busy days,
4

during which discussions and extensive investigations were
carried out.

the implementation of its recommendations will go a long
way towards reducing our dependence on South Africa and
will enable our people to obtain the basic necessities of life
within Lesotho itself without being subjected to the
inhuman indignities meted out to them in South Africa.

39. On behalf of the Government and the people of
Lesotho, I commend the report to the members of the
Security Council and, through the Council, to the Members
of the United Nations, the specialized agencies and the
international organizations. The implementation
of the
recommendations of the report will enable the Government
and the people of Lesotho to uphold and abide by the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, effectively
to implement the decisions and resolutions of the United
Nations and to safeguard our independence and sovereignty. It is with great pleasure that I wish to express our
piofound gratitude and appreciation to the members of the
Mission for the dedicated and diligent manner in which
they conducted their work and for the very comprehensive
report which they have submitted,

43. It is because of this that we express our hope that the
Council will adopt the report unanimously. The adoption
of this report would be a firm commitment on the part of
the world community to the just struggle against apartheid
in all its manifestations and a reaffirmation of the rights of
all South Africans in South Africa as a whole and a
complete rejection of the bantustanization and balkanization of South Africa.
44. Last year, the Council Iistened to our plea; this time
we are requesting it to adopt the Secretary-General’s report
and recommendations resulting from that plea. The report
sets out the financial, economic and material assistance we
urgently need. It is with great pleasure that I have to inform
you that, since the adoption of resolution 402 (1976),
some Member States have already made positive responses.
Some have promised to increase their bilateral aid to
Lesotho, while others have promised to channel their aid
through multilateral organizations. We are grateful to those
countries and request them and others to respond favo-urably to the appeal of the Secretary-General contained in his
letter of 18 April 1977 [S/12325], which announced the
establishment of a special account at the United Nations.

40. There are challenges and heavy obligations still being
imposed on Lesotho for not according recognition to the
bogus independence of the Transkei. Land-locked countries
have special problems created by their geographic position,
but Lesotho experiences the full measure of those problems
because it is not or11yland-locked but also surrounded by a
single State which is racist and apartheid-ridden. I wish to
put on record that, since I last addressed the Council, the
situation has not improved but has grown worse. My people
continue to suffer acts of harassment and intimidation at
the hands of the South African police, which is now
conducting South African policy vis-&vis Lesotho. The
normal flow of goods and the movement of people to and
from Lesotho through the three border posts continues to
be hampered and interfered with. Those who practise
apartheid spit their venom on us. More recently, our people
have been arrested and at times refused entry into South
Africa at border posts other than those that are the subject
of the problem which we presented to the Council. In all
these instances they are told that they must be prepared to
suffer the consequences of the Lesotho Government’s
refusal to accord recognition to the bantustan of the
Transkei. In this regard, I should like to mention a few
incidents just to illustrate my point.

45. With your permission, Mr, President, I should like to
thank the Governments of the Federal Republic of Nigeria,
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, the United Arab Emirates,
Canada, the Federal Republic of Germany, the United
States of America, Iran and other friendly Governments
that have expressed interest in coming to our assistance.
Multinational
organizations like the European Economic
Community and the Arab Fund for Development have
already made definite fmancial commitments to help
Lesotho to overcome the problems it is facing. My
Government and people are optimistic ‘that many other
countries which have not yet done so will also respond
favourably to the Secretary-General’s letter of appeal and
to contacts that have been and are being made by my
Government in this hour of need in the life of our nation.

41. On 22 April, a young Mosotho girl 17 years of age was
wounded on the Lesotho side of the border by a white
South African shooting from the South African side of the
border. On 30 April, a Lesotho citizen who was returning
home to Lesotho from South Africa was beaten up and
thrown off a moving train by South African Railway
officials. Two weeks ago, a junior South African police
officer decided, allegedly without the knowledge of Pretoria, to stop our people from going into a South African
border town for shopping purposes. In aII these instances,
Pretoria’s reply is that they are investigating.

46. A draft resolution will be submitted for your consideration, and my delegation hopes that it will enjoy the
maximum support of the Council, thus enabling the
Secretary-General to fulfil his mandate undei resolution
402 (1976). My Government and the people of Lesotho
have confidence in the members of the Council and,
justifiably, have high expectations that the, Council in its
wisdom will again not fail us in this hour of need.
47. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I call
next on the representative of Sierra Leone, who viill speak
in his capacity as Chairman of the African Group for the
month of May, I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

42. These types of incidents can happen between any two
neighbouring States, but in our case their intensity and
frequency have increased since 26 October 1976. It is quite
obvious to us that South Africa has embarked on a policy
of coercing Lesotho into recognizing its nefarious bantustans. As I stated before, we shall be cowed; we reject and
shall never accept racism, apartheid or the bantustanization
of South Africa. The Council’s adoption of this report and

48. Mr, NICOL (Sierra Leone): Sir, I have the rare
opportunity of addressing the Council twice in one day ‘in
my capacity as Chairman of the African Group. I have
5

--

economic difficulties arising from the closure of certain
border posts by South Africa.

already, during this morning’s meeting, congratulated you
on your assumption of the high office of President of the
Council for the month of May and expressed confidence in
the able and articulate manner in which you will conduct
the affairs of the Council. Who can understand the
problems of Africa better than an African? The African
Group is not only fortunate but also delighted to see you
presiding over the Council when the racist problem in
southern Africa in general, and in the Kingdom of Lesotho
in particular, is being discussed. My delegation is confident,
without any shadow of a doubt, that you will guide our
deliberations to a conclusion satisfactory to the Government of Lesotho and all interested parties.

53. I must at this point congratulate the Mission for the
production of an excellent report. We see there detailed
accounts of the type of assistance required to enable
Lesotho to overcome its present economic difficulties. We
observe that Lesotho’s requirements are both urgent and
substantial. The economic assistance which Lesotho is
requesting is primarily to strengthen its fragile economy
and reduce its economic dependence on South Africa,
thereby limiting the chances of deliberate pressures from
South Africa.
54. The Mission has recommended assistance for 46
projects, grouped under two distinct programmes of devel.
opment. They are, first, the emergency programme, estimated to cost $65,890,000 and, secondly, the accelerated
development programme, with a total cost of $46,940,000.
The Government of Lesotho itself can only finance a small
percentage of these development programmes. Lesotho will
therefore depend heavily on international programmes of
assistance to be able to overcome its economic difficulties.
In this regard, I strongly endorse the appeal made by the
Secretary-General in his letter [S/1232.5] in which he
requested all States to give immediate financial, technical
and material assistance to Lesotho. A further appeal is also
directed to the United Nations and its specialized agencies
to render assistance in the areasmentioned in the report of
the Mission.

49. Permit me at this point to express gratitude to the
members of the Council through you, Sir, for allowing me
to address this body on behalf of the African Group.
50. During the thirty-first session of the General Assembly, on 26 October 1976 to be precise, resolution 31/6 A
was adopted, by which the Assembly rejected the so-called
independence of the Transkei and declared it invalid. The
resoIution went further, cafling on all Governments to deny
recognition to the so-called independent Transkei and to
refrain from having any dealings with it or other bantustans. The Kingdom of Lesotho happens to have common
borders with the Transkei. In order to pressure Lesotho
into recognizing the Transkei, the Government of South
Africa maliciously ciosed the border posts between Lesotho
and the Transkei. Movement to and fro through those
border posts is governed by formal agreements between
Lesotho and South Africa. Apart from the fact that the
closure of those border posts is a breach of international
law on goods in transit and a threat to peace and security in
the region, that wicked act is also causing hardship and
economic loss to a great proportion of the population of
Lesotho.

55, The representative of Mauritius has already introduced
a non-controversial draft resolution [S/12335] for the
Council’s consideration and adoption. In my capacity as
Chairman of the African Group, I am appealing to the
members of the Council to adopt that draft resolution
unanimously as a logical consequence to resolution
402 (1976), which wasunanimously ddopted by the Council. Such an act would not only demonstrate international
solidarity with Lesotho’s cause but would go a long way
towards finding a solution to Lesotho’s economic problems.

51. The problem confronting us was discussed in detail in
the Council on 21 and 22 December last. The Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Lesotho, who presented Lesotho’s
complaint I1981 st meeting], gave a detailed account of the
effect of the closure of the border posts, and appealed to
the international community for economic assistance to
enable Lesotho to continue its development programme
while at the same time fully implementing United Nations
resolutions on apartheid and bantustans.

56. Lesotho’s problems should not be considered in
isolation. They are the direct effect of the apartheid system
of government prevalent in South Africa. sin order to
continue its inhuman racial policies and propagate its
divide-and-rule policy, the Government of South Africa has
created the system of bantustans. South Africa’s aim is to
pressure the surrounding African States into recognizing
those so-called independent bantustan territories. The
international community should stand firm by its principles
and not give recognition to any of those bantustan
territories. The first opportunity that has been given to us
to demonstrate our condemnation of South Africa’s bantustan policy is now, when Lesotho needs our assistance.
Let us with solidarity and with one voice attack Lesotho’s
economic problems in order successfully to avert South
Africa’s pressures on Lesotho to recognize the so-called
independent Transkei.

52. At the conclusion of the debate, resolution
403 (1976) was adopted unanimously. In accordance with
the terms of this resolution, the Secretary-General dispatched a Mission to the Kingdom of Lesotho to assessthe
assistance required so that a programme of financial
assistance could be arranged. The report subsequently
compiled, contained in document S/12315 of 30 March
1977, identifies areas where assistance is necessary to
enable Lesotho to continue its development programmes
and at the same time adhere to United Nations resolutions
on apartheid and bantustans. The report also contain ideas
on the assistance required to help Lesotho overcome the

The meeting rose at 4.45 pm

6
Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

Price:

$U.S.

1.00 (or equivalent

-~~
in other

currencies)

~__~.
77-~OOOI-March

1978-2200

;I
I

;
(
