A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/48/35
1 February 1994

Forty-eighth session
Agenda item 145
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/48/614)]
48/35.

Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee on Relations with the Host
Country, 1/
Recalling Article 105 of the Charter of the United Nations, the
Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations 2/ and the
Agreement between the United Nations and the United States of America
regarding the Headquarters of the United Nations 3/ and the responsibilities
of the host country,
Recognizing that effective measures should continue to be taken by the
competent authorities of the host country, in particular to prevent any acts
violating the security of missions and the safety of their personnel,
Noting the spirit of cooperation and mutual understanding that has
guided the deliberations of the Committee on issues affecting the United
Nations community and the host country,
Welcoming the increased interest shown by Member States in participating
in the work of the Committee,
__________
1/

A/48/26.

2/

Resolution 22 A (I).

3/

See resolution 169 (II).

/...

A/RES/48/35
Page 2

Welcoming also the efforts to explore ways to rationalize the work of
the Committee, and in particular its agenda,
1.
Endorses the recommendations and conclusions of the Committee on
Relations with the Host Country contained in paragraph 58 of its report; 1/
2.
Considers that the maintenance of appropriate conditions for the
normal work of the delegations and the missions accredited to the United
Nations is in the interests of the United Nations and all Member States, and
expresses the hope that the host country will continue to take all measures
necessary to prevent any interference with the functioning of missions;
3.
Expresses its appreciation for the efforts made by the host
country, and hopes that problems raised at the meetings of the Committee will
continue to be resolved in a spirit of cooperation and in accordance with
international law;
4.
Voices its concern that the amount of financial indebtedness
resulting from non-compliance with contractual obligations of certain missions
accredited to the United Nations has increased to alarming proportions,
reminds all permanent missions to the United Nations, their personnel and
Secretariat personnel of their responsibilities to meet such obligations, and
expresses the hope that the efforts undertaken by the Committee, in
consultation with all concerned, will lead to a solution of this problem;
5.
Welcomes the lifting of travel controls by the host country with
regard to certain missions and staff members of the Secretariat of certain
nationalities, and expresses the hope that the remaining travel restrictions
will be removed by the host country as soon as possible, and in this regard
notes the positions of the affected States, of the Secretary-General and of
the host country;
6.
Supports the efforts of the Chairman of the Committee, Member
States and the Secretariat to explore ways to rationalize the work of the
Committee and its agenda, permitting it to remain efficient and responsive,
and in keeping with the overall spirit of its mandate;
7.
Requests the Secretary-General to remain actively engaged in all
aspects of the relations of the United Nations with the host country;
8.
Requests the Committee to continue its work, in conformity with
General Assembly resolution 2819 (XXVI) of 15 December 1971;
9.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its forty-ninth
session the item entitled "Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host
Country".
73rd plenary meeting
9 December 1993
