S/2017/339

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 April 2017
Original: English

Implementation of Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014),
2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015) and 2332 (2016)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is the thirty-eighth submitted pursuant to paragraph 17 of
Security Council resolution 2139 (2014), paragraph 10 of resolution 2165 (2014),
paragraph 5 of resolution 2191 (2014), paragraph 5 of resolution 2258 (2015) and
paragraph 5 of resolution 2332 (2016), in which the Council requested the
Secretary-General to report, every 30 days, on the implementation of the resolutions
by all parties to the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic.
2.
The information contained herein is based on the data available to United
Nations agencies on the ground and from the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic and other Syrian and open sources. Data from United Nations agencies on
their humanitarian deliveries have been reported for the period from 1 to 31 March
2017.
Box 1
Key points in March 2017
(1) Rounds four and five of the United Nations-facilitated political negotiations in
Geneva were concluded in March. The rounds ended with a clear agenda and a
greater understanding of the points of commonality and divergence.
(2) Notwithstanding the ceasefire declared as at 30 December 2016, fighting in
multiple areas resulted in further civilian deaths and injury and the destruction of
civilian infrastructure.
(3) The situation in eastern Ghutah in Rif Dimashq, where hundreds of thousands
of people are besieged in a number of towns and surrounding rural areas, and
adjacent neighbourhoods of Qabun, Barzah and Tishrin deteriorated furthe r amid
reports of shelling, air strikes and heavy ground fighting.
(4) Close to 100,000 people were displaced as a result of fighting and insecurity in
several governorates. The United Nations and non-governmental organization
partners mobilized a multisector response to those displaced.

17-06106 (E)

200417

*1706106*

S/2017/339

(5) Some 6,800 people were evacuated from the besieged neighbourhood of Wa‘r
in Homs to Jarabulus in rural Aleppo and locations in Idlib as part of a local
agreement between the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and local
representatives in Wa‘r. The United Nations was not involved in the negotiation or
evacuation process.
(6) Overall, some 440,000 people were reached through inter-agency operations,
including through eight inter-agency convoys to besieged and hard-to-reach
locations, on-going airdrops to besieged Dayr al-Zawr city and through the airlift
link from Damascus to Qamishlii, given access challenges overland. More interagency convoys deployed in March, compared with the past several months,
notwithstanding ongoing access challenges.
(7) Syrian authorities approved a total 764,950 of the 1,066,650 requested
beneficiaries (71.7 per cent) under the April/May convoy plan. Six locations with
more than 132,000 people in need were denied. Some 168,000 people were
approved in locations where the approved total was less than the United Nations
request.

II. Major developments
3.
The month of March witnessed consecutive rounds of United Nations facilitated political negotiations in Geneva. The fourth round of negotiations, which
concluded on 3 March, was the first set of political negotiations in 10 months.
Invitees engaged constructively in increasingly intensive discussions on procedure
and substance with my Special Envoy and his team. A clear agenda emerged and
invitees agreed to receive a non-paper on principles, expert presentations on issues
in the four baskets of governance and a schedule and process for drafting a new
constitution, free and fair elections and counter -terrorism, security governance and
confidence-building measures. This round also saw continued engagement with civil
society, including the Special Envoy’s Syrian Women’s Advisory Board.
4.
In preparation for the fifth round of negotiations, held in the latter part of
March, my Special Envoy and his team undertook consultations in Moscow, Riyadh
and Ankara to seek advice on and support for the substantive discuss ions that were
necessary to build on progress made to date. At the ministerial meeting of the
League of Arab States, held in Jordan, my Special Envoy repeated his hope that
intra-Syrian negotiations would lead to a framework agreement containing a
political package so that a negotiated transitional political process could be
implemented in accordance with the clear sequencing and target timelines set out in
Security Council resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué of June 2012
that was endorsed in resolution 2118 (2013).

2/23

17-06106

S/2017/339

Figure I
Key dates in March 2017

12 March
Launch of national polio
campaign targeting
2.7 million children

Start of evacuations
from Wa‘r

5.
The fifth round of United Nations-facilitated political negotiations commenced
on 24 March in the presence of all invitees and the participation of the Syrian
Women’s Advisory Board. Invitees engaged in considerable detail on the substance
of that agenda, utilizing the methodology established by my Special Envoy and his
team. This round was marked by a willingness by invitees to present both oral and
written observations, resulting in a greater understanding of the points of
commonality and divergence.
6.
The Russian Federation and Turkey, as the guarantors of the ceasefire of
30 December 2016, convened in Astana again on 14 and 15 March. A decision was
taken to expand the guarantor role to the Islamic Republic of Iran. The guarantors
reaffirmed their commitment to the consolidation and strengthening of the ceasefire
regime and emphasized the need to improve conditions on the ground through
stronger enforcement of it. They initiated discussio ns on international assistance for
the demining of World Heritage Sites of the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization in the Syrian Arab Republic and on confidence -building
measures. Lastly, they welcomed the resumption of politic al negotiations in Geneva
and underlined the importance of the Astana meetings to complement and facilitate
the Geneva process. It was agreed that the next high -level meeting would be held in
Astana on 3 and 4 May, with preliminary expert consultations in Tehran on 18 and
19 April.
7.
Both rounds of intra-Syrian negotiations were convened in an atmosphere of
increased militarization on the ground, notwithstanding the ceasefire declared.
Military operations between the parties continued in parts of Aleppo, D amascus,
Dar‘a, Dayr al-Zawr, Hama, Idlib, Ladhiqiyah, Homs, Raqqah, Rif Dimashq and
Suwayda’ governorates. Such operations continued to result in death, injury and
displacement to civilians and damage and destruction to civilian infrastructure.
8.
Damascus and its suburbs located in Rif Dimashq governorate witnessed a
sharp increase in violence, resulting in the death of and injuries to civilians. Air
strikes and ground-based strikes, along with suicide bombings, contributed to a high
civilian death toll. On 11 and 15 March, a series of attacks hit civilian areas in
central Damascus, including the central court complex and a restaurant, apparently
aimed at causing a high number of civilian casualties. On 11 March, a twin suicide
attack on buses in the Shaghour neighbourhood caused dozens of fatalities and more

17-06106

3/23

S/2017/339

than 100 injuries. The Levant Liberation Organization (Hay’at Tahrir al -Sham), a
group that includes Jabhat Fateh al-Sham, formerly the Nusrah Front, claimed
responsibility for the attack. Non-State armed opposition groups launched mortars
and rockets at several neighbourhoods in Damascus city, notably Abbasiyin, Bab
Tuma, Tijarah, Zablatani, Mazzah 86 and Qassa‘, killing and injuring many civilians
and resulting in the temporary closure of schools in some neighbourhoods.
9.
Fierce clashes were also reported between Government forces and non -State
armed opposition groups in the Qabun, Barzah and Tishrin neighbourhoods in the
eastern part of Damascus city. By the end of March, government forces had
encircled those districts and advanced to the western Harasta area. Some 3,400
families from those neighbourhoods were displaced to Tall (1,500 families) and
eastern Ghutah (1,900 families).Air strikes and ground -based strikes continued and
led to large numbers of casualties among civilians in non-State armed opposition
group-controlled parts of Damascus and Rif Dimashq governorates. In particular,
heavy fighting was reported in Jawbar, while government forces intensified their air
strikes on eastern Ghutah (see box 2).
Box 2
Eastern Ghutah
(1) The situation in eastern Ghutah (Rif Dimashq), where hundreds of thousands
of people are besieged in a number of towns and surrounding rural areas,
deteriorated amid reports of shelling, air strikes and ground fighting on a near daily
basis, causing a significant number of civilian deaths and injuries and the
destruction of civilian infrastructure. At the same time, shelling from eastern Ghutah
into residential neighbourhoods in Damascus city was reported widely.
(2) Since 20 March, government forces have reportedly have prevented
commercial trucks from entering eastern Ghutah, resulting in price hikes of basic
staples, while informal trade has been curtailed. Exports of agricultural products
from East Ghutah to Damascus, which were authorized on a case-by-case basis,
have also stopped.
(3) The last United Nations humanitarian delivery to any of the besieged areas of
eastern Ghutah was in October 2016, with other areas not accessed since June 2016.
Recent approval to reach the area could not be acted upon owing to the security
situation and a lack of facilitation letters, although the Syrian Arab Red Crescent
was able to deliver a portion of the health supplies planned for the convoy on
9 March, including 250 dialysis kits, vaccines and baby milk, to its sub-branch in
Duma.
(4) According to the World Health Organization, none of the three public hospitals
and 17 public health care centres in eastern Ghutah are functioning or accessible to
the population, with several of them reportedly destroyed by air strikes. Some
facilities are reportedly still operational elsewhere in the enclave. The number of
children suffering from traumatic injuries is alarmingly high: 30 per cent of all
patients with war-related injuries are children under 15 years of age. The death of
patients due to lack of dialysis equipment and a measles outbreak has also been
reported. Schools in East Ghutah are open, although hours are shorter than usual
owing to security concerns.

10. In southern Damascus city, clashes were reported between pro -government
forces and Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in Tishrin street in
al-Yarmouk camp amid mutual artillery bombardment early in March.

4/23

17-06106

S/2017/339

11. The situation in the besieged areas of Madaya and Zabadani was marked by
intensified and near-daily ground-based strikes launched by government forces and
allied militias, primarily Hezbollah. The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) received numerous re ports of incidents
involving snipers shooting and reportedly killing and injuring civilians, including
children. The humanitarian situation remained precarious and reports received
indicated that many people were in need of urgent medical evacuation. Attac ks and
sniping by non-State armed opposition groups were also reported in the besieged
towns of Fu‘ah and Kafraya in Idlib, leading to multiple deaths of and injuries to
civilians. On 14 March, a convoy of the United Nations, the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent reached the
four towns of Zabadani, Madaya, Fu‘ah and Kafraya for the first time since
November 2016. The United Nations was unable to distribute all the delivered
assistance in Madaya owing to sniping by the surrounding militias that left several
people dead. Meanwhile, at the end of March, the United Nations received reports
of an agreement between parties to the Four Towns Agreement to evacuate people
from the four towns.
12. Idlib governorate witnessed an increase in the number of reported civilian
casualties, including women and children, as a result of the reported intensification
of air strikes that, in particular, affected the south of the governorate. In addition,
clashes erupted between Ahrar al-Sham and the Levant Liberation Organization in
several locations around Mastumah early in March. However, a ceasefire deal was
reportedly reached on 7 March, which brought an end to that episode of fighting. In
addition, OHCHR continued to receive reports of repressive measures taken by
non-State armed opposition groups and the Levant Liberation Organization in Idlib,
limiting the rights to freedoms of expression, peaceful assembly and association.
13. Fighting continued in several areas of Aleppo governorate, displacing tens of
thousands of people. In the north-eastern countryside of Aleppo, clashes were
reported between ISIL and the Syrian Democratic Forces led by People’s Protection
Units on several fronts. The Forces captured ISIL locations to t he south of Manbij
and, between 5 and 8 March, handed over several villages to government forces.
Fighting in eastern rural Aleppo between government forces and ISIL forced the
displacement of thousands of families, who consequently sought refuge in
Jarabulus, Manbij city and surrounding areas, as well as Aleppo city. Government
forces and their allies captured the ISIL-controlled town of Khafsah town in Manbij
district and, with it, the main water pumping station, allowing for the restoration of
the water supply to Aleppo. In areas held by the Turkish-led Operation Euphrates
Shield forces in and around Bab and those held by the Syrian Democratic Forces in
the vicinity of Manbij, several civilians were killed and injured by explosive
devices, such as improvised explosive devices and unexploded ordinances. On
29 March, the Prime Minister of Turkey, Binali Yildirim, announced the end of
Operation Euphrates Shield.
14. By the end of March, the Syrian Democratic Forces had gained control of most
of the villages and towns north of Raqqah governorate, closing in on Raqqah city.
To date, tens of thousands of people have been displaced as a result of the three
phases of the Operation Euphrates Shield , including some 20,000 people in March.
Most displacements remain temporary and most occur to nearby communities, with
people gradually returning once the security situation has improved. Civilian
infrastructure was also affected by air strikes in various locations in Raqqah. In
particular, fears over the integrity of the Tabaqah dam emerged after reports of an
air strike that had struck the dam’s control rooms. Repairs made by the Syrian Arab
Red Crescent, the Aleppo drinking water authority and Tabaqah dam administration

17-06106

5/23

S/2017/339

technicians in early April, however, significantl y reduced the threat of the dam
collapsing.
15. Air strikes on the ISIL-controlled parts of Raqqah reportedly increased
significantly, leading to a number of alleged civilian casualties, including many
women and children. For example, on 21 March, air stri kes reportedly hit the
al-Badiya school in Mansoura town in western rural Raqqah governorate, resulting
in the death of at least 46 civilians, including women and children, and injuries to
scores of others who were among the internally displaced persons living at the
school. On 22 March, air strikes reportedly hit a bakery and a local market in
Tabaqah town, resulting in the death of at least 37 civilians, including 5 women and
2 children, and injuries to 52 others. ISIL reportedly prevented civilians from
leaving areas under its control.
16. In Dayr al-Zawr governorate, the Syrian Democratic Forces advanced in the
northern countryside after fierce clashes with ISIL, seizing several villages, and cut
the main highway between Raqqah and Dayr al-Zawr cities as part of the third phase
of the Operation Euphrates Shield aimed at cutting communications between
Raqqah city and Dayr al-Zawr and further advancing towards Raqqah. Elsewhere,
fierce clashes were reported between ISIL and government forces in and around
besieged Dayr al-Zawr city amid heavy mutual artillery bombardment and
Government air strikes. On 9 and 13 March, government forces repelled several
ISIL attacks around the military airport south of the city.
17. Fighting and insecurity persisted in parts of Homs governorate. In the eastern
countryside of Homs, government forces, backed by air strikes, seized Tadmur
(Palmyra) city and a large surrounding area from ISIL in the early part of the month.
The situation in Homs city remained tense following two improvised explosive
device explosions, including one on a public transportation bus in Wadi al -Dahab
that killed 10 people and injured many more. In Wa‘r, an agreement was reached
and implemented mid-month between non-State armed opposition groups and the
Government, accompanied by guarantees provided by the Russian Centre for
Reconciliation of Opposing Sides in the Syrian Arab Republic in Humaymim. More
than 6,800 people in total were evacuated from Wa‘r between 18 March and 8 April
to Jarabulus in rural northern Aleppo and to areas in Idlib governorate. Cross-border
humanitarian partners have been providing a response to those who arrived from
Wa‘r to the extent possible, given the dire humanitarian situation of the evacuees.
The United Nations was neither part of the agreement nor the evacuation. As part of
the agreement, government forces reopened one of the roads connecting Wa‘r
neighbourhood with the rest of Homs city, and food items are now entering the
neighbourhood without hindrance. Electricity has been restored. Freedom of
movement for students and government employees has also been restored.
18. In Hama governorate, clashes between ISIL and government forces in the
eastern countryside were reported during the first half of March. In the latter ha lf of
the month, non-State armed opposition groups, as well as the Levan Liberation
Organization, launched multiple offensives in rural Hama, capturing more than 10
villages and towns, in addition to several military positions from government forces.
In the same period, government forces launched several counterattacks and, by the
end to the reporting period, had recaptured the majority of the area. Some 60,000
people fled their homes as a result of fighting in the governorate towards safer areas
in Hama, Idlib, Homs, Tartus and Ladhiqiyah governorates, where humanitarian
partners mobilized a response. By mid-April, an estimated 50 per cent of the
displaced were able to return to their homes.
19. Fighting was reported in various parts of Dar‘a governorate. G overnment
forces and non-State armed opposition groups engaged in fierce clashes in Dar‘a
6/23

17-06106

S/2017/339

city, including air strikes and ground-based strikes. Civilians and civilian
infrastructure were affected. For example, on 22 March, the Safsaf school of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) in Dera’a camp was hit by a mortar. One classroom was damaged.
Fighting erupted between non-State armed opposition groups and ISIL-affiliated
armed groups in Yarmouk valley in south-western rural Dar‘a a and continued
throughout March, forcing more than 2,000 people to flee to nearby villages in
Dar‘a and parts of Qunaytirah. Fighting was also reported in the eastern countryside
of Dar‘a when non-State armed opposition groups took control of the entire area of
Alaghwat after the withdrawal of ISIL from the area on 24 March.
20. There were relevant developments in other governorates. For example,
Suwayda’ on 22 March, the villages of Anz, Sahwat al-Khidr, and Dayr al-Laban in
Suwayda’ governorate reportedly signed a ceasefire and settlement agreement with
government forces. As with other such arrangements, the United Nations was not
part of the agreement. Meanwhile, non-State armed opposition groups reportedly
took control of all hitherto ISIL-controlled locations in the eastern countryside of
Suwayda’ by the end of March, leaving ISIL without a presence in the governorate.
In Ladhiqiyah’ governorate, there was fighting between non-State armed opposition
groups and government forces in the northern countryside, including air strikes in
Jabal al-Akrad and Jabal at-Turkuman areas. Non-State armed opposition groups
reportedly targeted Humaymim airport and Qardahah city with missiles.
Protection
21. Air strikes and ground-based strikes continued to kill and injure civilians in
significant numbers. The high level of civilian casualties is a strong indication that
violations of the prohibition on the launching of indiscriminate attacks and of the
principles of proportionality and precautions in and against the effects of attack
continued. The fighting continued to affect civilian infrastructure personnel and
objects, including medical personnel and facilities, and schools, education staff and
school children. Based on information received by OHCHR, civilian casualties in
suspected violation of the laws of armed conflict occurred in various governorates
(see annex). OHCHR documented alleged incidents by all parties to the conflict,
including Government forces and their allies, non-State armed opposition groups
and Security Council-designated terrorist groups.
22. The Department of Defense of the United States publicly confirmed that, in
March, the international coalition to counter ISIL carried out 425 str ikes against the
purported ISIL targets in the governorates of Aleppo, Dayr al -Zawr, Hasakah,
Raqqah and Homs. More than half the strikes were in and around Raqqah.
23. The Russian Federation continued to provide air support to government forces
and their allies. On 10 March, the Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation
stated that, in the previous week, Aerospace Defence Forces had conducted 452
strikes on ISIL targets in eastern Aleppo. On 28 March, the Ministry stated that its
forces were continuing their provision of support to Syrian government forces both
in responding to the opposition offensive in Hama and against ISIL targets.
24. As part of Operation Euphrates Shield, Turkish air and ground forces
continued to support non-State armed opposition groups fighting under the Free
Syrian Army banner in operations against ISIL, with the reported aim of improving
security and eliminating threats along Turkey’s border with the Syrian Arab
Republic.
25. The United Nations and health partners received credible reports of 19 attacks
that affected medical facilities. Those included documented attacks on the national
laboratory in Damascus, two hospitals in Hama, one hospital in Idlib, one hospital
17-06106

7/23

S/2017/339

in Raqqah, one hospital in Dar‘a and one advanced medical point in Hama. In
addition, one paramedic health worker was killed and one injured in Dar‘a. All
hospitals attacked were temporarily rendered out of service, except the hospital in
Dar‘a, which remained functional.
26. Educational facilities continued to be affected. The United Nations received
credible information of the following attacks to education facilities and related
protected personnel. On 9 March, the Abo Baker Seddeeq school in Darat Izzah,
Aleppo governorate, was reportedly hit by an air strike, resulting in the deaths of 7
children and injuries to 10 others who were playing in the school playground at the
time of the attack. The school was reportedly seriously damaged. On 9 March, the
Fadel Khateeb school in Kafr Nubl, Idlib governorate, was rep ortedly hit by two air
strikes. According to preliminary reports, high-explosive missiles hit the facility
directly, which is the biggest school in the area, with 1,450 students enrolled. No
casualties were reported, given that the school was closed for the weekend on the
day of the attack.
Humanitarian access
Box 3
Key points
(1) Eight inter-agency convoys to besieged and hard-to-reach locations were
carried out, including to the besieged four towns, Khan al -Shih in Rif Dimashq and
the hard-to-reach locations of Talbisah and Rastan in northern rural Homs and Wadi
Barada and Bludan in Rif Dimashq.
(2) A number of other inter-agency convoys to besieged and hard-to-reach areas
could not proceed owing to a lack of approval or of facilita tion letters by the Syrian
authorities, fighting and insecurity and delays to and restrictions on administrative
procedures after receiving original approvals. As a result, the United Nations
reached some 307,000 people, or 39 per cent, of the initial targ et under the March
inter-agency convoy plan.
(3) The April/May inter-agency convoy plan to besieged and hard-to-reach
locations was submitted to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs on 19 March. A total
764,950 of the 1,066,650 requested beneficiaries, or 7 1.7 per cent, were approved
on 30 March. Six locations with an estimated population of 132,000 were denied.
The remaining 168,000 people were approved in locations where the approved total
was less than the United Nations request.
(4) The removal of medical supplies from convoys remains a major challenge,
with some 36,000 medical treatments and supplies removed from convoys.
(5) Some 700,000 beneficiaries were assisted with food commodities by the
United Nations and its partners via cross-border operations from Jordan and Turkey,
while 93,500 people were supported in besieged Dayr al-Zawr through airdrops and
23,000 beneficiaries were reached through the airlift link from Damascus to
Qamishli, given the access challenges overland.

27. The delivery of humanitarian assistance to people in need remained extremely
challenging in many areas of the country as a result of active conflict, shifting
conflict lines, administrative impediments and deliberate restrictions on the
movement of people and goods by the parties to the conflict.
28. Access to the millions of people living in besieged and hard -to-reach locations
remained of critical concern. Eight inter-agency convoys to besieged and hard-to8/23

17-06106

S/2017/339

reach locations were carried out, including to the besieged four towns and Khan
al-Shih in Rif Dimashq. Convoys also reached the hard-to-reach locations of
Talbisah and Rastan in northern rural Homs and Wadi Barada, and Bludan in Rif
Dimashq. Convoys to other besieged and hard-to-reach areas, including those
approved under the March inter-agency convoy plan, were unable to proceed as a
result of fighting and insecurity, administrative delays by the Syrian authorities and
restrictions applied by non-State armed opposition groups.
29. United Nations agencies also undertook single-agency deliveries to cross-line
and hard-to-reach locations or reached those locations through their regular
programmes. Moreover, NGOs, both international and Syrian, continued to provide
medical, education, psychosocial and protection services, as well as some support in
other sectors, in hard-to-reach locations under extremely challenging circumstances.
Figure II
United Nations inter-agency cross-line humanitarian operations: percentage of people
reached each month in besieged areas, including via airdrops to Dayr al-Zawr city

6

100%

Number of besieged
areas reached this year

80%

60%

40%

20%

2
. 0%
Jan.

Feb.

Mar.

30. A combination of insecurity, deliberate interference and restrictions by the
parties to the conflict continued to prevent aid delivery. For example, the majority
of United Nations agencies and their partners continue to be unable to access
populations in need in ISIL-controlled areas of the country, given that all plans to
deliver assistance to those areas have been suspended owing to the inability to work
independently and monitor activities. This is preventing the United Nations and its
humanitarian partners from reaching Raqqah and most of Dayr al -Zawr
governorates, as well as pockets of northern rural Aleppo, south ern rural Hasakah
and north-western rural Hama. The cross-border humanitarian operation through the
Ramtha crossing point remained suspended during the first week of March owing to
the deterioration of the security situation in Dar‘a governorate, although it was
subsequently restored on 9 March. During the last few weeks in March, security
incidents escalated on the Salamiyah road, which is the main road to Aleppo city,
hampering humanitarian deliveries there.
31. Restrictions continue by non-State armed opposition groups and other local
actors. For example, humanitarian organizations have reported challenges in
obtaining formal approvals from the local authorities in Kurdish -controlled areas of
north-eastern Syria, causing delays to programming. Humanitaria n access for the
Turkey-based cross-border partners into Idlib governorate is also reportedly facing
more challenges, given that non-State armed opposition groups and Security
Council-designated terrorist groups are enforcing more restrictions on NGOs

17-06106

9/23

S/2017/339

operating in the governorate, including those relating to new registration demands
and requests for information and interference in staffing, logistics and finances.
Figure III
United Nations inter-agency cross-line humanitarian operations, March 2017

349,033 people reached

XL
People reached in

People reached in

People reached in

hard-to-reach areas

besieged areas

priority cross-line

241,500

107,533

areas

0

7%

18.7 %

4 13

People reached in
hard-to-reach areas

People reached in
besieged areas

Besieged locations
reached

Cross-line convoys

Airlifts

Airdrops

x

52

18

of

32. Life-saving and life-sustaining medical items sufficient for nearly 36,000
treatments were removed from convoys. The treatments and supplies removed are
shown in table 1. Serum drugs, renewable items (razors, scalpels blades, gauzes)
and surgical equipment (forceps, scissors, needles) are consistently removed by
government security bodies from midwifery kits, inter -agency emergency health
kits, paediatric kits and diarrheal disease sets in inter-agency and single agency
convoys, therefore hampering their functionality and causing severe deprivation to
the beneficiaries. This does not include medical supplies that were scheduled to be
delivered as part of the monthly inter-agency convoy plan but were unable to
proceed. Furthermore, since the beginning of 2017, the World Health Organization
has submitted seven single-agency requests to the Government to gain access to 14
locations in five governorates. The Government approved two requests, while five
remain unanswered.

10/23

17-06106

S/2017/339

Table 1
Medical supplies removed from humanitarian convoys, March 2017
Location

Number of
treatments

Type of supplies

Fu‘ah and
Kafraya

9 709

Serum drugs, renewable items and surgical equipment were removed
from inter-agency emergency health kits and diarrheal kits. Medical
consumables from burn kits and pneumonia kit B were reduced in
quantity/removed.

Madaya

16 143

Serum drugs, renewable items and surgical equipment were removed
from inter-agency emergency health kits and diarrheal kits,. Medical
consumables from burn kits and pneumonia kit B were reduced in
quantity/removed. Antiseptics from basic inter-agency emergency
health kits were removed.

Zabadani

3 218

Minor surgical instruments from surgical kits and medical
consumables from burn kits and pneumonia kit B were reduced in
quantity/removed. Antiseptics from basic inter-agency emergency
health kits were removed.

Talbisah

2 837

Inter-agency emergency health kits, diarrheal disease sets,
resuscitation kits and midwifery kits were not allowed to be delivered
and nutrition supplies were reduced in quantity.

Rastan

4 178

inter-agency emergency health kits, diarrheal disease sets,
resuscitation kits, midwifery kits and family hygiene kits were not
allowed to be delivered.

33. The United Nations inter-agency convoy plan for March requested access to
21 locations, including besieged locations, in order to reach 787,500 people. The
initial response from the Government included approvals for 44 per cent of the
requested plan, or 348,200 people, the lowest approval rate since Ma rch 2016, when
the monthly plan process began. That total, however, increased to some 74 per cent
later in March, when additional approvals for some other locations were received
following intense engagement by the United Nations team on the ground. Overal l,
the United Nations reached some 307,000 people against the plan, or 39 per cent.
Others were not reached owing to non-approval by the Syrian authorities at the
outset, insecurity and fighting and delays in the issuance of facilitation letters in
some instances.
34. On 19 March, the United Nations submitted an inter -agency convoy plan
covering April and May. The rationale for submitting a plan for two months at a
time is to allow for more flexibility. The plan included a request to reach 1,066,650
people in need across 28 besieged and hard-to-reach locations. On 30 March, the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs transmitted the High Relief Committee’s approvals for
the March inter-agency convoy plan. A total 764,950 of the 1,066,650 requested
beneficiaries, or 71.7 per cent, were approved. Nine locations were approved in full,
while 13 locations were approved with conditions in the number of people who are
permitted to be reached. Six locations comprising more than 132,000 people were
denied. The United Nations continues to engage the Syrian authorities in finding a
way to improve the inter-agency convoy process.
35. Individual agencies continued to submit requests for single -agency convoys.
For example, the World Food Programme (WFP) submitted 1,820 official request s
to obtain facilitation letters to transport food assistance to targeted locations across
the country, the vast majority of which are regularly accessible areas. Of those, 16
requests did not receive approval or a response from the relevant authorities, t hus
preventing the delivery of food assistance to 68,525 people in Homs, Dar‘a and Rif
Dimashq governorates.
17-06106

11/23

S/2017/339

36. The Nusaybin/Qamishli crossing in Hasakah governorate has been temporarily
closed by the Turkish authorities since 27 December 2015 because of security
concerns. Hasakah governorate also remains largely inaccessible by road for United
Nations agencies from within the Syrian Arab Republic owing to insecurity and the
presence of ISIL along the routes. The United Nations continues with airlifts from
Damascus to Qamishli airport to deliver multisectoral assistance.
Humanitarian response
37. In March, United Nations humanitarian agencies and partners continued to
reach millions of people in need through all modalities from within the Syrian Arab
Republic and across borders (see table 2). In addition to the United Nations and
partners, NGOs continued to deliver valuable assistance to people in need, in line
with previous months. The Government continued to provide basic services to those
areas under its control and in many areas beyond its control.
Table 2
Number of people reached by United Nations organizations, March 2017
Organization

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
International Organization for Migration
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

Number of people reached

31 000
N/A
264 000

United Nations Children’s Fund

2 600 000

United Nations Development Programme

2 773 000

United Nations Population Fund
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East

172 000
430 000

World Food Programme

4 100 000

World Health Organization

456 000

38. Cross-border deliveries continued from Jordan and Turkey into the Syrian
Arab Republic under the terms of resolutions 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258
(2015), and 2332 (2016) (see figure IV). In line with those resolutions, the United
Nations notified the Syrian authorities in advance of each shipment, includ ing
content, destination and number of beneficiaries. The United Nations Monitoring
Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic continued its operations, monitoring 521
trucks used in 24 convoys by six United Nations agencies, confirming the
humanitarian nature of each and notifying the Syrian authorities after each
shipment. The Mechanism continued to benefit from excellent cooperation with the
Governments of Jordan and Turkey.

12/23

17-06106

S/2017/339

Figure IV
Number of beneficiaries assisted by the United Nations and its partners, by
cluster, through cross-border humanitarian deliveries, March 2017
Ramtha

6 agencies

696,453

Bab Al-Salam

24 cross-border convoys

Bab Al-Hawa

521 trucks

439,407

396,857

74,148

Water, sanitation and
hygiene

Non-food items

Food

Health

39. Inter-agency convoys completed in March are listed in table 3. In total, the
United Nations undertook eight inter-agency convoys, with all except the Bludan
convoy as part of the March inter-agency convoy plan. In March, the logistics
cluster on behalf of United Nations agencies completed 18 airdrop rotations to
besieged Dayr al-Zawr city, airdropping quantities for some 42,000 people to
receive a full food ration. A total of fifty-two airlift rotations to Qamishli were
completed, airlifting a total of 1,975 tons of WFP food and other supplies on behalf
of other humanitarian actors. Doing so enabled WFP to provid e assistance for
188,550 people in the governorate of Hasakah. That assistance included 4,210 food
rations sufficient to assist 21,050 Iraqi refugees from Mosul hosted in the Hawl
refugee camp. Using stock airlifted to Qamishli, WFP delivered 7,300 ready -to-eat
rations to Tall Abyad, Suluk and Ayn Isa in northern Raqqah governorate (under
Kurdish control), providing support to 36,500 people in the area for the first time
since July 2015, as well as 7,000 ready-to-eat rations for 35,000 newly displaced
people in the hard-to-reach area of Manbij.
Table 3
Inter-agency cross-line humanitarian convoys, March 2017
Requested target
(number of beneficiaries)

Targeted
people reached

Fu‘ah and Kafraya

20 000

20 000

Multisectoral

Madaya

40 000

39 600

Multisectoral

400

Multisectoral

30 000

24 500

Multisectoral

N/A

25 000

Multisectoral

101 500

84 500

Multisectoral

6 000

6 000

Multisectoral

107 500

107 500

Multisectoral

Date

Location

14 March
14 March
14 March

Zabadani

24 March

Wadi Barada

27 March

Bludan

27 March

Talbisah

30 March

Khan al-Shih

30 March

Rastan

Type of assistance

40. A national polio campaign was conducted from 12 to 16 March. Preliminary
results indicate that 2.1 million of 2.7 million children under five years of age, or a
coverage rate of 76.68 per cent, were vaccinated against polio from inside the
Syrian Arab Republic in all governorates except Idlib, Raqqah city and part of rural
17-06106

13/23

S/2017/339

Aleppo. An additional 60,000 children in Idlib and Aleppo were reached via cross border partners. Final coverage results will be available by the second week of
April. Separately, some 9,000 children under five years of age were reached with
routine immunization, including measles, in eastern Ghutah from 18 to 25 March
through the Syrian Arab Red Crescent.
41. The United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) facilitated the completion of
emergency repairs of the Wadi Barada and Ayn al-Fijah pipelines to Damascus to
ensure adequate water production for the spring season. Support for pump
rehabilitation will continue to ensure adequate water supplies to Damascus during
the dry season. In Aleppo, UNICEF has supported efforts to resume water pumping
from the Khafsah plant at the Euphrates River since mid -March. As a result, many
neighbourhoods in the city received water through the municipal network.
42. The Russian Federation sent information bulletins to the United Nations
through the Russian Centre for the Reconciliation of Opposing Sides in the Syrian
Arab Republic that outlined the provision of bilateral humanitarian assistance. Other
Member States also continued to provide bilateral and other f orms of humanitarian
assistance.
Visas and registrations
43. A total of 40 new visa requests were submitted. Of those, a total of 11
applications were approved, none were rejected and 29 remain pending. Ten new
visa requests from earlier months were approved, while 13 remain pending. A total
of 75 visa renewal requests were submitted in February, of which 49 were approved
and 26 remain pending. A further 11 visa renewals submitted in earlier months were
also approved.
44. A total of 17 international NGOs are registered with the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic to operate in the country. Four more international NGOs are
in the process of completing registration. Those organizations continued to face a
series of administrative hurdles and restrictions that affect their ability to operate,
including in gaining permission to undertake independent needs assessments. Some
216 national NGOs are authorized to operate in the Syrian Arab Republic. One
national NGO in Damascus received authorization to operate during March, while
one national NGO in Aleppo was removed from the list. The national NGO in
Aleppo that was removed from the list was a major partner for many United Nations
agencies in the city.
Safety and security of humanitarian personnel and premises
45. On 5 March, two mortar shells landed 150 metres east of the Four Seasons
Hotel in Damascus where United Nations staff reside, causing minor damage to a
room used by WFP.
46. On 10 March, the office of one national NGO operating south-east of Idlib city
was raided by a non-State armed opposition group. None of the staff were in the
building at the time, but some equipment was confiscated. The raids were reportedly
conducted in reaction to the NGO celebration of International Women’s Day on
8 March.
47. On 13 March, one mortar landed on the UNRWA Shafa Amr collective shelter
in Qabun, Damascus, causing minor damage to the building, while three more
landed in the vicinity.
48. On 27 March, one Syrian Arab Red Crescent volunteer and an engineer and
technicians were reportedly killed as a result of an aerial attack while at the Tabaqah
dam in Raqqah to undertake an assessment to conduct repairs and stabilize the dam.
14/23

17-06106

S/2017/339

49. Since the beginning of the conflict, dozens of humanitarian workers have been
killed, including 21 staff members of the United Nations (of which 17 were
UNRWA staff members), 65 staff members and volunteers of the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent and 8 staff members and volunteers of the Palestine Red Crescent Society.
In addition, many staff members of international and national NGOs are reported to
have been killed. A total of 27 United Nations staff, including 1 United Nations
Development Programme staff and 26 UNRWA area staff, are detain ed or currently
missing.

III. Observations
50. I remain deeply troubled by the situation on the ground for civilians in many
parts of the Syrian Arab Republic. Explosive weapons continue to be fired into
populated areas, not only indiscriminately killing and injuring people, but also
destroying and damaging housing and vital infrastructure. The building blocks of
civilian life upon which ordinary Syrians depend continue to be damaged, destroyed
and rendered unusable, including bakeries, water stations, hospitals, schools and
places of worship. As a result, civilians continue to bear the brunt of this crisis each
and every day.
51. Humanitarian deliveries continue to be prevented from reaching the large
number of people who desperately need help. I am concerned about the rise in
administrative and other bureaucratic restrictions by all parties on the ground,
including the Syrian authorities and non-State armed groups and others in Idlib, as
well as local authorities in north-eastern Syria. I salute the tireless efforts of United
Nations humanitarian agencies, the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, ICRC and
international and national NGOs on the ground. They continue to ensure that
millions of people receive assistance each month in a difficult and high -risk
environment. Humanitarians stand ready to scale up these efforts but this requires
all parties to genuinely facilitate the work.
52. I note the recent evacuations from the besieged neighbourhood of Wa‘r in
Homs city as part of a local agreement between the Government and local
representatives in Wa‘r. The United Nations has not been involved in the
negotiations or evacuations around such agreements, which do not appear to meet
international legal standards or adhere to humanitarian principles. The United
Nations has repeatedly expressed its concern at any local agreement that is preceded
by the decimation of an area and results in the forced displacement of some parts of
the civilian population. I would like to remind parties involved in such agreements
that, under international humanitarian law, the forced displacement of civilians for
reasons relating to the conflict is permissible solely in order to guarantee their
security or for imperative military necessity. Forced displacement for any other
reason relating to the conflict is prohibited and may constitute a war crime. Any
evacuation of civilians must be safe, voluntary and to a place of their choosing.
Parties must treat those leaving with dignity and without fear of harm. Those
displaced must be allowed to return voluntarily to their homes as soon as the
situation allows.
53. Round five of the political negotiations in Geneva progressed towards obvious
points of commonality between invitees on the basis of the discussions around the
agreed agenda, not least of which was the assertion by all present that there should
be no constitutional or security vacuum as a negotiated political transition is
implemented. This was an important step and represents a deepening of the process
to include the emergence of other points of commonalities and a greater
understanding of what is required if a political transitional process is to be

17-06106

15/23

S/2017/339

successfully negotiated among Syrians in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015)
and the Geneva communiqué.
54. The steady work undertaken by the invitees should not be underestimated or
dismissed. It is precisely what is required if they are to move further along the track
to a political solution through dialogue to peace. It is ther efore significant that, at
the end of the negotiations, they evinced a willingness to intensify consultations
with the United Nations between negotiations so that further progress may be made
during the next round as quickly as possible to solve the conflict in the country.
Accordingly, notwithstanding the worrying situation on the ground and the likely
continuance of adverse incidents, invitees demonstrated a new maturity and
commitment to continuing the process notwithstanding all the political and milita ry
difficulties.
55. The United Nations continues to call for an adherence to and strengthening of
the ceasefire and continued engagement to ensure that humanitarian aid is received
by those most in need. The linkages between the ceasefire, humanitarian a ccess and
political progress remain a reality. While I am confident that progress can be made
in Geneva, I remain concerned that the scope for success in the political process can
be undermined by the deteriorating reality on the ground, which has an impac t on
civilians more than any actor. I continue to call upon parties on the ground to
commit to the protection of civilians and to continue to engage on political, military
and humanitarian tracks, with a view to ending this conflict.

16/23

17-06106

S/2017/339

Annex
Incidents affecting civilians recorded by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
March 2017a
Rif Dimashq and Damascus governorates
• On 2 March, one civilian was reportedly killed by a ground -based strike in
opposition-held Madaya.
• On 2 March, one civilian was reportedly killed and several wounded in air
strikes that hit a residential area of a non-State armed opposition groupcontrolled part of Harasta.
• On 3 March, one civilian was reportedly killed in air strikes that hit a
residential area of non-State armed opposition group-controlled Irbin.
• On 5 March, one civilian was allegedly killed in ground -based strikes on
non-State armed opposition-held Duma.
• On 7 March, two civilians, including one child, were allegedly killed in air
strikes on the part of Harasta held by non-State armed opposition groups.
• On 9 March, a series of ground-based strikes hit a residential area in non-State
armed opposition group-held Hammurah, resulting in the alleged death of five
civilians, including two women and one child, and injuries to an unknown
number of others.
• On 11 March, two consecutive explosions were reported in the area of Bab
al-Saghir, in the district of Shaghur in central Damascus, allegedly killing at
least 40 people and injuring more than 120 others, including Iraqi citizens,
according to pro-government sources. The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) received a list of 16 names of
members of Syrian security forces who were allegedly killed in the attack but
was unable to independently confirm the number of civilians killed.
• On 12 March, one civilian woman was allegedly killed and another woman
and her two children injured owing to ground-based strikes on opposition-held
Buqayn.
• On 15 March, one civilian was reportedly shot by a sniper in Buqayn on
14 March. He was among the four civilians evacuated to Damascus. However,
he died from his injuries on 17 March.
• On 15 March, two successive explosions occurred in government -held
Damascus: one inside the Palace of Justice in the central area of Hamidiyah
and the other in a restaurant in the Rawda neighbourhood. In the first incident,
OHCHR received a list of 13 lawyers who were reportedly killed in the blast
but was unable to confirm the total number of civilian casualties. Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) claimed responsibility for the two attacks
through an online media outlet known to be affiliated with them. The number
of civilian casualties caused by the second explosion is unknown.
a

17-06106

In line with resolution 2258 (2015), the present description of developments on the ground, and
the incidents during the month that OHCHR has been able to corroborate, relates to the
compliance with resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014) by all parties in the
Syrian Arab Republic. The information is provided without prejudice to the work of the Task
Force on the Ceasefire of the International Syria Support Group. The reporting is not a
comprehensive listing of all violations of international humanitarian law and violations and
abuses of international human rights law that took place in the Syrian Arab Republic during the
reporting period.
17/23

S/2017/339

• On 16 March, one 15-year-old boy was reportedly shot in the head by a sniper
and severely wounded. He survived but was reportedly in urgent need of
surgery.
• On 16 March, one child was allegedly hit in the head by sniper fire in the
vicinity of the Hezbollah-run Shabak checkpoint in Madaya.
• On 18 March, one man with a mental disability was allegedly shot dead by a
sniper near the Hezbollah-run Bin al-Shaikh checkpoint. One of his relatives,
who tried to rescue him, was also struck by sniper fire and reportedly died on
20 March.
• On 19 March, a market in Irbin was hit by ground-based strikes, allegedly
killing five civilians, including one child.
• On 19 March, four members of a local humanitarian group were allegedly
killed in an air strike as they were rescuing civilians following a previous air
strike in non-State armed opposition group-held Jawbar.
• On 19 March, one child was allegedly killed by sniper fire in the vicinity of
the Hezbollah-run Abd al-Majid checkpoint. Another civilian was allegedly
shot in the head by a sniper that same day, near the same checkpoint, and died
on 21 March. One civilian who tried to help him was also reportedly shot and
died two days later.
• On 19 March, one civilian man was reportedly killed as a result of being shot
dead by a sniper near the Bin al-Sheikh checkpoint.
• On 20 March, air strikes reportedly killed two civilians, including one child,
and injured 15 others in non-State armed opposition group-held Hammurah.
• On 22 March, two civilians were allegedly injured owing to ground -based
strikes on the residential area of Sha‘alan, in the centre of Damascus.
• On 25 March, an airstrike hit Rawda and Baladia streets, in Hammurah,
eastern Ghutah, reportedly killing 18 civilians, including 7 women and 3
children, and injuring 70 others, including 25 childre n and 20 women. The
impact reportedly damaged or destroyed some 90 houses, 35 shops and 1
mosque.
Dar‘a governorate
• On 1 March, in the village of Al-Qusayr, the ISIL-affiliated Khalid ibn
al-Walid Army allegedly executed a 40-year-old woman for alleged
“blasphemy” after reportedly depriving her of her liberty for 16 days.
• On 7 March, one child was allegedly killed by an air strike on the non -State
armed opposition group-held town of Sahwa in rural eastern Dar‘a.
• On 10 March, three civilians, including two women, were allegedly killed in
ground-based strikes launched on the government-held area of Sahhari and in
the vicinity of the airport.
• On 11 March, one civilian was reportedly killed in a ground -based strike on
the non-State armed opposition group-held village of Eastern Ghariyah.
• On 12 March, one civilian was reportedly killed and six others injured in a
ground-based strike conducted on the government-controlled part of Dar‘a
city.

18/23

17-06106

S/2017/339

• On 12 March, one doctor treating the wounded near the front line was
allegedly killed in an air strike on the non-State armed opposition group-held
area of Dar‘a Al-Balad, Dar‘a city.
• On 13 March, one medical worker and his wife were reportedly killed in an air
strike on the non-State armed opposition group-held area of Tariq al-Sadd.
• On 14 March, a civilian woman was reportedly killed in an air strike on the
non-State armed opposition group-held town of Sayda in eastern rural Dar‘a.
• On 14 March, one child was reportedly killed owing to ground-based strikes
on the government-controlled Dar‘a neighbourhood of Sahhari. Another child
was reportedly killed on the same day in ground-based strikes on the eastern
part of the Dar‘a Al-Balad area held by non-State armed opposition groups .
• On 17 March, one civilian was reportedly publicly executed in Tasil by the
Khalid ibn al-Walid Army for alleged “blasphemy”.
• On 18 March, one civilian living in Tasil was reportedly killed by ground based strikes.
• On 20 March, one civilian was allegedly killed by an improvised explosive
device close to the city of Khabab in northern Dar‘a.
• On 20 March, two civil defence members were reportedly killed as their car hit
an explosive device in the non-State armed opposition group-held area of
Al-Mukhayyam
• On 21 March, two hors de combat fighters from the city of Nawa were
reportedly executed by Khalid ibn al-Walid Army in the area of Tall
al-Shatara. They had allegedly been kidnapped several months earlier.
Aleppo governorate
• On 4 March, air strikes hit residential areas in the ISIL-controlled district of
Khafsah, near Manbij, reportedly killing four civilians from one family and
injuring three others.
• On 6 March, four civilians, including one woman and one child, were
allegedly killed when an explosive device went off at the outskirts of Khafsah
town in eastern rural Aleppo.
• On 11 March, three civilians were allegedly killed as a result of an explosive
device that detonated in Bab town.
• On 14 March, four civilians were allegedly killed when an explosive device
detonated while they were walking in Bab town in eastern rural Aleppo. While
OHCHR cannot determine who planted the device, ISIL has been known to
plant such explosives in areas under its control, in particular before
withdrawing.
• On 20 March, one woman was killed and her three children injured when air
strikes hit residential areas in non-State armed opposition group-held Ma‘rat
al-Atarib in western rural Aleppo.
• On 22 March, government-allied militias broke in and appropriated empty
houses of civilians in the Sayf al-Dawlah neighbourhood of Aleppo city.
Reports indicated that those responsible claimed that the owners of the houses
were absent and could have fled the country.
• On 23 March, ground-based strikes hit the government-controlled 3000
housing project in the Hamdaniyah area of Aleppo city. The facility reportedly
17-06106

19/23

S/2017/339

hosted many displaced persons from other areas of Aleppo. Five children were
allegedly killed in the strikes — four girls between 8 and 13 years of age and
one boy — and at least three other children were injured. The children were
playing in the street when more than seven mortar rounds fell on the area.
Idlib governorate
• On 5 March, air strikes hit residential areas in Kafr Nubl, south of Idlib,
reportedly killing 6 civilians, including 1 child, and injuring 17 others,
including 1 reporters and 1 news editor at the local Radio Fresh. An on -duty
civil defence volunteer was also injured during the attack.
• On 9 March, air strikes hit residential areas of Kafr Nubl, allegedly killing five
civilians, including three children and one woman. The school of Fadhl
al-Khatib, considered the largest in the area, was hit and damage d.
• On 9 March, two children were reportedly killed when a missile that had failed
to explode on impact later detonated in Jisr al-Shughur.
• On 15 March, several air strikes hit a residential area of Idlib city, allegedly
killing 25 civilians, including 14 children and 6 women. Most of the victims
were reportedly displaced persons from Bab.
• On 16 March, one civilian was reportedly killed and another injured as a result
of an explosion of an improvised explosive device on the road between
Tallmannis and Jarjanaz in Ma‘arrat al-Nu‘man.
• On 18 March, ground-based strikes hit the besieged town of Fu‘ah, allegedly
injuring three civilians, including one woman.
• On 19 March, several air strikes hit residential areas in Idlib city, reportedly
killing five civilians, including two children and two women, and injuring an
unknown number of others. The victims were reportedly internally displaced
persons from northern rural Homs.
• On 19 March, air strikes hit residential areas in the eastern neighbour hood of
Khan Shaykhum city, allegedly killing eight civilians, including three children
and their mother. One of the victims was a displaced person from northern
Hama.
• On 19 March, air strikes hit Arba‘in street, in Idlib city, reportedly killing at
least five civilians, including three children and one woman.
• On 22 March, air strikes hit residential areas in the western neighbourhood of
Jisr al-Shughur, allegedly killing four civilians and injuring five others, and an
on-duty civil defence volunteer. On the same day, other air strikes hit
residential areas of Jisr al-Shughur, injuring three children.
• On 24 March, air strikes hit residential areas of Urum al -Jawz in Ariha,
reportedly killing one woman and her child.
• On 24 March, air strikes hit residential areas in Khan Shaykhum, allegedly
killing two male civilians.
• On 24 March, air strikes hit a court and prison complex run by Jaish Al -Fatah
in Idlib city, reportedly killing at least 15 detainees, including 7 women from
Fu‘ah.
• On 24 March, more air strikes hit residential areas in Idlib city, allegedly
killing two male civilians.

20/23

17-06106

S/2017/339

• On 25 March, air strikes hit residential areas in Khan Shaykhum, reportedly
killing eight civilians, including two women and two children. Some of the
victims were reportedly internally displaced persons from Hama.
• On 25 March, air strikes allegedly hit the surgical hospital of Kafr Nubl,
putting the facility out of service.
• On 25 March, air strikes hit the Faculty of Education at Idlib University,
allegedly injuring one female student.
• On 28 March, air strikes hit residential areas in Jisr al -Shughur, allegedly
killing five civilians, including two women. Four of the vict ims were from the
same family.
• On 29 March, air strikes hit residential areas in Ma‘arrat al -Nu‘man, striking
the Caliph Umar bin Abdul aziz shrine and a bakery. The strikes allegedly
killed 8 civilians, including 6 children, and injured at least 20 ot hers and
caused material damage to the shrine.
Hama governorate
• On 25 March, air strikes hit an underground surgical hospital in non -State
armed opposition group-held Lataminah city, reportedly killing two civilians,
including one doctor who was performing surgery, and injuring 32 others,
including 16 medical workers. OHCHR received reports that toxic agents may
have been used in the attack. Although the attack did not cause significant
damage to the hospital, the facility was closed for a few days, given that some
equipment was reportedly damaged. Two ambulances were reportedly
destroyed.
• On 25 March, several air strikes hit residential areas of Lataminah and its
outskirts, reportedly killing three civilians, two wo men and one child and
injuring an unknown number of others.
• On 25 March, one child was killed and two others severely injured while they
were grazing sheep in Al-Azwar, south of Lataminah.
• On 28 March, air strikes hit a medical centre in non-State armed opposition
group-held Kafr Nabudah, north of Hama, reportedly injuring one medical
worker and causing extensive material damage.
• On 30 March, air strikes hit residential areas in non-State armed opposition
group-held Lataminah, reportedly injuring several civilians. OHCHR spoke to
a doctor at the hospital where victims were treated who reported that
symptoms indicated that a chemical agent may have been used.
Homs governorate
• On 1 March, ground-based strikes hit non-State armed opposition groupcontrolled Talbisah, north of Homs, reportedly killing one woman.
• On 1 March, ground-based strikes hit non-State armed opposition groupcontrolled Wa‘r, allegedly killing one civilian and injuring an undetermined
number of others.
• On 2 March, strikes on Wa‘r allegedly killed 2 civilians and injured 30 others.
• On 3 March, ground-based strikes hit residential areas of Wa‘r, reportedly
killing two civilians and injuring others.
• On 4 March, air strikes hit residential areas in Wa‘r, allegedl y killing 5
civilians and injuring at least 20 others.
17-06106

21/23

S/2017/339

• On 6 March, air strikes hit residential areas in Wa‘r, reportedly killing 2
civilians and injuring 17 others. Furthermore, on 6 March, ground -based
strikes hit residential areas in the government-controlled Ghutah
neighbourhood of Homs, allegedly killing a number of civilians.
• On 14 March, an improvised explosive device placed underneath a bus
exploded in the government-controlled Wadi-al-Dhahab neighbourhood
southeast of Homs city, reportedly injuring seven civilians.
Hasakah governorate
• On 2 March, a young civilian man was allegedly shot and killed by Turkish
border guards while he was overseeing grazing sheep in the rural town of
Malikiyah. He was originally from Qasr al-Dib village in rural Hasakah.
Dayr al-Zawr governorate
• On 8 March, at approximately 13:30, air strikes on ISIL-controlled Mayadin
town, eastern rural Dayr al-Zawr, reportedly hit several residential locations in
Jaish street, close to the Baladiya bakery, two civilian houses and the Abdul
Jabbar al-Obaid school, which was hosting internally displaced persons. At
least 23 civilians were reportedly killed and several others injured. Three of
those allegedly killed were from Mayadin, while the rest were displaced Iraqi
nationals.
• On 15 March, ground-based strikes hit residential areas of ISIL-controlled
Hamidiyah neighbourhood of Dayr al-Zawr city, allegedly killing at least eight
civilians from one family, including two women and a three -day-old infant
girl.
• On 15 March, one woman was reportedly killed whe n a ground-based strike
hit a residential area of the government-held Jurah neighbourhood of Dayr
al-Zawr city.
• On 17 March, ISIL reportedly publicly executed by firing squad six captive
fighters of the Syrian Democratic Forces in Karamah town.
• On 18 March, ground-based strikes hit residential areas of Jurah and Qusur
neighbourhoods of Dayr al-Zawr city, reportedly injuring four civilians.
Raqqah governorate
• On 8 March, at least 14 civilians were reportedly killed, including 4 women
and 6 children, when air strikes hit residential areas of ISIL -controlled Matabb
Albu Rashid village, eastern rural Raqqah.
• On 16 March, ISIL fighters deprived six male civilians of their liberty on the
ground that they had smuggled civilians to areas outside I SIL control. The men
were reportedly taken from their homes in various neighbourhoods of Raqqah
city. Their whereabouts remained unknown at the time of writing the present
report.
• On 17 March, another three men were allegedly held by ISIL fighters on the
same ground in Tabaqah town, western rural Raqqah.
• On 17 March, one woman was reportedly killed and seven other civilians,
including one woman, injured when fighters of the Syrian Democratic Forces
opened fire on their minibus close to Khass Hibal and Khass Ujayl villages in
rural Raqqah. Originally from those villages, the civilians have been displaced
and were reportedly trying to return to their homes.

22/23

17-06106

S/2017/339

• On 19 March, air strikes hit residential areas in ISIL -controlled Mazra‘at
al-Andalus village, in western rural Raqqah, reportedly killing 14 civilians,
including 2 women and 5 children, and injuring at least 23 others.
• On 19 March, five children were reportedly killed when an explosive device
detonated close to them while they were playing near the closed Gharbiyah
school in Huzaymah town in northern rural Raqqah.
• On 20 March, airstrikes hit various residential areas of Tabaqah town,
including Shari‘ al-Arid, Furn al-Ali and houses near the Kanisah roundabout,
reportedly killing 16 civilians, including 6 women and 3 children, and injuring
52 others.
• On 21 March, near Mansurah town, western rural Raqqah, air strikes hit
Badiya school, which was hosting displaced persons from Tadmur (Palmyra)
and Homs for the past three years. Reports indicated that there were at least 25
to 30 internally displaced families in the school at the time of the incident.
According to initial reports, at least 46 civilians were killed, including women
and children, and many others were injured.
• On 22 March, air strikes reportedly hit a bakery and adjacent local market in
Al-Hay al-Thani (the second neighbourhood) of Tabaqah. Initial reports
indicated that at least 37 civilians had been killed, including 5 women and 2
children, and 52 others injured. Sources on the ground claimed that no ISIL
installations/personnel were present at the time of the attacks.
• On 27 March, initial reports indicate that the manager of the Tabaqah dam
engineering team and his technical assistant were allegedly killed and at least
three other employees injured when air strikes hit close to the dam.
• On 30 March, air strikes carried out at dawn on ISIL -controlled Mansurah
village in western rural Raqqah hit a civilian house, reportedly killing a
mother and her four children aged between three months and 7 years and
injuring the father.

17-06106

23/23
