S/PV.7364

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7364th meeting

Wednesday, 21 January 2015, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Barros Melet .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Chile)

Members:

Angola .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mr. Bertoux
Mr. Omaish
Mr. Baublys
Mr. Haniff
Mr. Taula
Mr. Laro
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Shearman
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
The situation in Burundi
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Office in Burundi (S/2015/36)

15-01838 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1501838*

S/PV.7364

The situation in Burundi

The meeting was called to order at 11.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Burundi
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Office in Burundi (S/2015/З6)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Burundi to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, and His Excellency Mr. Paul Seger, Permanent
Representative of Switzerland and Chair of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, to
participate in the meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
Mr. Feltman: I am pleased to brief the Security
Council on the final report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Office in Burundi (BNUB).
As members of the Council know, the report before
the Council (S/2015/36) reviews the progress made in
implementing the mandate of BNUB since 31 July 2014.
It also takes stock of the overall mandate implementation
of United Nations peacekeeping and political missions in
Burundi since 2004. Further, it presents an assessment
of the remaining challenges facing Burundi, after the
closure of BNUB on 31 December.
In accordance with Security Council resolution
2137 (2014), BNUB ended its drawdown and its mandate
on 31 December. I joined Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Onanga-Anyanga in Bujumbura
to mark the symbolic closure of the Office on
12 December during my visit to Burundi and had the
pleasure to co-chair a warm flag-lowering ceremony
with the Minister of External Affairs and International
Cooperation.
As the Council is aware, Burundi has made
substantial progress, overcoming formidable challenges
since the end of the civil war. Burundi has adopted
power-sharing as a system of governance, established
ethnically balanced institutions and held regular
elections, and remains committed to the promise of
2/9

21/01/2015

national reconciliation. Burundi is much safer and
secure than it was a decade ago. These achievements,
and the spirit of the Arusha Accords on which they
were built, are first and foremost attributable to the
determination of the Burundians to break with the past
and work towards a peaceful, democratic and prosperous
nation. It is also the result of a remarkable level of
steady engagement of regional countries, the United
Nations and international partners, demonstrating that
concerted international action can yield positive results.
Let me emphasize some of the key challenges
that Burundi still faces. The spirit of Arusha, with its
principles of dialogue, consensus and democracy, has
eroded since the 2010 elections as political polarization
continues to hamper efforts to consolidate peace,
democracy and development. Concerns remain about
shrinking political space, restrictions of the right to
free assembly and expression, and the challenges of
building an independent justice system, which is a
critical element of a functioning democracy. Much
greater efforts are also required to strengthen propoor economic growth and to create employment
opportunities, especially for the country’s youth.
Organizing peaceful and credible elections is one
of the most pressing challenges facing Burundi this
year. As previous elections, the 2015 elections present
Burundians with the opportunity to further strengthen
peace-consolidation efforts undertaken since the Arusha
Accords. For that to happen, it would be desirable for
the following requirements to be met: First, it is critical
that the Independent National Electoral Commission
manage the electoral process in an inclusive manner,
with integrity, impartiality and independence.
Secondly, Burundians, regardless of party affiliation,
must be free to exercise their civil and political
rights, including their rights to freedom of expression
and peaceful assembly. Moreover, it behooves the
Government to ensure that opposition parties and their
leaders are able to fully participate in the electoral
process. Conversely, opposition parties must play their
part, remain engaged throughout the electoral process
and use peaceful and democratic means to address all
electoral disputes.
Thirdly, it is the responsibility of the Government
to prevent violence without impinging on the people’s
rights to freedom of expression and peaceful assembly
by ensuring that State officials and security forces act
impartially and in line with the law.

15-01838

21/01/2015

The situation in Burundi

Finally, individuals committing unlawful acts of
political violence must be prosecuted without delay.
As requested by the Council, the United Nations
Electoral Observer Mission in Burundi (MENUB)
started operations on 1 January with the mandate to
follow and report on the electoral process in Burundi
before, during and after the 2015 elections. Special Envoy
Uteem undertook his first visit to Burundi from 3 to
17 January, during which he held fruitful meetings with
Government officials and members of the diplomatic
corps in Bujumbura. He also inaugurated MENUB in
the presence of political party leaders, representatives
of civil society organizations and the diplomatic corps.
Regrettably, Government officials, the president of the
Commission électorale nationale indépendante (CENI)
and representatives of the ruling Conseil national pour
la défense de la démocratie-Forces pour la défense de la
démocratie (CNDD-FDD) did not attend the ceremony,
as the status of mission agreement had not been signed.
We signed that agreement yesterday and believe that
the Government will do so today.
Clashes at the border with the Democratic
Republic of the Congo between the Burundian army
and armed groups have decreased sharply since July
2014. However, on 30 December, the Burundian army
reported clashing with an unidentified armed group
of approximately 100 to 200 members entering from
neighbouring Democratic Republic of the Congo into
Burundi’s Cibitoke province. Over the course of several
days, the Burundian army reportedly defeated the
group, killing between 95 and 105 of its members. The
Government did not formally identify the attackers,
and no-one has claimed responsibility for the clash.
In another incident, on 4 January, five unidentified
gunmen dressed in military fatigues executed three
members of the ruling CNDD-FDD in a bar in Ruyigi
province, some 250 kilometres east of Bujumbura. If
not managed carefully, incidents such as those, at a
time of elections, could heighten political tensions.
Beyond the elections, Burundi faces challenges
no less critical. Improvements in health, education,
employment and infrastructure need to be at the
heart of the political debate if the country’s leaders
are committed to placing the national interest above
all others. The Government will need to broaden
political space and allow democratic institutions
to provide the checks and balances essential for a
functioning democracy, especially if it wants to forge
broader consensus in policy formulation. Security

S/PV.7364

and justice sector institutions will require sustained
professionalization and capacity-building, especially if
they are to retain the public trust.
Addressing the remaining challenges will require
the efforts of all Burundians and sustained support
from Burundi’s development partners. The joint
communiqué of the Burundi partners conference of
12 December re-emphasized the mutual commitments
of the Government and its partners adopted at the
2012 Geneva Partners Conference. As part of its
commitments, the Government guaranteed a credible,
inclusive and peaceful electoral process, while
international and regional partners pledged to continue
to support the country’s peace consolidation and
socioeconomic development efforts.
In that regard, I am pleased to note that the United
Nations will continue to provide support through the
Peacebuilding Fund to enhance political dialogue and
social cohesion, youth participation in political and
socioeconomic life, human rights and the resolution of
land disputes.
I would like to underscore the importance of
the Security Council’s support for regional peace
and security efforts. The Council’s support for the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region presents an opportunity in that respect.
The African Union, the East African Community and
the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
all have important roles to play in that regard.
In concluding, I would like to take this opportunity
to thank the people and the Government of Burundi
for the cooperation extended to BNUB, including
the seamless and timely completion of the mission’s
drawdown and exit. I would like to thank the former
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, for his outstanding
leadership and all BNUB staff for their contribution
to the United Nations efforts in Burundi. I would also
like to reiterate our appreciation to the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Peacebuilding Fund and all bilateral
donors for the fruitful partnership for peacebuilding in
Burundi.
Finally, I thank the Council for its continued
commitment to Burundi through the deployment of
United Nations field presences in the country over the
past 10 years.

15-018383/9

S/PV.7364

The situation in Burundi

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Feltman for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Seger.
Mr. Seger (spoke in French): Let me, at the outset,
thank the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, who has just spoken, for his very
comprehensive briefing and his personal commitment
to the cause of Burundi. We had the pleasure to cross
paths in Bujumbura in mid-December 2014 and to
jointly attend several meetings, including the closing
ceremony for the United Nations Office in Burundi
(BNUB), on 12 December, which he mentioned. Also,
Mr. Feltman’s participation in the round-table meeting
between the Government and its main international
partners on 11 and 12 December was an important
factor for its success.
Let me also welcome the presence of the Burundian
representative and my dear friend, His Excellency
Mr. Albert Shingiro, who was also in Burundi during
my trip and whose personal engagement was decisive
for the adoption of the joint declaration in Bujumbura.
Since today’s briefing is the last one on BNUB,
I would like to join with others in expressing my
gratitude to the former Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, my dear friend Mr. Parfait OnangaAnyanga, and his team for their outstanding efforts
for the Burundian nation and for our partnership in
this common endeavour. However, despite BNUB’s
departure — and I am sure Parfait would concur with
me on this — it is not yet time to look to the past. On the
contrary, our focus should be on the future. The stakes
are too high, especially in the context of the electoral
process, to allow us to lower our guard.

21/01/2015

credible, inclusive and peaceful. In that regard, I
especially welcome President Nkurunziza’s personal
commitment to free, inclusive and peaceful elections,
as expressed at the opening of the round-table meeting.
The joint communiqué adopted at the end of the round
table is a very promising step, and it is my hope that
going forward it will serve as a guiding document for
all of us. I appeal both to the Government of Burundi
and to international partners to fully implement the
political commitments made in the joint communiqué.
Let me now turn to three main points that, in my
view, merit particular attention from the Council: first,
the current security situation; secondly, the United
Nations presence on the ground; and, thirdly, the future
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).
I fully share the concerns expressed by UnderSecretary-General Jeffrey Feltman regarding the recent
acts of violence in the provinces of Cibitoke and Ruyigi,
which, unfortunately, resulted in a significant number
of victims. Those recent attacks, as well as all recourse
to violent means for political ends, must be firmly
condemned. Given that uncertainties persist regarding
the identity of the armed groups and the exact nature of
the hostilities, I strongly recommend that the competent
national authorities carry out investigations into the
events in a quick and impartial manner. As long as the
facts have not been established, rumours will spread
and aggravate the already tense political environment
in the run-up to the elections. I am convinced that an
impartial investigation could serve as a much-needed
confidence-building measure.

In my capacity as Chair of the Burundi
configuration, I visited Burundi from 8 to 12 December
2014 together with the Assistant Secretary-General
for Peacebuilding Support, Mr. Oscar FernandezTaranco. Since I already transmitted a detailed report
to the Council, which was attached to my letter dated
30 December 2014 (S/2014/954), I will address only the
most important aspect, the round-table meeting.

In the same vein, I also strongly condemn the attack
on 4 January by unidentified assailants on supporters of
the ruling party, the Conseil national pour la défense de
la démocratie-Forces pour la défense de la démocratie
(CNDD-FDD), near the border with Tanzania, that
claimed three lives. Those incidents have shown once
again that despite BNUB’s drawdown, we — and here
I include the Council — must remain vigilant. The
electoral phase is getting into full swing and is creating
tensions that need be carefully managed. We would be
ill-advised to be lulled into complacency at this point.

I was heartened by the discussions we had during
the two-day event on important issues such as the
follow-up to the mutual commitments taken in Geneva
in 2012, the implications of BNUB’s drawdown on the
wider international cooperation between Burundi and
its partners, and the future prospects for the partnership,
assuming that the elections will be free, transparent,

It goes without saying that violence, by whomsoever
committed, should have no place in Burundi. In the
context of the electoral process, the only viable option
for all Burundian stakeholders is the path of dialogue,
based on the spirit of Arusha. This cannot be stressed
enough. Only a truly inclusive political dialogue and an
open political space that ensures the protection of all

4/9

15-01838

21/01/2015

The situation in Burundi

public liberties and rights for all can lay the groundwork
for genuinely free, fair, peaceful and credible elections.
Let me now turn to my second point. The presence
of the United Nations on the ground is undergoing
substantial changes. The United Nations country team,
headed by the Resident Coordinator; the new electoral
mission, the United Nations Electoral Observer
Mission in Burundi (MENUB); and the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights must work
hand in hand to ensure maximum impact. Also, the
Government must continue to cooperate with the entire
United Nations family constructively and in good faith.
Following BNUB’s drawdown, the electoral
mission MENUB was officially inaugurated at a
ceremony in Bujumbura on Monday, 12 January, as the
Assistant Secretary-General noted. I welcome today’s
signing of the status-of-mission agreement, which
forms the basis for constructive cooperation between
the Burundian Government and MENUB. I trust that
MENUB will now be able to play the role with which
it has been entrusted by the Security Council, and as
requested by the Burundian Government, including
engaging with all political actors in Burundi. We had
the pleasure to welcome the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General and Head of MENUB, Mr. Cassam
Uteem, at a Steering Group meeting of the Burundi
configuration on 22 December, and I very much look
forward to closely cooperating with him and his team
throughout the electoral period.
With BNUB’s mandate at an end, the United Nations
country team, headed by the Resident Coordinator, now
leads the United Nations presence on the ground. In a
bilateral meeting with UNDP Administrator Ms. Helen
Clark last week, assured me that her office is well aware
of, and taking the measures necessary to accommodate,
the specific needs resulting from the current political
context in view of the upcoming elections, including
the appointment of the new Resident Coordinator, who,
I have been told, has been selected and has the right
profile. Ms. Clark also promised to accelerate the process
of translating the latest grant of the Peacebuilding Fund
(PBF), totaling $11.65 million, into impactful projects
in order to support Burundi’s peaceful transition.
One of the PBF projects that is ready for
implementation is the establishment of a network of
human rights defenders to be deployed throughout the
country. The project was elaborated over the past nine
months in agreement and in close cooperation with

S/PV.7364

Burundi. That observation network would be a very
welcome addition to the measures taken to protect
and promote the full respect of human rights and
fundamental freedoms during the electoral period. As
Burundi recently reiterated its commitment to pursue
the promotion of all public freedoms and to ensure the
protection of all human rights defenders in the roundtable communiqué of 12 December 2014, I urge all
parties involved to redouble their efforts so as to ensure
the prompt deployment of the network.
I was also informed that there are important
outstanding staffing needs within the United Nations
country team, particularly in the Resident Coordinator’s
office. Given the importance of a well-functioning
country team, I strongly encourage Member States to
consider closing the capacity gaps by seconding staff
to the office.
Similarly, the OHCHR bureau is in dire need of
financial stability and operational predictability, and
has for this reason already lost experienced staff in
Burundi. Human rights support and monitoring remain
as important as ever in Burundi, and I therefore urge
Member States to contribute the necessary financial
resources to the OHCHR, to wit, $2.2 million per year.
I thank the Peacebuilding Fund and Germany for their
substantial support in this regard and hope that others
will follow suit as soon as possible.
My third and last point pertains to the future of
the PBC. As indicated in my report, my designated
successor as Permanent Representative, Ambassador
Jurg Lauber, joined me on my last trip to Burundi,
primarily to show Switzerland’s commitment to carry
on with the mandate in case Burundi wishes to remain
on the PBC’s agenda. We specifically raised this issue
at our meeting with the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Laurent Kavakure; of course, the question of
whether Burundi wants to carry on with the PBC must
first and foremost be answered by the Government. I
see merit in continuing the engagement beyond this
year’s elections, for two reasons in particular.
First, the PBC would ensure an element of continuity
in the accompaniment of the country. BNUB is already
gone, and MENUB’s mandate will also expire in the
aftermath of the elections. The PBC can help smooth
the effects of this transition by remaining engaged
through its three main pillars: political support,
resource mobilization and the promotion of coherence
in international assistance.

15-018385/9

S/PV.7364

The situation in Burundi

Secondly, and depending on the success of the
electoral process, the PBC could in future focus even
more on socioeconomic development. Here I fully agree
with the Assistant Secretary-General that the economic
aspect is very important. The current four-year poverty
reduction strategy paper will expire in 2016, and,
consequently, a new one will have to be elaborated
and promoted in order to attract investment. Given
the Burundi configuration’s ability to convene and
the experience it gained in the context of the Geneva
process, it could play an important role in supporting
the dialogue on the second poverty reduction strategy
paper development strategy and in supporting its
implementation.
The PBC could also look into the possibility of
creating an international forum aimed at attracting
private investment in Burundi. I have already raised this
issue with the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
to the Great Lakes Region, Mr. Said Djinnit, and could
further explore it with the World Bank and the African
Development Bank. Continuing close cooperation with
international financial institutions would certainly
remain a pillar for future Peacebuilding Commission
engagement. In that regard, I warmly welcome the
World Bank decision, taken 13 January during a Board
of Directors meeting convened by the Swiss Executive
Director, to allocate $25 million to support economic
reform and to remain attentive to the situation in
Burundi.
Ultimately, the decision whether or not to continue
the involvement of the Peacebuilding Commission
will have to be taken by Burundi itself following
discussion within the configuration. To that end, I am
currently preparing a working document to guide our
consideration of the matter.
In the meantime, I will continue to fully discharge
my duties as Chair of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission throughout the electoral
process. I intend to visit the country two more times,
in April and June/July, before my own departure. As
per usual practice, I will continue to keep the Council
informed on the activities of the configuration, and on
my trips in particular, knowing that the Council will
remain firmly engaged in Burundi throughout the
crucial electoral period.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. Seger
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Burundi.

6/9

21/01/2015

Mr. Shingiru (Burundi) (spoke in French): As
this is the first time I take the floor, Sir, under your
presidency, let me first congratulate you personally and
your country on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of January 2015.
Rest assured of the full cooperation of the Burundian
delegation during your tenure.
Before entering the heart of the matter that brings
us together this morning, let me also thank you for
convening this important meeting on the latest report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Office
in Burundi (BNUB) (S/2015/36). We also thank
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for his extremely detailed briefing and
special interest in our country, Burundi. We recall the
strong and constructive message he delivered during
his last visit to Burundi, in mid-December, and his wise
counsel during the 12 December 2014 meeting with the
President of the Republic shortly after the BNUB flaglowering ceremony. I would also like to thank Mr. Parfait
Onanga Anyanga, former Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Burundi, for the excellent work
he did while posted in Bujumbura. We particularly
appreciate that he brought a successful conclusion to
the enormous work he was able to accomplish in our
country in such a short time.
I will focus on four main areas, namely, the electoral
process under way with a view to general elections in
2015, a few words on the round table following the
Geneva Conference on Burundi held in mid-December
2014 in Bujumbura, and an overview of the security
situation. And of course, afterwards I will also make
a few general comments on the report (S/2015/36)
submitted for the Council’s consideration today.
As the Council is aware, the year 2015 will be
one of general elections in Burundi. As elsewhere, the
Government has taken care to entrust this important
event to the Commission électorale nationale
indépendante (CENI), which was set up by consensus.
The preparatory process is therefore under way, and an
important step has just been taken with the completion
of the electoral enrolment operation throughout the
national territory and in Burundian Embassies abroad.
The operation went very smoothly overall despite the
observance in some areas of a few isolated cases of
logistical irregularities. Those irregularities will not,
however, undermine the entire оperatiоn.
As the report recommends in paragraph 63, the
Government is committed to doing everything in
15-01838

21/01/2015

The situation in Burundi

its power to ensure that the 2015 elections are free,
democratic, inclusive, transparent and take place in
a peaceful climate. The Electoral Code, the code of
conduct and the road map that have been set up by
consensus are, in our view, essential to ensure the
smooth conduct of the elections. In paragraph 65
of the report, the Secretary-General expresses his
certainty that those instruments, which were adopted
by consensus, are essential to the continuation of the
process. We agree with him.
The Council may have heard in certain political
circles and civil society allegations of an attempt to
manipulate the elections. The report refers to that in
paragraph 15. Those unfounded concerns are from one
of the opposition parties. I must say here that, after
having heard those accusations, which were based
on isolated and minor cases, the Government and
CENI launched messages of appeasement to call on
Burundian politicians, civil society and the media to
adopt responsible language and behaviour that respect
the principles of democracy and tolerance — behavior
that would take into account the political culture of our
population, bearing in mind the fact that Burundi is a
young, still-developing democracy. The quality of the
electoral process will depend in part on the experience
accumulated gradually since the 2005 elections.
At the meeting on 22 December 2014 between CENI
and electoral process stakeholders on the evaluation of
the voter enrolment, participants had an opportunity to
share concerns about technical and policy solutions that
will help CENI complete the finishing touches on the
provisional election register. In that connection we have
established a regular and open debate on all the matters
raised. As the Council is aware, we have championed
dialogue since the Arusha Accords, and we will not
shirk our responsibilty. Moreover, the report even
acknowledges, in paragraph 64, the strong commitment
of the Government of Burundi to maintain a frank and
ongoing dialogue on the matter.
We would like to take this opportunity to once again
express the gratitude of the Government of Burundi to
all partners that have already provided financial and
material support to the electoral process. The latest to
sign the financing convention to support the ongoing
electoral process was the European Union, with an
amount of €8 million. Of course, we invite all those
who wish to do so to act promptly.
We also greatly appreciate the countries and
international organizations that have agreed to send

S/PV.7364

electoral observation missions before, during and
after the elections in order to put an end to partisan
speculation such as that which occurred in 2010 with
the unjustified boycott by certain political parties. We
hope that they will not commit the same error this year,
because the empty-chair policy does not benefit anyone.
Even without popular support, one must play the game.
In that regard, we welcome the appointment of
the Head of the United Nations Electoral Observation
Mission in Burundi (MENUB), Mr. Cassam Uteem and
we wish him every success in his new duties. He can
count on the cooperation of my Government to that
effect. The status of mission agreement on MENUB
staff has just been finalized between the two parties,
allowing his team to work on the ground on a solid legal
basis.
As we all know, elections are actually a sign of a
properly functioning democracy — because democracy
is the set of facts and actions of the daily life of
citizens with respect to themselves and the institutions
that govern them. Democracy cannot develop in a
fragmented, divided society where there is distrust.
In that context, the Government of Burundi has just
established the Truth and Reconciliation Commission,
and the 11 individuals who will serve as commissioners
were elected in a climate of transparency.
As the Council knows, Burundi is currently
moving from the post-conflict phase to the sustainable
socioeconomic development phase. The continuing
reconstruction of the country and the long and
arduous journey to the harmonious development of
the Burundian people require enormous resources that
Burundi cannot afford on its own. In that framework,
on 11 and 12 December 2014 in Bujumbura, we held
with our partners a round table between Burundi
and its main development partners. We engaged in a
dialogue wherein we took stock of the current strategic
framework for growth and poverty reduction by
highlighting the progress achieved and the challenges
that remain in implementing our mutual commitments.
We thank Ambassador Seger for using his expertise
to facilitate the negotiations and the adoption of the
joint communiqué that led to the round table. We call
on our partners to review the document so that the
commitments reiterated at the Club du Lac Hotel in
Bujumbura will become a reality.
With regard to security and stability, Burundi is
a very safe country, as the Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs mentioned early in his briefing,

15-018387/9

S/PV.7364

The situation in Burundi

except for a few isolated cases of crime in some parts
of the country. Peace and security prevail throughout
the nation’s territory and people go about their normal
activities, as the report acknowledges in paragraph
20. The Government has pledged to stem all forms
of crime and disruptions to peace and security. It is
worth mentioning that at the end of December 2014,
while people were preparing to celebrate the end of
the year, Burundi experienced an infiltration, from the
neighbouring territory of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, of a column of armed men who were quickly
subdued by our courageous soldiers.
We once again reject the choice of violence as a way
to achieve political gains in our country. As the report
of the Secretary-General indicates in paragraph 59, my
country has come a long way. Burundi has suffered
greatly through cycles of violence and peace was
hard won, thanks to the peace agreements, including
the Arusha Accords. For us, this is an achievement
to be preserved. The use of violence is unacceptable
and must give way to a war of ideas and development
programmes.
Speaking of our restored peace that we have
regained thanks to the support of the international
community, we will continue to support peace,
Burundi shall express its gratitude by participating in
peacekeeping missions, particularly in Somalia and the
Central African Republic. For us, it is a badge of honour
to be among the first francophone troop-contributing
countries. We take this opportunity to launch again an
appeal to the international community to provide more
support to our troops who are doing excellent work on
the ground far from their families.
I now turn to the report submitted for the Council’s
consideration. In section C of the report, paragraphs 24
and 25, reference is made to the process of establishing
the transitional justice mechanisms. I spoke earlier
about the Truth and Reconciliation Commission that
is already in place. Now the international community
must provide sufficient support to the Commission to
carry out its mission.
With regard to section D of the report on
governance and institution-building, the Government
of Burundi will continue to work to combat corruption
and seek to address the remaining challenges in this
area, which is an ongoing battle. In that regard, we
thank our technical and financial partners for their
support to the institutions that fight corruption and
promote good governance in our country. Of course, we
8/9

21/01/2015

thank our local partners in civil society, who continue
to contribute to the common fight against the scourge
of corruption. They know who they are. I cannot name
them all here as I might forget some.
In terms of the rule of law, as addressed in section E,
it would be idealistic to want to establish a perfect rule
of law. As the Council knows, the rule of law is an ideal
that no country in the world has fully achieved. Despite
this, the Government has taken commendable initiatives
towards this ideal or at least to try to approximate it. This
is the case particularly when we look at the holding of
the National Conference on Justice, the drafting of the
strategic plan on judicial ethics of the Supreme Council
of Magistrates, the review of the legal framework for
prisons and correctional institutions and so forth. Even
if these efforts were overlooked by the drafters of the
report, these are the facts and they have produced
tangible results, even though many challenges remain.
With regard to the promotion and protection of
human rights in section F of the report, we welcome
the fact that the report recognizes that the country has
seen significant progress and a marked decrease in the
number of what the report calls extrajudicial killings
and the political violence of young people who are
affiliated with political parties. In that respect, we
recall that the fight against impunity remains a priority
for the Government.
As for section G on social and economic development,
we recall that Burundi, like most developing countries,
cannot attain the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs) by the deadline. However, remarkable progress
has been made in the areas of education and health. In
any case, development assistance must be reconsidered
to accelerate the achievement of the MDGs, which still
have not been met in our countries, and the post-2015
agenda is a good opportunity to do so. The conference
on financing for development to be held in Addis Ababa,
Ethiopia in July will be important in that regard.
On issues related to peacebuilding addressed in
section C of Chapter IV on cross-cutting issues, the
United Nations country team which has just taken over
from BNUB will have to implement the peacebuilding
priority plan for 2014-2016, which is the result of an
inclusive process.
With regard to BNUB and its transformation into
a country team, addressed in Chapter V of the report,
let me recall that the lowering of the BNUB flag took
place on 12 December 2014 in the presence of the

15-01838

21/01/2015

The situation in Burundi

two co-Chairs of the ceremony, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman,
who is present in the Chamber, and Mr. Laurent
Kavakure, Burundian Minister for External Relations
and International Cooperation. It must be said that this
symbolic gesture was the expression of two desires:
first, that of the Government of Burundi, which was
eager to move forward and fully appropriate the national
peacebuilding process, which is now in a mature phase,
as has been the case since 2005; and, secondly, that
of the Security Council, as expressed in its resolution
2137 (2014) of 13 February 2014.
We rightly acknowledge that BNUB, under the
enlightened leadership of Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga,

S/PV.7364

has carried out work in political dialogue, protecting
human rights and strengthening the institutional
capacity of the Government and civil society and has
supported the election process under way. The United
Nations, of which the Council is a part, can be proud of
having contributed to this shared success.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.

15-018389/9
