S/PV.9101

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9101st meeting

Wednesday, 27 July 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Costa Filho. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Brazil)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mrs. Onanga
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco
Ms. Juul
Ms. Agaronova
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Ms. Jacobs
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-44023 (E)
*2244023*

S/PV.9101

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peacebuilding and sustaining peace
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
His Excellency Mr. Osama Mahmoud Abdelkhalek
Mahmoud, Permanent Representative of Egypt, in
his capacity as former Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission; and Mr. Md Monwar Hossain, Chargé
d’affaires a.i. of Bangladesh to the United Nations, in
his capacity as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Mahmoud.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt): I thank you, Sir, for
availing me of this opportunity to brief the Security
Council on the annual report of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) on its fifteenth session, under
Egypt’s chairmanship (S/2022/89).
Egypt assumed the PBC chairmanship in the wake
of the successful conclusion of the third comprehensive
review of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture.
Throughout 2021, in line with the mandates contained
in the twin resolutions of the General Assembly and
Security Council (resolution 2282 (2016) and General
Assembly resolution 70/262), the Commission led
efforts towards the operationalization of the review
outcome as contained in the 2020 twin resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council (resolution
2558 (2020) and General Assembly resolution 75/201),
including by exploring avenues to strengthen the PBC’s
advisory, bridging and convening roles, with particular
focus on enhancing the impact of peacebuilding at the
field level.
In that connection, it gives me great pleasure
to report to the Council that the Peacebuilding
Commission achieved considerable progress across the
following areas in 2021.
First, with regard to expanding the scope of the
PBC’s geographic and substantive focus, in 2021 the
Commission engaged in support of 13 country- and
region-specific settings, including holding meetings for
the first time on the Gulf of Guinea and the transition
2/19

27/07/2022

in Chad. With that addition, the Commission engaged
with a total of 23 different countries and regions,
which is the highest number since its inception and
consistent with the overall trend of increasing the
engagements of the Commission. The Commission’s
thematic engagements, which made up 40 per cent
of its meetings, considered new themes, including
interlinkages between peacekeeping and peacebuilding,
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
security sector reform, the report of the SecretaryGeneral entitled Our Common Agenda (A/75/982) and
mental health and psychosocial support. In addition, the
Commission produced a total of 66 outcome documents.
They included remarks delivered at non-United Nations
forums, such as the Aswan Forum for Sustainable
Peace and Development and the Stockholm Forum on
Security and Development, increasing from zero in
2020 to nine in 2021.
Secondly, with regard to strengthening the PBC
advisory and bridging roles, the Commission further
expanded and strengthened its relations with the General
Assembly, the Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council through the designation of informal
coordinators for the Commission’s relations with those
organs and better alignment of their programmes
of work, in addition to the Commission providing
advice nine times to the Security Council, four times
to the General Assembly and three submissions to the
Economic and Social Council.
In order to list only a few, I will mention that, in
2021, the Commission advised the Security Council for
the first time on the Great Lakes region, and the General
Assembly on the causes of conflict and the promotion
of durable peace and sustainable development in
Africa. The Commission also briefed the Economic and
Social Council during the High-Level Political Forum
on Sustainable Development. Moreover, throughout its
engagements, the Commission continued to convene all
relevant United Nations stakeholders, with a view to
improve coordination and avoid the fragmentation and
duplication of work.
Thirdly, with regard to fostering effective
partnerships in peacebuilding, the Commission
solidified the trend of increased engagement with
partners outside the United Nations, with non-United
Nations briefers comprising 67 per cent of all
briefers at the Commission’s meetings. That included
national and local Government officials; regional and
subregional organizations; civil society organizations,
22-44023

27/07/2022

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

including
youth
representatives,
international
financial institutions and private sector companies;
and representatives of academia, think tanks and
independent experts.
Moreover, the Commission engaged for the first
time with the World Trade Organization (WTO) and
joined its Trade for Peace Network, which aims at
facilitating the accession of conflict-affected countries
to the WTO. The Commission also held the fourth
informal consultative meeting with the African Union
Peace and Security Council, which called for more
frequent exchanges between the two intergovernmental
bodies and a strategic alignment of their programmes
of work.
Fourthly, with regard to advancing the discussion
on financing for peacebuilding, in recognizing
peacebuilding financing as a critical challenge, the
Commission advanced the discussion on financing
with a view to assess the status of options introduced
by the Secretary-General since 2018, in addition to
exploring other possible options. The Commission’s
work throughout the year culminated with its annual
session and the submission of the PBC letter to the
General Assembly, which encouraged the latter to
consider all financing options, including voluntary,
assessed and innovative sources of funding. We look
forward to the successful conclusion of the recently
launched intergovernmental negotiations to translate
Member States’ commitments into concrete actions.
Fifthly, with regard to advancing the implementation
of the women and peace and security and the youth,
peace and security agendas, the Commission adopted
action plans on both agendas and continued to take
concrete action to enhance the important role of women
and youth in peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
I would like to share some statistics drawn from
a stocktaking exercise conducted last year. It revealed
that a concerted effort was made during 2021, with
91 per cent of the Commission’s outcome documents
promoting the importance of women’s full, equal and
meaningful participation in peacebuilding, in addition
to a significant increase in women’s participation in
the meetings of the Commission, from 22 per cent in
2019 to 74 per cent in 2021. It has also shown that the
Commission continued to amplify the voices of women
and brought their recommendations to the attention
of the Security Council. Similarly, the Commission
recorded a significant increase in the participation rate

S/PV.9101

of youth who briefed the Commission, from 5.4 per cent
in 2020 to 44.4 per cent in 2021.
Lastly, with regard to promoting recovery from
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, in
2021 the Commission continued to consider, through
its national and regional engagements, the impact of
the COVID-19 pandemic on national peacebuilding
objectives, in addition to mobilizing international
support and attention to build the most-needed human
and institutional capacities, in line with the nationally
identified peacebuilding priorities.
In conclusion, the Peacebuilding Commission,
as an intergovernmental advisory body that supports
peacebuilding efforts, continued to play a critical
role in enhancing effective multilateralism by
positioning itself as a platform for global solidarity and
coordination in response to the growing demand for
peacebuilding support.
The President: I thank Mr. Mahmoud for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Hossain.
Mr. Hossain (Bangladesh): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this meeting on peacebuilding and sustaining
peace. At the outset, I wish to congratulate Egypt, and
Ambassador Osama Mahmoud Abdelkhalek Mahmoud
in particular for his excellent work as the Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) in 2021.
As manifested in its annual report (S/2022/89),
the Commission indeed made significant progress
in strengthening its role during its fifteenth session,
particularly its bridging, advisory and convening role. In
building on that upward trajectory, in 2022 Bangladesh,
as the Chair, aimed to adopt a more ambitious and
forward-looking agenda for the Commission. To that
end, an ambassadorial-level meeting was convened
prior to the drafting of its programme of work,
which was attended by the PBC members as well as
representatives of the countries and region who engage
or seek to engage with the PBC.
Based on feedback and requests made in the
meeting, the programme of work focused on ensuring
the effective implementation of the Commission’s
mandate, as articulated in the successive twin resolutions
on peacebuilding and sustaining peace (resolutions
2282 (2016) and 2558 (2020) and General Assembly
resolutions 70/262 and 75/201). The formulation was
also guided by the relevant recommendations contained

22-440233/19

S/PV.9101

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

in the Secretary-General’s report entitled Our Common
Agenda (A/75/982), as they pertain to the requests of
specific countries and regions.
Allow me to share some highlights of the PBC 2022
programme of work and its implementation status in
past six months.
First, the PBC continues to emphasize delivery
by responding to demands in a timely manner. The
Commission plans to engage with at least 12 different
countries and five different regions this year, in addition
to its ongoing thematic priorities. To date, the PBC has
held 13 ambassadorial-level meetings and a field visit by
the Chair of the Liberia configuration. Country-specific
meetings have been held at the request of Colombia, the
Central African Republic, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia and
Burkina Faso, while regional meetings were held on the
Sahel, the Lake Chad basin and the Pacific islands to
discuss specific peacebuilding challenges and priorities
of those countries and regions. On the thematic front,
a meeting on youth and peace and security has been
organized, and preparation is under way for other
meetings, including on women and peace and security.
The Commission is also preparing for its annual session.
Secondly, this year’s programme of work prioritizes
a focus on national ownership and inclusivity. In that
regard, before organizing meetings, the Commission
engaged with an array of relevant national and regional
stakeholders to ensure that the PBC responds to
real needs on the ground. For instance, ahead of the
meeting on the Sahel, and with the support of the
Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs,
the PBC held extensive consultations with local
and regional representatives of the Sahel and its
international partners.
Building on the cross-border initiative of the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
and the International Organization for Migration on
transhumance in the Sahel region, which has been
successfully implemented with the support of the
Peacebuilding Fund under the auspices of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, the meeting
held created an opportunity to generate additional
political, technical and financial support to address the
specific peacebuilding challenges in that region.
Significant strides have been made so far in
promoting inclusive approaches to peacebuilding,
including by engaging with a greater number of local
actors, particularly women and youth briefers. The
4/19

27/07/2022

percentage of national and local actors who briefed
at PBC meetings is 43 per cent. The participation rate
of women briefers in PBC meetings to date is 80 per
cent, and that of young peacebuilders is 60 per cent.
The Chair is committed to maintaining that trend with
a view to increasing the participation rate of all three
categories by the end of its term.
Thirdly, greater attention to United Nations
coherence has remained a priority this year. To date,
the Commission has given due attention to promoting
integrated, strategic and coherent approaches to
peacebuilding and placed emphasis on synergy with
the PBF. In June this year, the Commission held
a meeting with the Chairs of the country-specific
configurations to receive updates on progress achieved
and upcoming activities.
The Commission also received updates on PBF
activities from the Peacebuilding Support Office
(PBSO). In addition, the Commission is planning to
organize dedicated meetings with agencies, funds
and programmes, including the Executive Boards, as
well to further consolidate United Nations coherence,
especially at the field level.
Fourthly, the Commission has been pursuing
effective partnerships with regional organizations and
international and regional financial institutions. To
date this year, a wide variety of partners, including the
African Union (AU), the European Union, the African
Development Bank, the Economic Community of West
African States, the Lake Chad Basin Commission, the
Group of Five for the Sahel, the Pacific Islands Forum
and the Pacific Community, have participated in PBC
meetings. This year’s annual informal consultative
meeting between the PBC and the African Union Peace
and Security Council is expected to be held in November
during the AU week on post-conflict reconstruction
and development.
The Commission is also working to enhance
South-South and triangular cooperation in support
of peacebuilding and sustaining peace and exploring
opportunities in order to further strengthen its
relationships with international and regional
financial institutions.
Fifthly, peacebuilding financing remained in focus
this year, particularly in the context of the high-level
meeting of the General Assembly on peacebuilding
financing held from 27 to 29 April. As articulated in its
programme of work, the PBC prioritized its advocacy
22-44023

27/07/2022

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

for ensuring adequate, predictable and sustained
financing for peacebuilding. Ahead of the high-level
meeting, the Commission sent comprehensive input to
the President of the General Assembly, reiterating that
peacebuilding financing remains a critical challenge.
The Commission encouraged the General
Assembly to consider at its high-level meeting all
options for enhanced peacebuilding financing,
including voluntary, assessed and innovative options.
The process now continues under the leadership of the
Permanent Representatives of Sweden and Kenya, as
co-facilitators for the intergovernmental consultations
on peacebuilding financing.
Finally and most important, the Commission
continued its efforts to enhance its advisory and bridging
role with the General Assembly, the Security Council
and the Economic and Social Council. For the first
time, the Commission shared its programme of work
with the General Assembly and the Security Council,
through formal communications from the Chair. That
has been a major step towards the institutionalization
of advisory relations between the PBC and other organs
of the United Nations.
Another significant achievement was the exchange
of letters between the PBC Chair and the President
of the Security Council that requested the SecretaryGeneral to liaise with the Commission in advance
of relevant reporting to the Security Council. In that
connection, the PBC receives the Secretary-General’s
reports in advance. In addition, for the first time, an
informal coordinator was appointed to liaise with the
Economic and Social Council, in line with the existing
practice vis-à-vis the General Assembly and the
Security Council.
To date, during the sixteenth session of the PBC, the
Commission sent eight advisories and delivered seven
statements at various meetings, including meetings of
the General Assembly, the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council. This year’s submissions
and statements have focused on the country, regional
and thematic contexts in which the PBC has previously
engaged, including submissions to the Security Council
on Burkina Faso, Central Africa, the Great Lakes,
women and peace and security, and the impact of the
coronavirus disease pandemic on peacebuilding; a
briefing to the Security Council on the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel; and a submission
to the General Assembly on peacebuilding financing.

S/PV.9101

The PBC is working with the Economic and Social
Council to organize its annual Economic and Social
Council-PBC joint meeting, which will be held in late
November or early December this year.
In conclusion, the Chair would like to thank all
members of the Peacebuilding Commission, the Chairs
of the country-specific configurations, the informal
coordinators and the countries and regions that engage
with the PBC and the PBSO for their support for
the implementation of the PBC programme of work
for 2022.
The President: I thank Mr. Hossain for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s briefing.
I thank Ambassador Osama Abdelkhalek for Egypt’s
able leadership of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) in 2021 and for his continued championing of
peacebuilding, including in furthering the critical
conversation on financing for peacebuilding.
I also thank Ambassador Hossain and, through
him, Rabab Fatima for Bangladesh’s committed and
visionary stewardship of the PBC, as reflected in the
2022 annual work plan.
The PBC is a critical and unique body mandated by
its founding resolutions (General Assembly resolution
60/180 and resolution 1645 (2005)) and subsequent
twin resolutions (General Assembly resolution 70/262
and resolution 2282 (2016))of the peacebuilding
architecture review, to drive all aspects of the peace
continuum — whether preventive peacebuilding, peace
and political transitions, or post-conflict recovery in
both country and regional situations — in alignment
with the national priorities of the country concerned.
As a subsidiary body with a distinctive convening
power, the PBC brings together a broad set of peace
and development actors, including optimizing
complementarity with subregional and regional bodies.
The PBC is also mandated to marshal resources and
advise the Security Council and the General Assembly
on workable strategies and approaches before, during
and after conflict.
Both the 2021 annual report (S/2022/89) and the
2022 annual work plan, including the related outcome
documents, attest to the work being done around

22-440235/19

S/PV.9101

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

those objectives to actualize the PBC’s mandate. That
mandate underscores that the Commission is wellpositioned to engage and delve into a broader and more
comprehensive set of peace issues — something that the
Security Council cannot do. Therefore, the PBC and the
Council must work together in complementarity and in
support of each other’s work, particularly in countries
that are both on the Council’s agenda and engaging
with the PBC, the majority of which are in Africa.
However, it is becoming increasingly obvious
that there is an increasing global need and demand for
peacebuilding, which has created an urgency to reinforce
peace investments to close the persistent peacebuilding
financial gap. In our changing conflict environment,
there is also an increasing appetite among Member
States to take ownership of peacebuilding dividends.
As the informal coordinator between the Security
Council and the PBC, I thank the Council presidencies
since January 2021, including Brazil, as well as the
Chair of the PBC, the Security Council Affairs Division
and the Peacebuilding Support Office teams, for their
cooperation in ensuring meaningful and value-adding
peacebuilding entry points to operationalize the
synergy between the two bodies.
Against that background and based on our experience
as the informal coordinator — a responsibility that we
take to be critical — I will highlight four points.
First, looking at the 2021 annual report and the
2022 work plan, as well as the various advisories and
personal briefings delivered to the Council to date, it is
critical to ensure that the PBC remains well-positioned
to provide timely, relevant and actionable advice to
the Council, whether thematic, country-specific or
region-specific. We believe that will allow for more
informed engagement by the Council. As the informal
coordinator, and having heard feedback from the crossmembership of both the PBC and the Council, we are
making every effort to ensure regular stocktaking,
timely consultations and consensus on advisories prior
to Council meetings.
Secondly, key to responding to the most important
needs of countries is the prioritization of the voices and
views of the countries concerned. That should remain
a priority for the membership of both the Council and
the PBC. We welcome the operationalization of the
important milestone that was reached in March this
year in ensuring that, beyond the Council, the PBC and
countries concerned are in receipt of advance copies
6/19

27/07/2022

of the Secretary-General’s reports on cross-cutting
files. We believe that will contribute to fulfilling
the growing faith of the countries concerned in the
PBC’s effectiveness and their informed engagement
in meetings. In that regard, we urge that the priorities,
requests and facts presented by Government and
national representatives remain sacrosanct and be
reflected as such in advisories.
Thirdly, the alignment of the programmes of
work of the Council and the PBC remains a challenge.
Improvement in that area will need early focus and
planning around the already calendarized Council
meetings, particularly when it comes to peace operation
transitions and mandate renewals.
Fourthly and lastly, what the Council does, or
should do, with the advice provided by PBC remains
a valid question to be explored. There is a need for a
follow-up mechanism that ensures that the Council acts
where applicable and integrates and follows up that
advice in its work. Such a follow-up mechanism will be
helpful in ensuring that the advice has greater impact
in terms of deliverables and that there is continuity and
meaningful long-term commitment from both bodies.
In conclusion, Kenya assures the upcoming
presidencies, the PBC Chair and Vice-Chairs and the
Peacebuilding Support Office that we shall continue
working closely with them to strengthen the linkage
with the Security Council.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): Let me begin by
thanking Brazil for organizing this focused briefing on
improving and strengthening cooperation between the
Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC). I also express my gratitude to the PBC Chair
for 2021 and the Permanent Representative of Egypt
for presenting the annual report on PBC activities for
the year 2021 (S/2022/89). I thank the Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission and Chargé d’affaires of
Bangladesh for his statement.
The international community has come to
better grasp the complex and interlinked facets of
peacebuilding. Our perspective on addressing conflicts
has undergone a paradigmatic shift, from resolution,
reconciliation and recovery to prevention and
reconstruction. A comprehensive approach focusing on
sustainable development, inclusive economic growth
and political processes forms an integral part of conflict
prevention and peacebuilding efforts today.
22-44023

27/07/2022

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

India has acknowledged the PBC’s significance
since its inception and deeply appreciates its advisory,
bridging and convening roles. We believe the PBC needs
enhanced support and increased focus from Member
States in fulfilling its mandate. In that context, I would
like to make the following five observations.
First, national Governments must steer priorities
and strategies for sustaining peace at all stages of
conflict. We emphasize that inclusivity is cardinal
to advancing national peacebuilding objectives. An
exclusively donor-driven approach to peacebuilding
may not be the most prudent path to follow.
Secondly, forging social cohesion and trust in
governance institutions in divided societies is easier
said than done, but it is indispensable to ensure that
conflict-ravaged societies do not relapse into chaos.
Efforts to that end need to factor in complex layers
of post-conflict scenarios and the local context. A
simplistic approach based on the reiteration of thematic
and cross-cutting issues may have shortcomings.
Thirdly, the ongoing discourse on enhanced
financial support for peacebuilding activities through
sources other than voluntary contributions merits an
in-depth and careful study of its ramifications for the
United Nations ecosystem. Any decision to that effect
must be consensus-based. We should eschew creative
interpretations of the peacebuilding mandate stipulated
in the relevant resolutions.
Fourthly, the advisory role of the PBC should
be exercised judiciously and only when warranted.
The PBC should exercise its convening role more
effectively. It must involve itself more proactively in
the activities of the Peacebuilding Fund to address the
financial deficit.
Fifthly and lastly, it is important to set clear
benchmarks and criteria for an exit strategy in the
country under consideration. Peacebuilding advocacy
by the PBC needs to end when the criteria are met.
As one of the leading troop- and police-contributing
countries to United Nations peacekeeping missions,
India has been an active member of the PBC. India’s
fundamental approach to peacebuilding efforts is
anchored in respect for the national ownership and the
development priorities of Member States.
India has always played a constructive and
significant role in the context of peacebuilding
through its extensive development partnership with the

S/PV.9101

countries of the global South. India continues to assist
countries in post-conflict situations through bilateral
and multilateral forums by providing substantial grants
and soft loans. Our engagement has been wide-ranging,
encompassing key sectors such as infrastructure,
housing, education, health and connectivity, and
improving livelihoods. India also provides scholarships
for higher education and capacity-building, including
in large numbers to women.
India will continue to be a force multiplier
for peacebuilding efforts. We hope that those
efforts will continue to always be driven by a
people-centric approach.
Ms. Jacobs (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom is grateful for the work of Egypt and
Bangladesh in driving the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) in the past 18 months. Sustaining peace is
the shared responsibility of all pillars of the United
Nations, but the Commission is the only dedicated
global forum for supporting countries with their
peacebuilding processes. Under Egypt’s stewardship,
the Peacebuilding Commission continued to expand its
geographic reach and increased its engagement with
women peacebuilders. Under Bangladesh’s leadership,
we have an ambitious work plan and a renewed focus on
impact. I also want to recognize the tireless work of the
Peacebuilding Support Office.
The United Kingdom sees the potential of the
Peacebuilding Commission. Through activist Chairs,
including Egypt and Bangladesh, the youngest body of
the United Nations system has matured. By continuing
to deepen its follow-up on the countries with which
it engages and by rallying collective responses to
peacebuilding challenges, the PBC will continue to
grow in value.
With emerging new threats to peace and security, it
is more important than ever that we take a comprehensive
approach to addressing global challenges. The PBC has
a valuable role in advising the Security Council and a
mandate on practical action to achieve that. And I would
like to thank Kenya for its role as informal coordinator
between the PBC and the Council.
The world can no longer afford the cost of conflict.
We must focus on prevention. Peaceful, just and
inclusive societies are critical to achieving sustainable
development and resilience. We encourage all national
and international actors to put peacebuilding and
sustaining peace at the centre of their policies and

22-440237/19

S/PV.9101

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

approaches. That means more integrated, inclusive
and strategic policy approaches, smarter financing and
casting the net of cooperation and partnerships more
widely. The Peacebuilding Commission — through its
bridging role and increasingly in its own right — is a
critical part of that equation.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I would like to thank the representatives of
Egypt and Bangladesh for their respective statements
and commend the remarkable work that has been done
under the leadership of Egypt and Bangladesh at the
head of the Peacebuilding Commission in 2021 and
2022, respectively.
I would like to focus on three points.
First, the Peacebuilding Commission must continue
to develop partnerships and dialogue with the States in
question. The Peacebuilding Commission has proven
itself able to bring together a broad and diverse range of
interlocutors and partners. Its ability to induce Member
States to engage in interactive dialogue with civil
society, regional organizations and the private sector is
crucial. Its convening power is its strength.
France commends the work done by the countryspecific configurations and the personal engagement
of their Chairs. In particular, France welcomes the fact
that the Central African Republic country-specific
configuration once again made recommendations to the
Security Council this year prior to the mandate renewal
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic.
France also encourages the Burundi configuration to
continue to support progress in the country. Burundi can
count on France’s support in the context of the current
political dialogue under way via the European Union.
Secondly, the operational contribution of the
Peacebuilding Commission must be decoupled, in
particular when it comes to the Security Council. The
work of the Peacebuilding Commission on thematic
and cross-cutting subjects has proven its importance,
particularly when it comes to promoting agendas, such
as the women and peace and security agenda and the
youth, peace and security agenda. To address specific
needs, that work also needs to be placed in specific
geographical contexts.
At the peace-security-development nexus, the
Commission has a central role in building lasting
peace and preventing the re-emergence of conflicts.
France supports that work in the context of transitions
8/19

27/07/2022

and post-conflict contexts as well. The Commission
must also support preparations for the withdrawal of
peacekeeping operations by mobilizing United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes and all development
partners. In particular, its support for the transition of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo will be
very important.
Concerning the Security Council, the Peacebuilding
Commission needs to produce complementary, targeted
and operational recommendations that respect the
mandates of the two bodies. Doing so before the
renewal of peacekeeping operations mandates and
in anticipation of dialogue with the Security Council
penholders is absolutely essential. In that connection,
I would like to commend the extremely valuable work
done by Kenya as informal coordinator between the
Commission and the Council.
Finally, lasting peace must be based on sustainable
and predictable financing. As we know, financing
needs for peacebuilding remain substantial. That was
reiterated at the high-level meeting of the General
Assembly held in April. The Peacebuilding Fund has
proven its ability to catalyse financing to support an
integrated United Nations response and to work with all
actors on the ground. It promotes the implementation
of the Sustainable Development Goals and good
governance. For that reason, the sustainable financing
of peacebuilding must be ensured.
It would be useful for the Fifth Committee to
study the possibility of putting in place long-term
financing. Other options should also be explored,
including partnerships with the international financial
institutions and the mobilization of private sector
actors. The Peacebuilding Fund will continue to enjoy
the support of France, will increase its contribution to
$7.5 million this year.
Peacebuilding is a major tool for prevention,
stabilization in transition contexts and development in
the service of populations. For their sake, we need to
redouble our efforts to build and finance lasting peace.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting. Let me also thank
Ambassador Mahmoud of Egypt for his report on the
work of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) during
2021, as well as our colleagues from the Mission of
Bangladesh on the plan of work for 2022. I take this
opportunity to also commend the work of our Kenyan
22-44023

27/07/2022

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

S/PV.9101

colleague Mr. Martin Kimani for his role as informal
coordinator with the PBC.

warming as a core element of efforts to advance peace
and security.

We appreciate the work that PBC has done
to perform a critical role in the global security
architecture. Over the years, the PBC has expanded
that role, with the engagement of some 23 countries and
regional situations, and we remain convinced that more
can be done. Today’s security- and development-related
challenges serve to underscore the importance of the
United Nations as a cornerstone of multilateral-based
cooperation for sustaining peace. Conflicts worldwide
only emphasize the risks of persistent threats to peace
and security in underinvested situations of conflict
prevention and peacebuilding efforts. Therefore, the
increased and pressing needs for prevention and for
building and sustaining peace should be at the heart of
multilateral efforts.

We now also face another human-made crisis: food
insecurity. Food scarcity already fuels conflicts around
the world, and food security should be mainstreamed in
all discussions and activities of United Nations entities
that deal with peace and security. That will also require
the PBC to adopt a more dedicated focus on the work of
United Nations agencies on the ground, especially its
peacebuilding programmes, with a view to building on
them and maximizing the use of resources.

For all those reasons, comprehensive and inclusive
partnerships with national and regional stakeholders
beyond the United Nations system, including civil
society, are important for strengthening efficiency
and effectiveness where they are most needed. We
appreciate the broader focus on the risk factors of
the conflict cycle when operating in post-conflict
contexts in order to better support political transition
and reconciliation processes. A more clearly defined
peacebuilding approach to United Nations peacekeeping
and special political missions would be beneficial for
the implementation of respective mandates.
For us, the full and active involvement of women
and young people in peacebuilding processes is vital for
their success. We would like to see their role increased,
especially when the Council deliberates on mandates,
and specifically on the work of the PBC. Inclusivity is
key to effective peacebuilding.
Albania fully supports the emphasis that
Bangladesh has put on accountability. That is a key
priority for us, and we will spare no effort during
our mandate in the Council to advocate for and
support accountability efforts worldwide. Without
accountability, reconciliation and transition suffer,
and achieving lasting peace becomes more difficult, if
not illusory.
Global warming due to climate change has revealed
itself beyond any reasonable doubt. It is a clear and
present threat to security, with anticipated disastrous
consequences. We strongly believe that the PBC should
adopt a strategy to address the consequences of global

As one of the most effective tools of the United
Nations for confronting the changing nature of
conflicts that involve various and complex dynamics,
peacebuilding financing remains a critical challenge.
We need to continue to explore and consider options
for ensuring adequate, predictable and sustained
financing for peacebuilding. I wish success to Kenya
and Sweden as co-facilitators of the draft resolution on
peace financing and peacebuilding and assure them of
our support.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, and your team for convening this
important meeting. We also thank Ambassador Osama
Abdelkhalek and Mr. Monwar Hossain for their
briefings on the updates of the important work of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). We value their
dedication to strengthening the PBC’s work across the
United Nations.
It is our collective aim to secure lasting peace
and prevent conflicts. The PBC’s complementary
approach to peace and security plays a significant role
in achieving that end, not only through its efforts in
country-specific contexts but also through its efforts to
address many cross-cutting areas, such as women and
peace and security, young people, climate change, the
coronavirus disease pandemic and innovation.
We commend the progress made by the PBC, many
examples of which we heard from our briefers today. We
would like to specifically highlight the increase in the
participation of women peacebuilders and young people
in Commission meetings in 2021, which demonstrates
the PBC’s serious pursuit of action-oriented outcomes
driven by local contexts.
We also underscore the significant benefits of
the Peacebuilding Commission’s coordination with
the Security Council and its bridging role among the

22-440239/19

S/PV.9101

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and the Security Council.
Notwithstanding those achievements, we also
recognize the challenges facing the PBC, which
should be addressed. We echo the need mentioned by a
number of Member States for the provision of adequate,
sustained and predictable financing for peacebuilding
activities. With that in mind, we would like to stress
two areas that could enhance cooperation between the
Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission.
First, we encourage Council members to further
engage with the Peacebuilding Commission, including
by continuing to invite it to brief and provide written
advisories to the Security Council on relevant matters.
A key approach could be for Council members to
coordinate with the Commission before and during
their assumption of the Council presidency. That would
not only identify issues pertinent to PBC but would
also allow enough time for it to make the necessary
preparations in an effective manner ahead of Council
meetings and consultations.
For example, during our presidency in March, the
United Arab Emirates requested the PBC to provide
written advisories on our open debate on women and
peace and security (see S/PV.8989 and our Arria Formula
meeting on climate security, in coordination with the
PBC and Kenya as the informal coordinator between
the PBC and the Security Council. The Commission’s
contributions were valuable and necessary for further
shaping the discussions.
Secondly, we should draw on the PBC’s perspectives
and recommendations in the design and implementation
of mandates for peace operations and their transitional
arrangements. Its contributions could promote the
Council’s objective of ensuring that exit strategies in
conflicts include fundamental elements to foster peace
in local contexts. The Council could also provide the
means for the participation of the PBC in the initial
stages of making those efforts. We believe that such
coordination would also enable us to expand the list of
relevant stakeholders in that domain, including regional
development and financial institutions, the private
sector and civil society.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates appreciates
the continued efforts of the PBC in preventing
conflicts and preserving peace and can count on our
continued support.
10/19

27/07/2022

Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
I would like to thank the Permanent Mission of
Bangladesh for its tireless leadership this year as Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), and Egypt for
its service as PBC Chair last year.
The United States strongly supports United Nations
peacebuilding efforts. Conflict prevention, preventive
diplomacy and peacebuilding work are critical for
responding to shared security and development
challenges around the world. Since the inception of
the Peacebuilding Commission, the United States has
served as a proud member and, over the years, we have
seen the transformational impact that investments in
the peacebuilding architecture can have in supporting
post-conflict environments, as well as those seeking to
prevent a relapse.
We commend the Peacebuilding Commission for
its leadership in helping to inform and carry out United
Nations and Member State responses across the peace
continuum, including through the implementation
of peace agreements and political dialogue, the
promotion of coexistence and the peaceful resolution of
conflict, the revitalization of economic growth and the
re-establishment of essential administrative services.
We support the PBC’s mandate as an
intergovernmental advisory body, as outlined in the
twin resolutions of the General Assembly (resolution
75/201) and the Security Council (resolution 2558
(2020)). We also support the expanded role of the
Peacebuilding Commission given its important
contribution to supporting post-conflict environments.
As outlined in Our Common Agenda (A/75/982), an
expanded Peacebuilding Commission role could enable
the United Nations system to address the cross-cutting
issues of security, climate change, health, development,
gender equality and human rights with greater
effectiveness and accountability.
Member States’ peacebuilding efforts can and
should complement United Nations peacebuilding. On
1 April, President Biden launched the implementation
phase of the United States Strategy to Prevent Conflict
and Promote Stability. Over the next 10 years, the
United States will work closely with partner countries
across the globe to promote inclusive and sustainable
peace. Recognizing the variety of pressures the world
faces today, we hope the new strategy will harness
and integrate the full range of the tools at our disposal
to prevent conflict before it erupts and target the
22-44023

27/07/2022

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

underlying political, economic and social factors that
drive fragility.
We reiterate that the role of women is critical.
Women must not only be involved; they must have seats
at the table.
The United States also supports the SecretaryGeneral’s overall reform agenda, including the need to
better align humanitarian-peace-development efforts
and actors in order to bolster complementarity and
increase the impact of donor funding. The United
States calls upon all Member States to provide effective
oversight of United Nations peacebuilding efforts.
Member States should further ensure the coherence
of mandates and programmes, explore innovative
financing and proactively support the meaningful
participation of women in peacebuilding.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): At the outset, I would like
to thank Ambassador Osama Mahmoud Abdelkhalek
Mahmoud of Egypt, former Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), as well as Mr. Monwar Hossain,
Chargé d’affaires of Bangladesh and current Chair of
the Commission, for their insightful briefings with
regard to the annual report on the activities of PBC
(S/2022/89), as well as the work plan of the PBC. We
also thank the Permanent Representative of Kenya
for his useful contribution to the work of the Security
Council in his capacity as informal coordinator to
the PBC.
Undoubtedly, our common determination to evolve
the architecture and approach to sustaining peace in all
parts of the world make the PBC an important advisory
body for pursuing an integrated and coherent global
effort in support of national actions for addressing the
multidimensional challenges that face several countries
and regions.
Ghana therefore welcomes the activities undertaken
by the PBC in 2021, including the convening of 29
meetings, as well as discussions on 13 different
countries and regional issues. The coverage of new
topics by the Commission, such as peacekeeping
and peacebuilding, disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration, alongside that of the political,
governance, security, socioeconomic and humanitarian
situations, is commendable.
We are also satisfied with the increase in
the number of thematic and cross-cutting issues
considered — at 40 per cent as compared to about
15 per cent in 2018 — and encourage the deepening

S/PV.9101

of the partnerships with the multilateral development
banks, international financial institutions and regional
organizations and institutions, such as the African Union
and the Economic Community of West African States.
The question of financing the critical role of
the PBC continues to remain a daunting challenge.
Pursuant to the twin resolutions of the General
Assembly (resolution 75/201) and the Security Council
(resolution 2558 (2020)) and as affirmed by the Member
States during the high-level meeting on peacebuilding
financing held last April, there is a need to address the
concern over what the Secretary-General describes in
his report as too little progress on adequate, predictable
and sustained financing for peacebuilding. The
provision of adequate resources to the Peacebuilding
Fund translates into greater investments in prevention
and peacebuilding, which is a key component of the
New Agenda for Peace in the context of Our Common
Agenda (A/75/982). Urgent action is therefore required
in that regard.
While encouraging an expanded donor base for the
Fund, which was about $178 million in 2021 but still fell
short of the Secretary-General’s target of $500 million
annually, we believe that one of the viable means of
providing the PBC with a consistent baseline of funding
is through United Nations assessed contributions.
That approach, which was originally proposed by an
independent advisory group of experts for the 2015
review of the peacebuilding architecture, remains
relevant, and we therefore welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s call for an annual appropriation of
$100 million to the Peacebuilding Fund starting from
the period 1 July 2022 to 30 June 2023.
On working methods, we welcome the PBC
practice of submitting letters or notes of advice ahead
of Security Council meetings. That practice, if further
established, would undergird the relations required by
the Council with the PBC in a manner that will help
the PBC to impact the Council’s work and contribute
effectively to addressing the underlying causes of the
conflicts on its agenda.
Furthermore, the PBC’s ability to bring together
diverse stakeholders and non-United Nations actors is
an added advantage that is critical for efforts to sustain
peace and promote development in conflict-affected
countries and regions. That is no mean achievement
and should be sustained and enhanced.

22-4402311/19

S/PV.9101

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

It is also proven that empowering women through
meaningful participation in peacebuilding helps to
improve the effectiveness and sustainability of such
efforts. In that regard, we welcome the PBC’s intervening
role in targeting young people, women and agricultural
self-employment, among other areas. We encourage
further measures to empower women and young people
to enhance their full and meaningful participation in all
political processes, including elections and transitions.
The Commission’s involvement in climate-related peace
and development interventions, as well as the promotion
of community-based dispute resolution mechanisms, is
equally remarkable and deserves encouragement.
Before concluding, let me indicate that, at
the national level, Ghana remains committed to
peacebuilding efforts, as evidenced in its establishment
of a National Peace Council, which, among other things,
develops and enhances national mechanisms and
processes for conflict prevention and the building of
sustainable peace. Currently, in addition to budgetary
allocations, we have established an accompanying Fund
for Peace to supplement peacebuilding activities across
all 16 regions and the 260 districts of Ghana.
Finally, we look forward to an early conclusion of
the negotiations on the draft resolution on peacebuilding
financing being co-facilitated by Kenya and Sweden.
We are optimistic that the draft resolution, once
adopted, will provide a secure and concrete basis for
addressing the financing challenges. We note the costeffectiveness of peacebuilding financing and encourage
greater support in that regard to enable the dividends of
the efforts for peace to be realized.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): First,
I thank Ambassadors Mahmoud and Hossain for their
briefings. I also thank Egypt and Bangladesh for their
outstanding work and important role serving as Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission for 2021 and 2022,
respectively.
Former Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali
first put forward the concept of peacebuilding in his
report entitled “An Agenda for Peace” (S/24111); 30
years later, peacebuilding has become an important
instrument in the United Nations for eliminating the
root causes of conflict and achieving sustainable peace.
Currently, with greater uncertainty and instability in the
international landscape, countries in conflict or postconflict settings face a greater challenge in achieving
long-term security and stability. The United Nations
and the international community should therefore
12/19

27/07/2022

make greater investments, step up overall planning and
coordination and further tap into the important role
of peacebuilding. China would like to highlight the
following points in that regard.
First, we should uphold the concept of country
ownership. The key for post-conflict countries to achieve
sustainable peace and development lies in their own
efforts. The international community should respect the
sovereignty and ownership of post-conflict countries
and provide constructive assistance in line with their
wishes and requests. National conditions vary greatly
among post-conflict countries and may even evolve
within the same country as it passes through different
stages. The international community should support
the countries concerned in exploring a development
path that fits their own national conditions and should
engage in peacebuilding in a targeted manner that is
aligned with the priorities of the countries concerned.
Secondly, development should always be put first.
Peacebuilding is all-encompassing and may incorporate
a variety of areas and dimensions. For the absolute
majority of countries in conflict or post-conflict
settings, however, the biggest challenges are developing
the economy and improving people’s livelihoods.
We are of the view that peacebuilding should always
be development-oriented, with resources primarily
invested in poverty eradication, universal access to
education and public health, among other things.
Support for countries in conflict or post-conflict
settings in achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals and cultivating a national development drive
is conducive to consolidating the ground for peace.
In the Sahel region, military means alone cannot
fundamentally eliminate terrorism and should instead
be complemented with active efforts in development
and job creation. That will help to remove the breeding
ground for terrorism and thereby address both the
symptoms and their causes.
Thirdly, we should focus on capacity-building. The
lack of capacity is a major obstacle to achieving sustained
peace for countries in conflict or post-conflict settings.
The United Nations and the international community
should help the countries concerned, especially their
Governments, to enhance their capacity for governance,
sustainable development and the maintenance of
common security, as well as their resilience. Unilateral
sanctions impede the socioeconomic development of the
countries concerned and undermine their capacity to
22-44023

27/07/2022

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

cope with risks and challenges, and they must therefore
be lifted fully and unconditionally.
Fourthly, financing for peacebuilding requires
a comprehensive approach. China supports the
provision of adequate and predictable financial
support for peacebuilding in multiple ways. To that
end, we should build up innovative partnerships and
explore diverse funding channels for peacebuilding.
International financial institutions should increase
dedicated investment in a targeted manner, work
closely with the United Nations, the Governments of
relevant countries and the private sector, and mobilize
more funding that can be flexibly instrumentalized
and drive peacebuilding projects forward. Projects
supported by the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) should be
clearly distinguished from the peacebuilding mandate
of United Nations political and peacekeeping missions
in order to achieve precision in investment and avoid
duplication and waste.
Fifthly, we need more comprehensive planning and
coordination. As the only body in the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture that consists of Member
States, the PBC should fully play its convening role,
better coordinate with the PBF and other stakeholders
and provide all-around peacebuilding support to
countries in conflict or post-conflict settings. China
supports stronger interactions between the PBC and the
Security Council with a view to creating synergies.
We look forward to more advice being provided by
the PBC to the Council and encourage the Council to
invite its Chair to brief the Council on a more frequent
basis in order to strengthen communication. On the issue
of Haiti in particular, we welcome greater commitment
by the PBC and its advice on how to strengthen the
mandate of the United Nations Integrated Office in
Haiti and how to better help Haiti to overcome its
current difficulties.
China attaches great importance to peacebuilding
and has always actively supported the construction and
development of countries in conflict or post-conflict
settings through multilateral and bilateral channels.
We proposed the Belt and Road Initiative and the
Global Development Initiative to inject significant
momentum into achieving shared development. China
has provided several contributions to the PBF, as well
as financial support for many peacebuilding projects
through the Global Development and South-South
Cooperation Fund and the China-United Nations Peace
and Development Fund. Those projects are currently

S/PV.9101

under way. China will continue to support the calls for
peacebuilding with concrete actions and to contribute
to the achievement of long-lasting peace.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I want to begin by
thanking Brazil for organizing this crucial debate.
Ireland has long advocated for a strengthened
relationship between the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). As I approach the
end of my term as Permanent Representative of Ireland,
I am reassured that there remains such staunch support
for that important United Nations body around this
table. I want to warmly welcome the current and former
Chairs of the PBC present here today and to recognize
Kenya’s role as informal coordinator.
The presence and briefings of the speakers are
powerful reminders that, while we come into this
Chamber, day in and day out, with eloquent words in
support of peace, there are other United Nations bodies
that simply put their shoulder to the wheel and get the
job done. They do it quietly and without fanfare. They
seek not to make headlines but headway. I believe the
Peacebuilding Commission is one such body.
In my time as Ireland’s Permanent Representative
to the United Nations, I have had the privilege of serving
as an elected member of both the Security Council and
of the Peacebuilding Commission. Both the Council
and the Commission work towards the same goal, albeit
from different angles. Both are critical to building and
sustaining peace. I would like to offer some reflections
on how we can learn from and support each other to
do just that: to build peace and finally live up to our
promises under the Charter of the United Nations.
First and obviously, we need to invest in prevention.
That makes sense not only politically and morally but
also financially — prevention saves both lives and
money. It means moving away from our default position
of responding to crises and taking a more proactive
role in actually preventing them. Sitting around this
table, we hear of similar situations around the globe:
situations of poverty, gender inequality, food insecurity
and human rights violations.
The question is: when will we wake up and face
the facts? The writing appears on the wall long before
the first bullet is fired. The longer we take to invest in
prevention, the hungrier people grow, the more destitute
their poverty becomes and the more likely conflict is to
arise. The time to act is now. Just as no one country can

22-4402313/19

S/PV.9101

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

address those challenges alone, the same is true for the
United Nations.
We need to respond in a coordinated manner,
including by providing support for the SecretaryGeneral’s New Agenda for Peace. That should be
matched with a genuine commitment to ensuring that
peacebuilding activities are adequately supported and
sustainably financed. I would like to commend and
encourage the PBC’s convening role on discussions on
peacebuilding financing, most notably on synergies
with the Peacebuilding Fund.
Secondly, the Council could learn valuable lessons
from the PBC’s work on promoting inclusivity, most
notably of women and young people. As Council
members know, my country is no stranger to conflict. For
generations of young people, myself included, violence
on our island was a daily reality. Our conviction, borne
of that experience, is that we cannot build lasting peace
without including those who ultimately inherit it. The
PBC has engaged with youth issues in a tangible manner,
particularly in regions on the Council’s agenda, such as
the Great Lakes region and the Sahel. That requires and
deserves our full support.
Similarly, the PBC has an important role to play
in ensuring women’s full, equal and meaningful
participation. Let me be clear here: gender equality
is neither naïve idealism nor an aspiration that we
can reserve for peace time. Women are demanding
fulfilment of their right — fulfilment of our right — to
participate in peace processes, to be in the room and
at the table where peace is made. Our participation
disrupts the status quo that begot the conflict in the
first place. It establishes an inclusive and sustainable
vision of peace. Put simply, it leads to better and longerlasting peace.
Thirdly, the Council needs to respond to the
changing world around us and empower others,
including the PBC. Every month, the PBC empowers
us with knowledge and advice. It is high time for us to
turn that advice into action, where we can. It is vital
that we ensure that the PBC and the Member States
it represents are empowered to fulfil their important
role. The recent PBC briefing on the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel (see S/PV.9086),
its engagement on regional issues and its advice
on enhancing the links between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding are all concrete examples of how we can
effectively work together.
14/19

27/07/2022

I want to be clear: enhancing the synergies between
the PBC and the Security Council makes our work here
more effective. That is true not only of our deliberations
here in New York but also of our impact on the ground,
where it matters most. This is not about overstepping
mandates; it is about using mandates to their full
potential. I ask the Council: is that not the essence of
multilateralism? Is it not the pooling of our strengths,
our resources and our knowledge to work side by
side — super-Powers and small islands alike — for the
betterment of our shared and vulnerable planet?
As I listened today to the examples of protecting the
gains of peacekeeping transitions, empowering women
and young people in peace processes and addressing
the interplay of climate and conflict, I am encouraged
by what we have achieved, both at the Council and at
the Peacebuilding Commission. But to those who seek
to use the Charter as a means — or some might say
as an excuse — to protect their own power instead of
fulfilling their obligations to maintain international
peace and security, I ask them what they are really
afraid of.
We know that the road to sustainable peace is long.
It does not end with the signing of a deal. It takes time,
commitment, fortitude and — always — hope. As I
conclude my time as Ireland’s Permanent Representative,
I call on the Council to open the doors of this Chamber
to those possibilities, strengthen its cooperation with
the Peacebuilding Commission, open our ears to the
calls of our Members and open our minds to those on
the front lines who strive for peace every day. Millions
of vulnerable people are relying on us to do just that.
We cannot let them down.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I would like to start by
thanking the Brazilian presidency for organizing this
briefing. I would also like to thank the current and
former Chairs of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
for their briefings.
Under the leadership of Egypt and Bangladesh,
the Peacebuilding Commission has continued to hone
its working methods, utilize its convening power
and further demonstrate its relevance to the Security
Council’s work as an advisory body. Through its crosspillar coordination mandate, the PBC is well-positioned
to holistically address the drivers of conflict, without
the limitations suffered by other United Nations bodies.
In that regard, Norway particularly welcomes the
PBC’s recent discussions on climate change, including
22-44023

27/07/2022

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

S/PV.9101

its cross-border approach in the Sahel and the Great
Lakes region, and its increased attention to the gender
and youth dimensions of conflict. Norway also applauds
the adoption of the Commission’s gender strategy. We
now need to ensure that it is fully implemented.

his mandate. We also congratulate the outgoing Chair,
the Ambassador of Egypt, on his work, as well as the
Ambassador of Kenya, the unofficial coordinator of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), on his input and
his leadership.

The United Nations peacebuilding triangle, which
consists of the PBC, the Peacebuilding Fund and the
Peacebuilding Support Office, is becoming more
efficient and agile. Building on that already firm basis,
let me suggest three further points of action.

Gabon welcomes the report (S/2022/89),
which informs us of the efforts undertaken by the
Peacebuilding Commission, and is pleased with the
work accomplished in the countries that are part of the
PBC configuration, particularly in Central and West
Africa. The progress made in those countries attests to
the relevance of the body, which deserves the support
of the Security Council. We also welcome the efforts
made by the Peacebuilding Commission to establish
more coordinated action with the Security Council.

First, we recognize the significant advisory role of
the PBC to the Security Council. The Council should
request, deliberate and draw upon the targeted advice
of the PBC more often, especially in the formation of
mandates, renewals and transitions.
Secondly, the PBC should continue to innovate and
expand its work to more areas, including supporting
holistic measures related to climate change, health,
gender, development and human rights. That should
of course be done in close partnership with the
Member States concerned and in close collaboration
with Resident Coordinators and United Nations
country teams.

Resolution 2282 (2016) stresses that peacebuilding
is an essential political process, aimed at preventing
the outbreak, escalation, continuation or recurrence
of conflicts. It therefore contributes significantly to
preventing the outbreak of conflicts, paving the way for
peacemaking processes.

Thirdly, we must step up our efforts to increase
the financing available for peacebuilding and
prevention. Norway strongly supports the ongoing
negotiations on increased financing for peacebuilding,
including the Secretary-General’s proposals on
assessed contributions.

The briefing to which we are convened today seeks
to encourage a genuine structural transformation of
the peace and security architecture. That necessary
transformation is an opportunity for our countries
to adapt our mechanisms for promoting peace and
security to the ever-changing global context of crisis
and conflict. However, new dangers are emerging
and threaten the foundations of our societies and the
essential unity that forms the doctrine of our humanity.

For its part, Norway has been a consistent supporter
of the Peacebuilding Fund since the Fund’s beginning,
and we remain a steadfast supporter. We continue to be
impressed by the Fund’s agility, efficiency and spirit
of innovation. Our current five-year agreement of
approximately $50 million matches the Fund’s strategy
and provides predictability and flexibility.

Our common values are being undermined, and
our efforts to curb poverty and to fight against the
inequalities of the adverse effects of climate change are
struggling to succeed. Severe distortions continue to
affect our economies and the health of our populations,
hard hit by the coronavirus disease pandemic, which is
still raging.

Sustaining peace remains at the heart of Norwegian
foreign policy and multilateral efforts. Based on our
experience and continued commitment, Norway will
seek to rejoin the Peacebuilding Commission as a
candidate for membership for the period 2023 to 2024.

Gabon would like to make the following points.

Mrs. Onanga (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this briefing on
the review of sustainability and the peacebuilding
mechanism, which my delegation warmly welcomes. I
would also like to thank Ambassador Hossain for his
briefing, and I assure him of our support throughout

Peacebuilding requires a holistic vision that takes
into account all aspects, such as human rights, gender,
governance, peacekeeping and development. While
States must play a primary role in peacebuilding,
that undertaking cannot succeed without a dynamic
partnership that is itself anchored in a strengthened
multilateralism. Fragile States emerging from crisis
situations need to be supported more consistently so as
to prevent such countries from returning to conflict.
Particular attention must be paid to issues of political

22-4402315/19

S/PV.9101

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

and economic governance at both the national and
the international levels. Regional organizations and
mechanisms will also need to continue to be key
players, in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity
enshrined in the Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations.
In that regard, the United Nations system,
working in a more coordinated and coherent manner,
must do its utmost to support the strategic objectives
set by countries to maintain peace and promote
sustainable development.

27/07/2022

United Nations peacebuilding assistance remains
one of the key instruments in the Organization’s toolkit
for helping States to overcome the consequences of
conflicts and prevent their recurrence.
For almost two decades, the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) has played an important role in those
efforts, acting as both an intergovernmental advisory
body and a unifying platform where participants can
learn the views of a wide range of stakeholders on most
pressing issues.

Particular attention should be paid to the role of
women, in accordance with the women and peace and
security agenda, through their inclusion in all activities
of the society and in all phases of conflict management,
from early warning to prevention and management on
the ground, including in the mediation process.

The Commission is a reputable body with vast
potential, which is confirmed by its expanding
geographical scope. In addition to country-specific
configurations on Burundi, Liberia, Guinea-Bissau and
the Central African Republic, last year the Commission
held its first meetings on Chad and the Gulf of
Guinea region.

Similar attention should be given to young people,
who must fully play their part as actors and agents
in building sustainable peace and shared economic
prosperity through inclusive policies, as rightly
emphasized in resolution 2250 (2015), on youth, peace
and security. That will create the context for the healthy
development of young people and prevent them from
being drawn into the trap of radicalization, which
sustains violent extremism.

A comprehensive and impartial approach, taking
into account country-specific and regional specificities,
careful analysis and the pursuit of unique solutions
aimed at upholding national priorities, is key to the
positive achievement of peacebuilding goals. We are
convinced that such a method is more effective than the
broader consideration of thematic contexts, which are
often already being discussed at all sorts of platforms
within the United Nations.

Given the multiple threats to peace and security,
emphasis should be placed on strengthening national
conflict-prevention
mechanisms,
including
by
establishing inclusive institutional frameworks that can
enhance the resilience of societies to the risks of violent
conflict, with the full participation of the private sector
and civil society.

It is important to emphasize that respect for
the sovereignty of the host State and support for its
priorities stand at the core of the PBC’s work and all
other peacebuilding and peacekeeping processes.
Experience has shown that international assistance
in peacebuilding is most effective when it is based
on the principle of national ownership, meaning
that governments, taking into account the needs of
society, decide on and implement the most pressing
peacebuilding actions and strategies. The United
Nations and international partners, including regional
and subregional organizations and the international
financial institutions, must, where necessary,
and with the consent of the host country, provide
assistance, which must be focused first and foremost
on building the capacity of the States themselves to
overcome conflicts. Working with local population
groups and non-governmental organizations can take
on a supporting role with the authorities playing a
coordinating role.

My delegation believes that such an approach,
which reaffirms national responsibility and ownership,
involving all components of society, under the
leadership of the legitimate national authorities, while
stressing the need for an effective strategic partnership
underpinned by regional organizations and the
important role of the Security Council, would make it
possible to more effectively prevent conflicts and lay
the foundations for lasting peace in the world.
Ms. Agaronova (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the current and former Chairs of
the Peacebuilding Commission, the Chargé d’affaires
of Bangladesh, Mr. Hossain, and the Permanent
Representative of Egypt, Ambassador Mahmoud, for
their briefings and their insights.
16/19

We believe that the PBC has room to improve the
quality of its recommendations to the Security Council,
22-44023

27/07/2022

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

which could be provided upon the request of the Council
in relation to country subjects that are on the agendas
of both organs. We are convinced that the value of
the Commission is that it can pass the peacebuilding
priorities of the host country along to the Council,
which could be a useful addition to respective reports
of the Secretary-General.
It is the added value and pertinence of the
Peacebuilding Commission’s recommendations that
play a fundamental role in it being taken into account in
the work of the Security Council, as well as that of the
General Assembly and Economic and Social Council.
We believe that, in order to improve the quality of
cooperation between the Security Council and the
Commission in some cases, there is no need to wait for
a planned Council meeting for the head of a countryspecific configuration to issue a formal statement. If
the matter is urgent, then a letter can be written to the
Security Council to that effect.
This year, once again, we have discussed the
question of the appropriate financing of peacebuilding
activities. We have outlined our position in detail
in the General Assembly and in the Peacebuilding
Commission. At the same time, we believe that it is once
again necessary to underscore that we need to start with
an assessment of the existing channels of peacebuilding
financing. It is important to clarify whether mandates
are being issued effectively, whether resources
from United Nations peacekeeping and political
missions are being effectively allocated and spent,
and whether coordination of these efforts with United
Nations funds and programmes, specialized agencies,
non-governmental organizations and the financial
institutions are being effectively coordinated. Another
long-standing problem is the high cost of carrying out
projects, owing to expenditure on international staff
and all sorts of consultants; sometimes these numbers
go beyond what is reasonable.
Moreover, we consistently call for resources to be
allocated to overcoming the real causes of conflicts. We
do not agree with the widespread practice of allocating
a fixed percentage of resources to generic priorities,
which may not even be mentioned as priorities by the
host country, but which are popular among donors. There
are many cases where donors attach political conditions
to their donations, which is also why already scant
resources are being spread too thin. Even more glaring
are the situations where the financing for mechanisms

S/PV.9101

that monitor the implementation of peace agreements
dries up, as recently happened in South Sudan.
We can talk all we like about human rights or
climate change and other problems but achieving or
building peace in those conditions will not be possible.
Our view is that the political settlement of conflicts and
the stabilizing of security situations are what lays the
foundation for improving the human rights situation
and for building democratic institutions in a particular
country rather than vice versa.
We have always supported the Peacebuilding
Fund (PBF) as a flexible mechanism, allowing for
a rapid response to emerging problems. But we have
never seen the PBF as the sole source of resources for
peacebuilding. The Fund was created and operates as
an instrument for gathering voluntary contributions,
and if we are considering the possibility of replenishing
the Peacebuilding Fund with resources from the regular
budget, then we must deal with the difficult issue of
Member States’ determining the mandates for the use
of those resources and their having oversight over
the spending thereof. We are in favour of resources
reaching recipient States and their being spent on the
real peacebuilding priorities and needs of those States.
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Mexico thanks Ambassador Abdelkhalek for
his detailed briefing on the report of the Peacebuilding
Commission for 2021 and the Chargé d’affaires of
Bangladesh, Mr. Hossain, for his briefing on the
programme of work carried out in 2022. We take this
opportunity to acknowledge the work of Egypt at the
head of the Commission last year, as well as that of
delegation of Bangladesh this year.
Mexico recognizes that the Peacebuilding
Commission has a mandate that gives it a unique
convening capacity to bring together and empower
different actors to work. This fosters coherence between
political and sustainable-development objectives,
especially when various peacebuilding challenges
converge, including the still-present impacts of the
pandemic, as well, unfortunately, as the deterioration
of various regional situations and the emergence
of conflicts.
It is clear that the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission has increased in recent years, with
activities of greater geographic and thematic scope.
In particular, we consider it relevant that both the
Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund have become

22-4402317/19

S/PV.9101

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

involved in projects in Latin America and the Caribbean,
as evidenced in the case of Colombia. On thematic
issues, we welcome the continued deepening of the
links between peacekeeping and peacebuilding in such
areas as disarmament, security reform, mental-health
services, psychosocial support, and generally anything
that has to do with strengthening the Commission’s role
in post-conflict processes.
With regard to agendas that address the issues of
women and youth in the context of peace and security,
we also stress that the adoption of action plans for both
agendas provides new tangible tools to facilitate the
integration of women and youth into these processes,
something we have insisted on time and again.
We therefore acknowledge that the Peacebuilding
Commission has made an effort to listen to the voices
of women and youth working in their communities,
who are the true peacebuilders.
It is clear that peace is not sustainable without
development. We therefore welcome the fact that the
Commission is a key player in the implementation
of the New Agenda for Peace put forward by the
Secretary-General. We appreciate that this New Agenda
promotes greater coordination between the resident
coordinators and the United Nations country teams in
order to perform at the highest level in peacebuilding
strategies and in an inclusive manner, so as to allow
for the rebuilding of the social fabric and respond to
the interests of the societies and governments in the
countries in which they work. We are certain that the
Peacebuilding Commission can also play an important
role in this area.
On the other hand, Mexico considers the
Commission to be an essential actor in strengthening the
preventive capacity of the United Nations. As Mexico
has repeatedly pointed out, the Security Council must
take into account social and development aspects as
underlying causes of conflicts in order to guarantee
the prevention of such conflicts and the transition to
peace, something that Mexico has always emphasized
and which I also highlighted during my country’s
presidency of the Council in November 2021.
In this regard, we believe that the recommendations
that the Peacebuilding Commission sends to the
Security Council enrich the comprehensive approach
to which we should aspire. They are instruments that
make it possible to establish consistent links between
peace and security, development and human rights. Our
18/19

27/07/2022

only suggestion would be that such advice reach the
Council in time for it to be duly considered.
We are aware that this work, of course, calls for
consistency, ongoing cooperation and coordination
between the General Assembly, the Security Council
and the Economic and Social Council, in accordance
with their mandates. That what Mexico has consistently
advocated, as reflected in the debate that we convened
in November during our presidency (see S/PV.8906).
For that reason, we call on all actors to continue to
strengthen communication between the Peacebuilding
Commission and the principal organs that I have
mentioned, which contributes also to strengthening the
advisory role that we expect from the Commission.
In the framework of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions,
Mexico, together with other partners, will make specific
proposals to improve that relationship.
In conclusion, Mexico believes that the work that
the peace architecture has accomplished in the less
than two decades since the Commission’s creation
reflects, as has already been mentioned this morning,
the true value of multilateralism. Communication and
coordination between the Council, the Peacebuilding
Commission and the other bodies of the United Nations
is key to preventing fresh crises from arising, or, if they
do, to respond to them in the best possible way.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Brazil.
I would like to thank my dear colleague Ambassador
Osama Abdelkhalek for the comprehensive overview
of the work of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
in 2021. Before the pandemic, the presentation of the
annual report of the PBC (S/2022/89) to the Council
was a common practice, which we are happy to resume
and expect will continue.
I also wish to thank Mr. Monwar Hossain for the
very informative briefing on the PBC’s programme of
work for 2022. As I highlighted at one of our meetings
earlier this month, those opportunities for exchange
between the Council and the PBC are very much
welcome and should, in fact, happen more often.
Finally, my very warm thanks to Ambassador
Rabab Fatima for her support and leadership in the PBC
in the first half of 2022 and her contribution to bringing
the collaboration between the two bodies to the top of
our agenda.
22-44023

27/07/2022

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

In addition to the input on West Africa and the Sahel
recently shared with the Council, the presentation of the
annual report of the Commission for 2021 has provided
several examples of the significant contributions that
the PBC can make by playing its advisory, bridging and
convening roles.
The PBC is well suited to working as a platform
to promote greater coordination among the relevant
partners of a particular country at risk of lapsing or
relapsing into conflict. Additionally, it can mobilize
regional organizations and international financial
institutions and foster South-South and triangular
cooperation arrangements in support of national
peacebuilding initiatives. The Commission can also
support the implementation of peacebuilding activities
by peacekeeping operations and help mobilize political
support to promote reconciliation, the women and peace
and security agenda, institution-building and other
nationally defined peacebuilding priorities. However,
there is more that the PBC could do.
As Brazil and others have pointed out a number of
times, the Commission is only a teen-ager in the United
Nations family. The relations of the Commission with
the Economic and Social Council, the General Assembly
and in particular the Security Council remain to be fully
explored. That matter has priority status for most PBC
members, and that is the reason why the relationship
of the PBC with other bodies was included in its 2022
programme of work. It is our hope that the Council will
share that sense of priority and constructively engage
in that exercise.
We are thankful to the delegation of Kenya in its
role of informal coordinator of PBC-Security Council
relations for its efforts directed at encouraging debate
and action on ways to improve the coherence of agendas
and the timeliness and the quality of the advice that the
Commission provides to the Council. The circulation
of Secretary-General`s advance reports to Security
Council members among the membership of the PBC
was a good first step in that respect.
Nevertheless, the next steps should turn into a more
meaningful collaboration between the two bodies, such
as, first, consultations on issues relating to peacebuilding
and sustaining peace ahead of the formation, review,
drawdown and transition of peacekeeping operations
and special political missions, with a clear timeline
for that; secondly, the regular submission of written

S/PV.9101

advice by the Peacebuilding Commission on issues on
the agenda of both bodies; thirdly, the submission of
advice on how peacebuilding planning and strategies
could concretely address the needs of children affected
by conflict, especially in areas that require long-term
commitments such as the reintegration of children
formerly associated with armed groups; fourthly, a
further alignment of the Council and the PBC work
programmes; fifthly, greater interaction between the
Commission and Council penholders; and, sixthly,
enhancing the Council’s working methods regarding
interaction with the PBC.
Without proper peacebuilding-oriented inputs, the
Security Council will not make significant progress
in conflict prevention, which is a key element in
long-term peace promotion and in the preparation for
successful transitions.
The road to achieving durable peace requires
comprehensive approaches that could benefit
significantly from the support and unique perspective
of the Peacebuilding Commission. We look forward to
maintaining that issue as a standing item on our agenda,
and we remain committed to making the Peacebuilding
Commission a more effective and permanent partner
for the Security Council. For that to happen, however,
the Council must begin to view the Commission as an
indispensable ally and not a competitor.
Now I beg the indulgence of members to go a little
bit beyond my prepared statement to thank all present,
both briefers and members, for the evaluations and
ideas raised. I am encouraged in particular by the fact
that several speakers have gone beyond the narrow
focus of the relationship between the Security Council
and the PBC to reflect on the work of the PBC itself and
how it can become a more constructive partner of the
Security Council.
In that vein, I hope that, first, members here that
are also members of the PBC will take these ideas to
our counterparts in that body; my delegation certainly
will. And, secondly, I hope that the Security Council
will take note of the fact that the reverse approach can
and must be adopted, that is, that the advice of the PBC
can feed into the work of this body.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.

22-4402319/19
