A/RES/76/158

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
7 January 2022

Seventy-sixth session
Agenda item 74 (b)
Promotion and protection of human rights: human
rights questions, including alternative approaches for
improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and
fundamental freedoms

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 16 December 2021
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/76/462/Add.2, para. 114)]

76/158.

International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from
Enforced Disappearance
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 61/177 of 20 December 2006, by which it adopted
and opened for signature, ratification and accession the International Convention for
the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, 1
Recalling its resolution 47/133 of 18 December 1992, by which it adopted the
Declaration on the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance as a body
of principles for all States,
Recalling also all its other resolutions on the matter, including resolutions
70/160 of 17 December 2015, 72/183 of 19 December 2017 and 74/161 of
18 December 2019, as well as relevant resolutions adopted by the Human Rights
Council, including resolution 36/6 of 28 September 2017 2 and resolution 45/3 of
6 October 2020, 3
Recalling further its resolution 68/165 of 18 December 2013 on the right to the
truth, as well as Human Rights Council resolution 36/7 of 28 September 2017 on the
Special Rapporteur on the promotion of truth, justice, reparation and guarantees of
non-recurrence, 4

__________________

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2716, No. 48088.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 53A
(A/72/53/Add.1), chap. III.
3
Ibid., Seventy-fifth Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/75/53/Add.1), chap. III.
4
Ibid., Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/72/53/Add.1), chap. III.
1
2

21-19197 (E)

120122

*2119197*

A/RES/76/158

International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from
Enforced Disappearance

Recalling its resolution 73/162 of 17 December 2018 on the human rights treaty
body system,
Recalling also that no one shall be subjected to enforced disappearance,
Recalling further that no exceptional circumstance whatsoever may be invoked
as a justification for enforced disappearance,
Recalling that no one shall be held in secret detention,
Deeply concerned, in particular, by the increase in enforced or involuntary
disappearances in various regions of the world, including arrest, detention and
abduction, when these are part of or amount to enforced disappearances, and by the
growing number of reports concerning harassment, ill-treatment and intimidation of
witnesses of disappearance or relatives of persons who have disappeared,
Recalling that the Convention sets out the right of victims to know the truth
regarding the circumstances of the enforced disappearance, the progress and results
of the investigation and the fate of the disappeared person, and sets forth State party
obligations to take appropriate measures in this regard,
Recalling also that the Convention defines the victim of enforced disappearance
as the disappeared person and any individual who has suffered harm as the direct
result of an enforced disappearance,
Acknowledging that the widespread or systematic practice of enforced
disappearance is recognized in the Convention as a crime against humanity, as defined
in applicable international law,
Stressing the importance of the work of the Working Group on Enforced or
Involuntary Disappearances,
Taking note of the recommendation made by the Working Group that more
assistance should be provided to family members and members of civil society in
order to enable them to report alleged cases of enforced disappearance to the Working
Group, given that, in a large number of cases, the underreporting of cases of enforced
disappearance remains a major problem owing to various reasons, including,
inter alia, fear of reprisal, weak administration of justice, poverty and illiteracy,
Calling upon States that have not provided substantive replies concerning
claims of enforced disappearances in their countries to do so, and to give due
consideration to relevant recommendations concerning this issue made by the
Working Group in its reports,
Encouraging the Working Group, in accordance with its working methods, to
continue to provide the States concerned with relevant and detailed information
concerning allegations of enforced disappearances in order to facilitate a prompt and
substantive response to such communications withou t prejudice to the need for the
States concerned to cooperate with the Working Group,
Recalling the high-level meeting of the General Assembly held on 17 February
2017 to commemorate the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the Convention, which
provided an opportunity to review the positive impact of the Convention and to
discuss ways and best practices to prevent enforced disappearances and to combat
impunity by, inter alia, promoting the universal ratification of the Convention,
Recalling with appreciation the launch by the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights of an international campaign for the universal
ratification of the Convention,
Recalling with appreciation also the decision of the General Assembly to
declare 30 August International Day of the Victims of Enforced Disappearances,
2/5

21-19197

International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from
Enforced Disappearance

A/RES/76/158

Recalling with appreciation further the decision of the General Assembly in its
resolution 65/196 of 21 December 2010 to proclaim, pursuant to the reco mmendation
made by the Human Rights Council in its resolution 14/7 of 17 June 2010, 5 24 March
as the International Day for the Right to the Truth concerning Gross Human Rights
Violations and for the Dignity of Victims,
Acknowledging the valuable work of the International Committee of the Red
Cross in promoting compliance with international humanitarian law in this field,
Deeply concerned that the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has
created new contexts where enforced disappearances may occur and that measures
related to fighting the pandemic have impacted the capacity of many actors to take
the necessary action to search for disappeared persons and to investigate their alleged
enforced disappearance,
Urging Member States to address gender-based violence, including as related to
cases of enforced disappearance, and recalling that such violence can never be
justified and that Member States should ensure that the COVID -19 pandemic does
not limit measures taken to prevent and address enforced disappearances, including
those involving gender-based violence, especially against women and girls,
1.
Recognizes the importance of the International Convention for the
Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, the ratification and the
implementation of which is a significant contribution to ending impunity and to
promoting and protecting all human rights for all;
2.
Welcomes the fact that 98 States have signed the Convention and 64 have
ratified or acceded to it, and calls upon States that have not yet done so to consider
signing, ratifying or acceding to the Convention as a matter of priority, as well as to
consider the option provided for in articles 31 and 32 of the Convention regarding the
Committee on Enforced Disappearances;
3.
Also welcomes the most recent reports of the Secretary-General on the
status of the Convention; 6
4.
Requests the Secretary-General and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights to increase their intensive efforts to assist States in
becoming parties to the Convention, including by supporting the actions of States to
ratify the Convention, providing technical and capacity-building assistance to States
and civil society and raising awareness about the Convention, with a view to
achieving universal adherence;
5.
Requests United Nations agencies and organizations, and invites
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and the Working Group on
Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances to continue to make efforts to disseminate
information on the Convention, to promote understanding of it and to assist States
parties in implementing their obligations under this instrument, especial ly in the
context of the commemoration of the fortieth anniversary of the Working Group in
2020;
6.
Recalls with appreciation the first Conference of the States Parties to the
Convention, held in Geneva on 19 December 2016, and convened in accordance wit h
article 27 of the Convention, and the decision adopted by consensus that the

__________________

Ibid., Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 53 and corrigendum (A/65/53 and A/65/53/Corr.1),
chap. III, sect. A.
6
A/74/213 and A/76/315.
5

21-19197

3/5

International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from
Enforced Disappearance

A/RES/76/158

Committee would continue to monitor the Convention in accordance with its
mandate; 7
7.
Takes note with appreciation of the sixth meeting of the States parties to
the Convention, held in New York on 14 June 2021, and its discussion of substantive
matters related to the Convention, and encourages all States parties to the Convention
to continue to include such a discussion in the agenda of the meeting of the States
parties;
8.
Welcomes the work achieved by the Committee, and encourages all States
parties to the Convention to submit their reports, to support and promote the work of
the Committee and to implement its recommendations;
9.
Calls upon all States parties to further cooperate with the Committee,
including by responding favourably to its requests for visits;
10. Takes note of the guiding principles for the search for disappeared persons
adopted by the Committee at its sixteenth session and developed in dialogue and
broad consultations with Member States and other relevant stakeholders; 8
11. Recognizes the importance of the Declaration on the Protection of All
Persons from Enforced Disappearance 9 as a body of principles for all States that is
designed to punish enforced disappearances, to prevent their commission and to help
victims of such acts and their families to seek fair, prompt and adequate reparation;
12. Welcomes the cooperation established between the Working Group and the
Committee, within the framework of their respective mandates, as well as with other
relevant special procedures and treaty bodies, within the framework of their
respective mandates, and encourages them to continue their cooperation in the future;
13. Takes note with interest of all the general comments of the Working Group,
including the comments on children 10 and women 11 affected by enforced
disappearances, and recognizes in this regard that enforced disappearances have
special consequences for women and vulnerable groups, especially children, as they
most often bear the serious economic hardships that usually accompany s uch
disappearances and, when subjected to enforced disappearances themselves, may
become particularly vulnerable to sexual and other forms of violence;
14. Takes note of the need to document cases concerning enforced or
involuntary disappearances allegedly perpetrated by non-State actors, as decided by
the Working Group;
15. Welcomes the fact that the Committee held its annual meeting with the
Working Group, as an opportunity to take stock of the activities of the two parallel
organs, which are complementary and reinforce each other within the framework of
their respective mandates;
16. Takes note with appreciation of the guidelines to prevent and address
intimidation and reprisals against individuals and groups cooperating with the
Committee adopted by the Committee at its twentieth session; 12
17. Also takes note with appreciation of the key guidelines on COVID-19 and
enforced disappearances, in which the Working Group and the Committee recalled
that enforced disappearance is prohibited in all circums tances and called upon
__________________

See CED/CSP/2016/4.
See CED/C/7.
9
Resolution 47/133.
10
A/HRC/WGEID/98/1 and A/HRC/WGEID/98/1/Corr.1.
11
A/HRC/WGEID/98/2.
12
See CED/C/8.
7
8

4/5

21-19197

International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from
Enforced Disappearance

A/RES/76/158

Member States to continue, during the COVID-19 pandemic, to respect their
international obligations;
18. Invites the Chair of the Committee and the Chair of the Working Group to
address and engage in an interactive dialogue with the General Assembly at its
seventy-seventh and seventy-eighth sessions under the item entitled “Promotion and
protection of human rights”;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
seventy-eighth session a report on the status of the Convention and the
implementation of the present resolution;
20. Decides to give its full consideration to the subject matter at its seventy eighth session.
53rd plenary meeting
16 December 2021

21-19197

5/5
