A/RES/77/103

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
19 December 2022

Seventy-seventh session
Agenda item 77
Report of the International Law Commission on the work
of its seventy-third session

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 7 December 2022
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/77/415, para. 12)]

77/103.

Report of the International Law Commission on the work of its
seventy-third session
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the International Law Commission on the work
of its seventy-third session,1
Emphasizing the importance of furthering the progressive development and
codification of international law as a means of implementing the purposes and
principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations and in the Declaration on
Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation
among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, 2
Recognizing the desirability of referring legal and drafting questions to the Sixth
Committee, including topics that might be submitted to the International Law
Commission for closer examination, and of enabling the Sixth Committee and the
Commission to enhance further their contribution to the progressive development and
codification of international law,
Recalling the need to keep under review those topics of international law which,
given their new or renewed interest for the international community, may be suitable for
the progressive development and codification of international law and therefore may be
included in the future programme of work of the International Law Commission,
Recalling also the role of Member States in submitting proposals for new topics
for the consideration of the International Law Commission, and noting in this regard

__________________
1
2

22-28249 (E)

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-seventh Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/77/10).
Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.

221222

*2228249*

Report of the International Law Commission on the work of its
seventy-third session

A/RES/77/103

the recommendation of the Commission that such proposals be accompanied by a
statement of reasons,
Reaffirming the importance for the successful work of the International Law
Commission of the information provided by Member States concerning their views
and practice,
Recognizing the importance of the work of the special rapporteurs of the
International Law Commission,
Welcoming the holding of the International Law Seminar, and the voluntary
contributions made to the United Nations trust fund for the International Law Seminar,
Acknowledging the importance of facilitating the timely publication of the
Yearbook of the International Law Commission and of eliminating the backlog,
Stressing the usefulness of focusing and structuring the debate on the report of
the International Law Commission in the Sixth Committee in such a manner that
conditions are provided for concentrated attention to each of the main topics dealt
with in the report and for discussions on specific topics,
Wishing to enhance further, in the context of the revitalization of the debate on
the report of the International Law Commission, the interaction between the Sixth
Committee as a body of governmental representatives and the Commis sion as a body
of independent legal experts, with a view to improving the dialogue between the two
bodies,
Welcoming initiatives to hold interactive debates, panel discussions and question
time in the Sixth Committee, as envisaged in General Assembly reso lution 58/316 of
1 July 2004 on further measures for the revitalization of the work of the Assembly,
1.
Takes note of the report of the International Law Commission on the work
of its seventy-third session;3
2.
Expresses its appreciation to the International Law Commission for the
work accomplished at its seventy-third session, and notes in particular:
(a) The completion of the second reading of the draft conclusions on
identification and legal consequences of peremptory norms of general international
law (jus cogens) and the commentaries thereto; 4
(b) The completion of the second reading of the draft principles on protection
of the environment in relation to armed conflicts and the commentarie s thereto;5
(c) The completion of the first reading of the draft articles on immunity of
State officials from foreign criminal jurisdiction and the commentaries thereto; 6
3.
Decides that the consideration of chapter IV of the report of the International
Law Commission on the work of its seventy-third session, dealing with the topic
“Peremptory norms of general international law (jus cogens)”, shall be continued at the
seventy-eighth session of the General Assembly, during the consideration o f the report
of the Commission on the work of its seventy-fourth session;
4.
Recommends that the International Law Commission continue its work on
the topics in its current programme of work, taking into account the comments and
observations of Governments, whether submitted in writing or expressed orally in
debates in the Sixth Committee;
__________________

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-seventh Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/77/10).
Ibid, chap. IV, sect. E.
5 Ibid, chap. V, sect. E.
6 Ibid, chap. VI, sect. C.
3
4

2/7

22-28249

Report of the International Law Commission on the work of its
seventy-third session

A/RES/77/103

5.
Draws the attention of Governments to the importance for the
International Law Commission of having their views on the various aspects of the
topics on the agenda of the Commission, in particular on all the specific issues
identified in chapter III of its report, 7 regarding:
(a)

General principles of law;

(b)

Sea-level rise in relation to international law;

(c)

Subsidiary means for the determination of rules of in ternational law;

(d)

Prevention and repression of piracy and armed robbery at sea;

(e) Settlement of international disputes to which international organizations
are parties;
6.
Also draws the attention of Governments to the importance for the
International Law Commission of having their comments and observations by
1 December 2023 on the draft articles on immunity of State officials from foreign
criminal jurisdiction; 8
7.
Takes note of the decision of the International Law Commission to include
the topics “Settlement of international disputes to which international organizations
are parties”, “Prevention and repression of piracy and armed robbery at sea” and
“Subsidiary means for the determination of rules of international law” in its
programme of work,9 and encourages the Commission to continue the examination of
the topics that are in its long-term programme of work; 10
8.
Encourages the International Law Commission to take particular account
of the capacity and views of Member States, as well as of the workload of the
Commission, when including topics in its current programme of work;
9.
Takes note of paragraphs 249 to 253 of the report of the International Law
Commission,11 and notes, in particular, the inclusion of the topic “Non -legally binding
international agreements” in the long-term programme of work of the Commission, 12
and in this regard calls upon the Commission to take into consideration the comments,
concerns and observations expressed by Governments during the debate in the Sixth
Committee;
10. Also takes note of paragraph 270 of the report of the International Law
Commission, and requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to identify
concrete options for support for the work of special rapporteurs, additional to those
provided under General Assembly resolution 56/272 of 27 March 2002;

__________________

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-seventh Session, Supplement No. 10
(A/77/10).
8 Ibid., para. 66.
9 Ibid., paras. 238–240.
10 The following topics are currently in the long-term programme of work of the International Law
Commission: “Ownership and protection of wrecks beyond the limits of national maritime
jurisdiction”, “Jurisdictional immunity of international organizations”, “Protection of personal
data in transborder flow of information”, “Extraterritorial jurisdiction”, “The fair and equitable
treatment standard in international investment law”, “Evidence before international courts and
tribunals”, “Universal criminal jurisdiction”, “Reparation to individuals for gross violations of
international human rights law and serious violations of international humanitarian law” and
“Non-legally binding international agreements”.
11 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-seventh Session, Supplement No. 10
(A/77/10).
12 Ibid., para. 251.
7

22-28249

3/7

A/RES/77/103

Report of the International Law Commission on the work of its
seventy-third session

11. Welcomes the efforts of the International Law Commission to improve its
methods of work, and encourages the Commission to continue this pr actice;
12. Invites the International Law Commission to continue to take measures to
enhance its efficiency and productivity and to consider making proposals to Member
States to that end;
13. Recalls the importance of an in-depth analysis of State practice and the
consideration of the diversity of legal systems of Member States to the work of the
International Law Commission;
14. Takes note of paragraph 274 of the report of the International Law
Commission, recalls the paramount importance of multilingualism as set forth in
General Assembly resolutions 69/324 of 11 September 2015 and 73/346 of
16 September 2019 on multilingualism, underlines the importance of having the
documents of the Commission published in due time in the six official languages of
the United Nations while ensuring their accuracy in all official languages, and to this
end requests special rapporteurs to submit their reports within the time limits specified
by the Secretariat, and the Secretariat to give due consideration to the quality of the
translation of the documents of the Commission in the six official languages;
15. Encourages the International Law Commission to continue to take costsaving measures at its future sessions, without prejudice to the efficiency and
effectiveness of its work;
16. Recalls that the seat of the International Law Commission is at the United
Nations Office at Geneva;
17. Takes note of paragraph 284 of the report of the International Law
Commission, and decides that the next session of the Commission shall be held at the
United Nations Office at Geneva from 24 April to 2 June and from 3 July to 4 August
2023;
18. Also takes note of paragraph 281 of the report of the International Law
Commission, and requests the Secretariat to proceed with the necessary
administrative and organizational arrangements to facilitate the holding of the first
part of a session of the Commission in New York during the next quinquennium;
19. Stresses the desirability of further enhancing the dialogue between the
International Law Commission, in particular the special rapporteurs, and the Sixth
Committee, and in this context encourages, inter alia, the continued practice of
informal consultations in the form of discussions between the members of the Sixth
Committee and the members of the Commission throughout the year;
20. Encourages delegations, during the debate on the report of the
International Law Commission, to continue to adhere as far as possible to the
structured work programme agreed to by the Sixth Committee and to consider
presenting concise and focused statements;
21. Encourages Member States to consider being represented at the level of
legal adviser during the first week in which the report of the International Law
Commission is discussed in the Sixth Committee (International Law Week) to enable
high-level discussions on issues of international law;
22. Underlines in this regard the necessity to allow sufficient time for the
consideration of the report of the International Law Commission in the Sixth
Committee;
23. Requests the International Law Commission to continue to pay special
attention to indicating in its annual report, for each topic, any specific issues on which
expressions of views by Governments, either in the Sixth Committee or in written
4/7

22-28249

Report of the International Law Commission on the work of its
seventy-third session

A/RES/77/103

form, would be of particular interest in providing effective guidance for the
Commission in its further work;
24. Takes note of paragraphs 286 to 288 of the report of the International Law
Commission with regard to cooperation and interaction with other bodies, and
encourages the Commission to continue the implementation of articles 16 (e), 25 and
26 of its statute in order to further strengthen cooperation between the Commission
and other bodies concerned with international law, having in mind the usefulness of
such cooperation;
25. Notes that consulting with national organizations and individual experts
concerned with international law may assist Governments in considering whether to
make comments and observations on drafts submitted by the International Law
Commission and in formulating their comments and observations;
26. Reaffirms its previous decisions concerning the indispensable role of the
Codification Division of the Office of Legal Affairs of the Secretariat in providing
assistance to the International Law Commission, including in the preparation of
memorandums and studies on topics on the agenda of the Commission, and takes note
of the request of the Commission to the Secretariat contained in paragraphs 241 to
246 of the report of the Commission to prepare memorandums that would be
particularly relevant for its future work on the topics “Settlement of international
disputes to which international organizations are parties”, “Prevention and repression
of piracy and armed robbery at sea”, “Subsidiary means for the determination of r ules
of international law” and “Sea-level rise in relation to international law”;
27. Also reaffirms its previous decisions concerning the documentation and
summary records of the International Law Commission; 13
28. Takes note of paragraph 272 of the report of the International Law
Commission, stresses the need to expedite the preparation of the summary records of
the International Law Commission, welcomes the continuation of the measures taken
to streamline the processing of summary records during the sixty-fifth session of the
Commission,14 which have led to a more rational use of resources, and expresses its
satisfaction that the summary records of the Commission, constituting travaux
préparatoires in the progressive development and codification of inte rnational law,
will not be subject to arbitrary length restrictions;
29. Welcomes the institutionalization of the practice of the Secretariat to
include on the website of the International Law Commission the provisional summary
records in English and French relating to the work of the Commission;
30. Also welcomes the efforts of the Secretariat in seeking to ensure the timely
and efficient processing of the documents of the International Law Commission and
the institutionalization of the experimental measures taken during the sixty-eighth
session of the Commission to streamline the editing of those documents;
31. Takes note of paragraph 271 of the report of the International Law
Commission, and underlines the importance of the publications of the Codifica tion
Division to the work of the Commission, welcomes in particular the issuance of the
ninth edition of The Work of the International Law Commission also in Chinese,
French, Russian and Spanish, and reiterates its request that the Secretary -General
__________________

See resolutions 32/151, para. 10, and 37/111, para. 5, and all subsequent resolutions on the
annual reports of the International Law Commission to the General Assembly; see also Yearbook
of the International Law Commission 1982, vol. II (Part Two), paras. 267–269 and 271, as well
as all subsequent annual reports of the International Law Commission.
14 Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/68/10),
para. 183.
13

22-28249

5/7

A/RES/77/103

Report of the International Law Commission on the work of its
seventy-third session

continue to publish The Work of the International Law Commission in all six official
languages at the beginning of each quinquennium, the Reports of International
Arbitral Awards in English or French and the Summaries of the Judgments, Advisory
Opinions and Orders of the International Court of Justice in all six official languages
every five years;
32. Also takes note of paragraph 275 of the report of the International Law
Commission, expresses its appreciation to the United Nations Library at Geneva for
the dedicated assistance accorded to the Commission, and notes the Commission’s
emphasis on the need for adequate funding to ensure the continuation of the Library’s
ability to function as a research library to assist the Commission in the performance
of its mandate in the codification and progressive development of international law;
33. Further takes note of paragraph 276 of the report of the International Law
Commission, stresses the unique value of the Yearbook of the International Law
Commission, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure its timely publication in
all official languages;
34. Expresses its appreciation to Governments that have made voluntary
contributions to the trust fund on the backlog relating to the Yearbook of the
International Law Commission, and encourages further contributions to the trust
fund;
35. Takes note of paragraph 277 of the report of the International Law
Commission, expresses its satisfaction with the remarkable progress achieved in the
past few years in reducing the backlog of the Yearbook of the International Law
Commission in all six languages, welcomes the efforts made by the Division of
Conference Management of the United Nations Office at Geneva, especially its
Editing Section, in effectively implementing relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly calling for the reduction of the backlog, encourages that Division to
provide continuous necessary support to the Editing Section in advancing the
Yearbook of the International Law Commission, and requests that updates on progress
made in this respect be provided to the Commission on a regular basis;
36. Welcomes the continuous efforts of the Codification Division to maintain
and improve the website relating to the work of the International Law Commission;
37. Takes note of paragraph 285 of the report of the International Law
Commission, together with annex II and the appendix to the report, and, without
prejudice to the importance of ensuring necessary allocations for the Commission and
its secretariat in the regular budget, requests the Secretary-General to establish a trust
fund for assistance to Special Rapporteurs of the International Law Commission and
matters ancillary thereto, taking into account the terms of reference proposed in the
appendix to the report, including the need for the financial contributions not to be
earmarked for any specific activity of the International Law Commission, its Special
Rapporteurs or Chairs of its Study Groups;
38. Expresses the hope that the International Law Seminar will continue to be
held in connection with the sessions of the International Law Commission and that
an increasing number of participants representing the principal legal systems of the
world and from different countries in the various regions, including in particular those
from developing countries, will be given the opportunity to attend the Seminar, as
well as delegates to the Sixth Committee, and appeals to States to continue to make
urgently needed voluntary contributions to the United Nations trust fund for the
International Law Seminar;
39. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide the International
Law Seminar with adequate services, including interpretation, as required, and

6/7

22-28249

Report of the International Law Commission on the work of its
seventy-third session

A/RES/77/103

encourages him to continue to consider ways to improve the structure and c ontent of
the Seminar;
40. Underlines the importance of the records and topical summary of the
debate in the Sixth Committee for the deliberations of the International Law
Commission, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to forward to the
Commission, for its attention, the records of the debate on the report of the
Commission, together with such written statements as delegations may circulate in
conjunction with their oral statements, and to prepare and distribute a topical
summary of the debate, following established practice;
41. Requests the Secretariat to circulate to States, as soon as possible after the
conclusion of the session of the International Law Commission, chapter II of its report
containing a summary of the work of that session, chapter III containing the specific
issues on which the views of Governments would be of particular interest to the
Commission and any draft provisions adopted on either first or second reading by the
Commission;
42. Also requests the Secretariat to make the complete report of the
International Law Commission available as soon as possible after the conclusion of
the session of the Commission for the consideration of Member States with due
anticipation and no later than the prescribed time limit for reports in the General
Assembly;
43. Encourages the International Law Commission to continue to consider
ways in which specific issues on which the views of Governments would be of
particular interest to the Commission could be framed so as to help Governments to
have a better appreciation of the issues on which responses are required;
44. Recommends that the debate on the report of the International Law
Commission at the seventy-eighth session of the General Assembly commence on
23 October 2023.
47th plenary meeting
7 December 2022

22-28249

7/7
