S/PV.8601

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8601st meeting

Wednesday, 21 August 2019, 9.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Wronecka . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Poland)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Cooreman
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Ugarelli
Mr. Repkin
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Hickey
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia (S/2019/661)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-25920 (E)
*1925920*

S/PV.8601

The situation in Somalia

The meeting was called to order at 9.30 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia
(S/2019/661)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Somalia to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in the meeting: Mr. James Swan,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia; Mr. Francisco Caetano José Madeira, Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission for Somalia and Head of the African
Union Mission in Somalia; Ms. Pramila Patten, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict; and Ms. Amina Arale, Executive
Director of the Somali Women Development Centre.
Mr. Madeira and Ms. Arale are joining this meeting
via video-teleconference from Mogadishu.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/661, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on Somalia.
I now give the floor to Mr. Swan.
Mr. Swan: I am pleased to address the Security
Council for the first time since assuming my duties
in June. I want to begin by affirming to the members
my full commitment to implementing the mandate
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
(UNSOM), approved by the Council in resolution 2461
(2019), and other relevant Council resolutions. I also
want to stress at the outset the central importance of
key cross-cutting priorities in all that we do, including
human rights, the women and peace and security
agenda, youth engagement and the inclusion of civil
society, among other issues.
Since my arrival in Somalia, I have been grateful
for the warm welcome by the Federal Government,
2/28

21/08/2019

federal member states and all of the Somalis I have
had the pleasure of meeting. I also appreciate the
collaboration to date of the international partners
in Somalia and look forward to reinforcing that
collaboration. I am particularly grateful for the counsel
and close cooperation of Ambassador Francisco
Madeira, the Special Representative of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission for Somalia, and I
pay tribute to the continued heroic sacrifice of forces of
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) for
the cause of peace in Somalia.
Since my return to a country I have followed
closely for many years, I have been impressed by many
visible signs of progress. I have visited each of the
federal member states and Somaliland, where I had an
opportunity to hear the perspectives of their leaders
and people. In my travels around the country, I have
observed many examples of recovery, development,
improving security and functional State institutions.
I have been deeply impressed, even moved, by the
resilience, commitment and courage of Somalis I
have encountered. This progress is a testimony to
the ambitious but achievable peacebuilding and
State-building agenda, to which Somalia’s leaders
are committed.
Somalia and its international partners are eager
to see this progress advance between now and the
end of 2020 through constitutional reform, advances
in security operations and security sector reforms,
the achievement of debt relief leading to predictable
financing for development, and delivery on the
anticipated national elections. We must acknowledge the
gains made to date towards achieving these priorities.
Yet the window to achieve further necessary progress
on these issues is narrowing. Key benchmarks risk
falling behind agreed timelines. Further progress may
be delayed without renewed dialogue and cooperation
among all stakeholders.
Setting the stage to achieve these goals between
now and 2020 will require accelerated efforts in the next
several months. It will also require political consensus
and compromise among Somali leaders at the national
level — in both the executive and legislative branches
of Government — and particularly between the central
Government and the federal member states, on how
best to advance. We look forward to the next meeting of
the Somalia Partnership Forum in October, which will
provide an opportunity for Somalia and its international
partners to agree on the priority areas for action and to
19-25920

21/08/2019

The situation in Somalia

catalyse progress on Somalia’s State-building priorities
between now and the end of 2020.
The national electoral cycle in 2020 and 2021 offers
an opportunity to decisively advance the process of
democratization. Technical preparations continue to
make progress, a draft electoral law is under review by
the Federal Parliament and the National Independent
Electoral Commission is preparing for voter registration.
I encourage Parliament’s House of the People
to expedite its review and adoption of the electoral
bill, including further consultations to achieve broad
political support. To that end, I welcome the resumption
of cooperation between the two Houses of Parliament.
I also encourage the Federal Government to establish
an electoral security coordination task force to develop
the arrangements by which the election will be secured.
We also urge that the empowerment of women in the
political processes be enhanced.
Even as we look ahead to national elections in 2020
and 2021, we must be attentive to electoral processes
in the federal member states. We are closely following
developments in Galmudug, where, with the support of
the Federal Government of Somalia, a reconciliation
forum is being put in place. We encourage this effort
aimed at achieving a broad-based consensus on
Galmudug’s electoral process.
In Jubaland, we continue to urge a single, agreed,
consensual electoral process, without which there is
an increased risk of instability if there is a contested
outcome. The United Nations and other international
partners have pressed all sides to seek compromise on
an agreed path forward, but time is now, regrettably,
very short. Disorder in Jubaland would put in jeopardy
not only gains made in that federal member state,
but also many critical national priorities, including
preparations for the elections in 2020 and 2021, the
fight against Al-Shabaab and the development agenda.
Whatever the outcome in Jubaland tomorrow, I implore
all stakeholders to show restraint, refrain from violence
and resolve grievances through dialogue.
As noted at the beginning of my briefing, I visited
Somaliland on 27 and 28 July and had informative
consultations with its leaders. We continue to
encourage dialogue between authorities in Hargeisa
and Mogadishu, and others, building on past efforts.
The Federal Constitution, once adopted, will
provide a common vision for all Somalis, while clearly

S/PV. 8601

defining the respective roles of the organs of the
federal State and relations with and between federal
member states. Progress has been made in the technical
review process, but Somalis now need to pursue an
inclusive dialogue to reach agreement on outstanding
critical issues, including the allocation of powers,
intergovernmental relations, the system of governance,
resource sharing and the status of Mogadishu.
The security situation in Somalia remains a serious
concern. The brutal Al-Shabaab attack on the offices
of the Benadir regional administration on 24 July
served as a painful reminder of the threat that terrorism
poses to progress. I pay tribute to the victims of this
and other attacks. Yet there are encouraging security
developments. Somali security forces, working with
AMISOM, the United Nations and international partners,
are making progress in recovering and stabilizing areas
of Lower Shabelle, on the periphery of Mogadishu,
that had been held by Al-Shabaab. Those operations
have shown the effectiveness of this collaboration and
reinforced the commitment of key security actors to the
comprehensive approach to security. The operations are
simultaneously supporting the implementation of the
transition plan and the national security architecture by
advancing institutional reforms designed to generate,
professionalize and sustain Somali military and police
forces, as well as rule-of-law and justice institutions.
Somalia is making steady progress towards economic
recovery. Efforts are ongoing to improve the country’s
economic resilience as well as the inclusiveness of that
growth. Government authorities have made important
strides towards improving fiscal performance and
strengthening governance. The decision point under
the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative is within
sight. The Federal Government of Somalia now needs
to ensure that it achieves the remaining preconditions
for reaching the decision point in early 2020, which
will require close collaboration with Parliament to pass
necessary legislation, and with federal member states
on the fiscal federal framework.
Meanwhile, the humanitarian crisis in Somalia
remains among the most protracted in the world.
Currently, 2.2 million Somalis are facing acute food
insecurity, and 2.6 million are internally displaced,
fleeing conflict and drought. The United Nations and
the Somali Government together issued a drought
impact response plan requesting $686 million, of
which approximately $350 million has been secured. I
call on Member States to urgently resource the plan.

19-259203/28

S/PV.8601

The situation in Somalia

At the same time, we must focus on legitimate Somali
priorities for longer-term development, as reflected in
the recovery and resilience framework and preparations
for the new national development programme.
Almost eight months have passed since 1 January,
when the United Nations family was shaken by a mortar
attack on our Mogadishu compound. Since that day, we
have made substantial progress to enhance the safety
and security of United Nations personnel. Staff security
and welfare will remain a priority for me throughout
my tenure.
Allow me to express my appreciation to my
Deputy, Mr. Raisedon Zenenga, for his leadership in
the challenging months before my arrival. I also thank
the United Nations Support Office in Somalia for its
steadfast assistance to AMISOM, the Somali National
Army and the United Nations family in Somalia.
Building sustainable peace and stability in a
country that has suffered the trauma and shocks that
Somalia has experienced over many decades will take
perseverance and patience. With the continued support
of the Security Council, and the wider international
community, UNSOM remains committed to assisting
Somalis on their journey towards a peaceful and
prosperous future.
The President: I thank Mr. Swan for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Madeira.
Mr. Madeira: I thank you, Madam President, for
inviting me to address the Security Council on the
situation in Somalia. At the outset, let me join Mr. Swan
in congratulating you, Madam President, upon your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.
Since my previous briefing of the Council (see
S/PV.8533), Somalia’s political and security landscape
has remained encouraging, despite recurrent instances
of commotion and political uncertainty. In the past
three months, the country has witnessed political,
security and economic developments that, if sustainably
harnessed, will have a healthy impact on our concerted
effort to help end the war in Somalia, bring about a
return to peace in the country and build a better future
for all its people.
During the period under review, we witnessed
efforts by the Federal Government of Somalia to seek
to comply with its commitments and milestones on
peace, stability, development and inclusive politics,
4/28

21/08/2019

in particular in relation to the preparations for the
state-level elections in Galmudug and Jubaland.
In Galmudug state, remarkable progress towards
reconciliation was recorded, including inter- and
intra-clan reconciliation, as the basis for a longterm approach to stability. Prime Minister Hassan
Khayre’s stay in Galmudug, which lasted more than a
month, led to the triggering of a process whereby Ahl
Al-Sunna Wal-Jama‘a and Habar clan forces are being
integrated into the Somali national security forces.
The African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM),
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), the European Union, the United Nations and
bilateral partners were invited to witness the unveiling
of the Prime Minister’s initiatives on force integration
and on preparations for the Galmudug reconciliation
conference in Dhusamareb and the preparation of the
ground for Galmudug state elections later in the year.
The delegation met with some of the integrated
Al-Sunna recruits and was afforded an opportunity
to meet and discuss with the reconciliation committee
their composition and mission, the communities they
represent and their level of representativeness. The Prime
Minister’s efforts need to be supported in all aspects,
as they provide a unique opportunity to deliver on the
establishment of a united Government and functioning
institutions in Galmudug, lasting reconciliation among
the 11 clans that make up the population of that state and
the much-needed peace and stability that is essential for
any meaningful development there.
With regard to Jubaland, in the course of preparations
for upcoming elections, AMISOM held several separate
meetings with the Federal Government of Somalia,
Jubaland state leaders, presidential candidates from the
opposition, traditional elders and representatives of the
international community to review the deteriorating
political situation in Jubaland state, with a view to
mitigating the far-reaching ramifications and potential
escalation of tensions among the stakeholders. The key
outcome of those engagements was the stakeholders’
agreement on AMISOM’s role as elaborated in resolution
2472 (2019) to help create a secure environment in the
run-up to elections, including beefing up the security
of Kismaayo and its environs. An elaborate plan for the
envisaged free, fair and inclusive elections was agreed,
and an intelligence committee was put in place.
Together with AMISOM and IGAD, the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM),
under the leadership of my colleague, Mr. James
19-25920

21/08/2019

The situation in Somalia

Swan, went into Kismaayo and, on behalf of the
international community, made efforts to reach out to
the stakeholders, the Jubaland Independent Electoral
and Boundaries Commission and the administration
in Kismaayo to address key concerns raised by the
parties. These efforts are ongoing, and, despite the
late hour, it is our hope that the parties will come to
an understanding that will produce inclusive, credible
and peaceful elections that strengthen the unity of the
people of Jubaland.
On the 2020 and 2021 elections, the key highlights
during the period under review were the further
development of the electoral rolls whereby political
decisions on the electoral system were considered, with
a review of the political party law, voter registration,
public outreach and election security. The National
Independent Electoral Commission has yet to finalize
the pre-voter-registration preparations, including the
identification of voter-registration locations that can be
secured with the support of AMISOM.
In line with the decision of the African Union
Peace and Security Council and resolution 2472
(2019), the African Union Commission and AMISOM
sponsored and organized a multi-stakeholder workshop
in Kampala on electoral security and an electoral
dispute-resolution mechanism directed to the 2020
and 2021 general elections in Somalia. A draft election
plan on electoral-security planning was developed
during the workshop, which envisages, among other
key interventions, the establishment by the Federal
Government of Somalia of an electoral-security task
force that will develop the electoral-security concept
for the 2020 and 2021 elections. Meanwhile, AMISOM
has proactively put together internal election-security
cells throughout the regions comprising its own police,
military and civilian components.
On the Constitution review process, mandated
bodies held discussions with President Mohamed
Abdullahi Mohamed Farmajo on the progress realized
so far. Public consultations and civic engagement within
the states have been planned and agreed, and work
towards their implementation is in progress. AMISOM
is ready to contribute to these efforts by supporting the
Somali security forces, which have been given the task
of providing security to the different teams that will be
implementing this programme in the regions.
The Somali economy continues to recover, and this
year’s growth is estimated to strengthen to 3 per cent

S/PV. 8601

from 2.8 per cent last year. Inflation declined from
3.2 per cent to 3 per cent, according to information
obtained from the Governmental authorities. The
Government is implementing the fourth and last
staff-monitored International Monetary Fund (IMF)
programme designed to attract soft loans from the IMF
and the World Bank and strengthen opportunities for
debt relief. We believe that effort needs to be recognized
and supported.
Al-Shabaab remains a serious threat to security
and stability across Somalia. To face this challenge,
AMISOM maintains a presence in the sectors as set
out in its 2018 to 2021 concept of operations, and,
in collaboration with the Somali security forces, we
continue to protect population centres, secure the
main supply routes and provide convoy escorts to
ensure the safe movement of peoples and goods, the
distribution of humanitarian assistance and the exercise
by the Government and federal member states of their
governance functions. We undertake combat patrols
and conduct targeted operations against the enemy.
To sustain and enhance current operational
coordination
among
AMISOM,
the
Federal
Government of Somalia and their partners, AMISOM
convened several operational coordination meetings
at its headquarters, and significant progress has been
recorded in the areas of consultation, joint planning and
joint operations. In that regard, in support of efforts by
the Somali security forces aimed at implementing the
Somali transition plan, AMISOM conducted targeted
offensive operations in Coscore and Dar es Salaam
in Sector 2 with a view to disrupting and degrading
Al-Shabaab. In this context, significant progress was
made in the implementation of first phase activities of
the Somali transition plan, including combat readiness,
mentoring and assisting the 53rd, 143rd, Eagle, 27th and
reconnaissance battalions of the Somali National Army.
AMISOM and the Somali National Army conducted
joint operations that, apart from Sabiid, Janaale and
Bariira, calmed areas that were liberated in April and
May. These joint operations also led to the capture from
Al-Shabaab of the towns of Ceel Sallini, Ceel Gelow,
Awdhagle in the Lower Shabelle region between June
and August 2019.
Our interaction and collaboration with the United
Nations Mine Action Service is vital and indispensable.
It is getting tighter and stronger as we progress deep into
enemy territory. Thanks to the work of this important
United Nations agency, many lives of our soldiers are

19-259205/28

S/PV.8601

The situation in Somalia

saved and their physical wholeness safeguarded. This
is also important in mitigating the threat posed by the
improvised explosive devices.
I also want to highlight the important collaboration,
cooperation and support that AMISOM is getting from
the United Nations Support Office in Somalia. This
support is what makes us move and achieve what we
are achieving. I wish to express my recognition and
thanks to Ms. Filipetto for her proactive, receptive and
amicable handling of business with AMISOM.
In terms of reconfiguration, AMISOM has been
reconfigured in space and forces. In this regard, due
to operational tempo, AMISOM has established new
forward operating bases in Ceel Sallini, Ceel Gelow
and Awdhagle. On the other hand, AMISOM Sectors 1,
2 and 3 have already established mobile forces that have
proved to be very effective in keeping the enemy on its
toes and far away from the main population centres.
Relatedly, AMISOM police has mentored 3,251 Somali
police personnel deployed in 31 operational police
stations in Somalia on various policing themes and
provided operational support to enhance the delivery
of professional, responsive and robust policing services
across the country.
Similarly, in line with the Somali transition plan,
AMISOM provided capacity-building support to the
Somali Police Force through the conduct of refresher and
specialized training, including courses on community
policing and human rights, community policing and
de-radicalization, and the training of trainers to
enhance policing skills as part of efforts to facilitate
the gradual transfer of security responsibilities to the
Somali security forces.
In a bid to support the protection of the rights
of vulnerable persons, AMISOM police officers
co-located with the Somali police gender focal point
officers for mentoring and sensitization. A total of
970 Somali Police Force and federal member states
police force officers were mentored and sensitized
on numerous themes related to sexual and genderbased violence. AMISOM maintains civilian-sector
teams in Kismaayo, Jawhar, Beledweyne and Baidoa,
carrying out the Mission implementation plan for
2019 and engaging with the leaders of federal member
states, civil society organizations and key partners,
including United Nations agencies, in support of the
military and police in stabilization efforts aligned with
6/28

21/08/2019

Somalia’s transition plan and in the implementation of
stabilization programmes.
As we do those things, we strive to ensure that
our operations are conducted in strict compliance
with applicable international humanitarian law,
international human rights law and the United Nations
human rights due-diligence policy. To that end, during
the period under review, AMISOM conducted a series
of predeployment and in-mission trainings for all
uniformed personnel on international humanitarian
law, international human rights law, child protection,
the protection of women, tracking civilian casualties,
analysis and response cells, sexual exploitation and
abuse, conduct and discipline, and conflict-related
sexual violence. In the period under review, professional
development trainings were conducted for AMISOM
troop-contributing countries — Uganda, Burundi,
Kenya and Sierra Leone — while various in-mission
induction trainings were carried out in Mission areas.
The Council may recall that, after the capture of
the city of Mogadishu, AMISOM forces embarked on
the liberation of regional capitals and main population
centres in the rest of central and southern Somalia.
To preserve those gains and ensure that life evolves
normally in the liberated areas, AMISOM has had
to establish a continued presence in those towns and
population centres to hold and secure them and foil
all attempts by Al-Shabaab to take them back. As the
number of towns captured from Al-Shabaab increased,
so too did the number of forces required to hold them.
The number of troops approved for AMISOM was put
under pressure in the presence of the growing population
demand for AMISOM protection and security.
To solve that problem and to continue to take
towns from Al-Shabaab while holding on to the
already captured towns, AMISOM created dedicated
mobile forces, but that approach came with another
challenge — who would hold the newly liberated towns
and preserve the accumulated gains? That question did
not have a satisfactory answer, as our Somali brothers
were not yet in a position to generate a sizeable, properly
trained, integrated and equipped force with adequate
and dependable logistical support. That inability of the
Somali forces to hold and build on the newly liberated
population centres posed a much more delicate
question — what is the use of AMISOM continuing
to liberate more cities and towns, at immense cost in
lives and equipment, just to see those same towns and
19-25920

21/08/2019

The situation in Somalia

cities being retaken by Al-Shabaab because of the lack
of forces to hold them?
That aspect of the challenge faced by AMISOM in
the theatre of operations was never properly understood
by the wider international community, which preferred
to cling to its assumed position — that AMISOM was
not carrying out offensive operations as it once did. The
recent developments in Sabid, Bariire, Ceel Sallini, Ceel
Gelow and Awdheegle have provided the right answer
to that question, which has eluded us for many years.
The Somalis are now producing properly trained and
integrated battalions capable of taking on Al-Shabaab,
liberating towns and holding them, and allowing the
Government to come in, attend to the population and
provide services.
That is one of the most salient achievements during
the period under consideration. To sustain that and
allow for the consolidation of the accumulated gains
and the transition of the security responsibilities from
AMISOM to the Somalis, we must continue supporting
the generation of troops in Somalia, training and
equipping those armed forces and protecting and
enabling them to take and continue to hold cities
and towns.
The President: I thank Mr. Madeira for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Patten.
Ms. Patten: I thank you, Madam President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on my recent
visit to Somalia, which took place from 14 to 18 July, at
the invitation of the Federal Government.
While it was my first visit, Somalia has been a
priority country for my mandate over the past decade.
Following the signing of a joint communiqué on the
prevention of sexual violence in May 2013, my Office,
through the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and
Sexual Violence in Conflict, has been actively working
through the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia and other United Nations entities to support the
Government in strengthening its formal justice system.
The purpose of my visit was to engage with the
Federal Government and the federal member states,
to take stock of ongoing efforts, to understand the
challenges and to determine the nature of support
to be extended to the Government in its efforts to
prevent and respond to conflict-related sexual violence.
During my mission, I visited Mogadishu and Baidoa.
In both locations, I met with senior Government

S/PV. 8601

officials, parliamentarians, United Nations and African
Union officials, front-line service providers and civil
society representatives.
I could not meet with survivors due to security
constraints, but I am satisfied with the level of
information I obtained from the United Nations system
and implementing partners who stressed how sexual
violence in Somalia remains a matter of grave concern.
The number of cases documented is just the tip of a
deeply structural problem, with countless women and
girls subjected to, or living in fear of, sexual violence.
I emphasize the word “countless”, as victims are often
invisible and inaccessible, with nowhere to report these
crimes and nowhere to turn.
It is an environment in which women and girls
are particularly vulnerable to conflict-related sexual
violence owing to deeply entrenched gender inequality
and discrimination, continuing insecurity, weak rule
of law, large-scale displacement, limited reach of
State institutions, lack of access to areas controlled by
Al-Shabaab and the recurrent humanitarian crises.
In Baidoa, the President of South-West state and
other members of his cabinet, the Ministers of Justice
and Gender Equality, informed me of persistent
insecurity, particularly in internally displaced
persons camps, with displaced women and girls from
marginalized minority groups facing the highest risk of
sexual violence owing to a lack of, or limited access to,
protection mechanisms.
I met with more than 35 civil society organizations
and front-line service providers in Mogadishu, who
depicted a situation in which sexual predators are
emboldened by a weak legal system and the stigma
attached to reporting, leading to justice being elusive
for most victims. They highlighted how the conflict has
eroded the strength of all key institutions, especially
the criminal justice system, thereby severely limiting
human rights protection for survivors and their ability
seek justice in a secure and dignified manner.
They raised the serious challenges that they face in
reaching vulnerable women and girls, especially those
with disabilities, due to insecurity, restrictions imposed
by parties to the conflict and targeted attacks on aid
workers. The majority of survivors do not have access
to comprehensive health services, including sexual and
reproductive health services. Al-Shabaab has banned
most non-governmental organizations and all United
Nations agencies from areas under its control.

19-259207/28

S/PV.8601

The situation in Somalia

21/08/2019

Concerns were also raised about the common
practice of abduction by Al-Shabaab and forcing
families to endorse forced marriages. In that regard, I
was encouraged by an innovative pilot project in Baidoa,
supported by International Organization for Migration,
which provides rehabilitation and reintegration
assistance to women and girls formerly associated with
Al-Shabaab. Social workers shared information about
several cases, including that of a 17-year-old girl who
was abducted and forcibly married to a member of
A1-Shabaab, but escaped with her two children born
from rape, and that of another young victim who paid
So.Sh50 million, the equivalent of $2,500, in order to
escape Al-Shabaab. In recognition of the potential of
that project and the urgent need to reach more victims
of violent extremism and terrorism, the United Nations
Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict, the
inter-agency network that I chair, is already working to
replicate and scale up that initiative.

Despite some commendable efforts by the
Government, such as the constitutional review, the
sexual offences bill approved by the Federal Cabinet
since May 2018, efforts led by the Attorney General’s
Office and training of the Somali police, Somali
armed forces and national intelligence security agency
throughout 2018, progress is slow, with terrorism
remaining a major threat to peace and stability in
the country.

Impunity for the perpetrators of crimes of sexual
violence was also raised as a major concern, with
victims’ fears of stigmatization and reprisals, the
weakness and complexity of the legal system, the lack
of an adequate legislative framework and functional
judicial system and the use of traditional justice systems
resulting in chronic underreporting.

The Government also expressed the commitment
to work towards the delisting of its forces from the
annex to the annual report of the Secretary-General
on conflict-related sexual violence and has sought the
technical support of my Office to establish a road map
in that regard. In the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral’s (S/2019/280), the Somali National Army, the
Somali Police Force and allied militia, as well as the
Puntland forces, are listed as parties credibly suspected
of committing or being responsible for patterns of rape
and other forms of sexual violence. In my engagement
with the Deputy Prime Minister and other Government
officials, I made it clear that the full implementation
of the joint communiqué will be key on the road
towards delisting.

Despite ongoing efforts by the Government to
strengthen the formal justice system, many survivors
of sexual violence depend on traditional mechanisms
for justice — including customary law, xeer and
Sharia — through which they are forced to marry their
rapist to avoid bringing shame and stigma upon the
family. Local culture, with its custom of compelling
victims to marry their assailants or accept livestock
as compensation for their assault, constitutes a major
obstacle to justice. Concerns were expressed about the
safety of a 9-year-old girl who was raped by a 27-yearold brigadier soldier in Adale a few days before my
visit and about the likelihood of the case being settled
through traditional justice system.
Despite that extremely challenging situation, I am
pleased to inform the Council that my dialogue with
the national authorities was frank and constructive.
There was no attempt to deny or downplay the extent
and gravity of these crimes. In fact, there was a clear
acknowledgement that sexual violence has been, and is
being, perpetrated by all parties to the conflict, as well
as an expression of political will to address that scourge.
8/28

As a direct outcome of my visit, the Government
committed to working with the United Nations system
to develop a new implementation plan for the joint
communiqué, in the form of an action plan on ending
sexual violence in conflict, which will focus on key
elements of resolution 2331 (2016), which outlines the
nexus between terrorism and conflict-related sexual
violence, and resolution 2467 (2019), which calls for a
holistic, survivor-centred response to conflict-related
sexual violence.

Other key messages that I imparted to the
Government included the importance of tackling
conflict-related sexual violence primarily as a matter
of peace and security, by engaging the Ministries of
Defence, Internal Security and Justice, alongside the
Ministry of Women, Human Rights and Development.
The importance of addressing the root causes along with
a recognition that ending sexual violence necessitates
ending the gender inequality and discrimination that
underpins both the abuse and accompanying social
stigma, starting with the ratification of relevant
international and regional women’s rights instruments.
There must be a prompt enactment of the sexual
offences bill, which is still before the Parliament, which
19-25920

21/08/2019

The situation in Somalia

notes that the Somali penal code classifies sexual
violence as merely an offence against modesty and sexual
honour. There is a need to strengthen the participation
of the federal member states in all the initiatives of
the Federal Government, and most especially in the
development and implementation of the new action
plan. Last but not least, I stressed how critical it is to
engage a broad range of stakeholders, including the
Government, civil society, traditional and religious
leaders and the donor and diplomatic community.
I agreed with the Federal Government of Somalia
to deploy technical expertise from my Office at the
earliest convenience to support the elaboration of a new
action plan to address and respond to conflict-related
sexual violence. My Office will be working closely with
the United Nations system as a whole in supporting the
Government of Somalia.
Although peace remains elusive and violence and
insecurity have become normalized through decades
of conflict, survivors and front-line service providers
remain resilient. What they want, above all, is a
response from their Government and the international
community that shows that they are not forgotten.
The President: I thank Ms. Patten for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Arale.
Ms. Arale: I thank you, Madam President, for
the invitation to provide an update on the situation
of women and girls. My name is Amina Arale. I am a
young human rights defender and peace advocate. I was
born and raised in Somalia, and I have witnessed human
right violations in my country for 30 years. I join my
voice with those of my fellow human rights defenders
who have tirelessly fought for peace and justice in my
country and who have lost their lives or loved ones in
the process.
Today I speak in my capacity as the Executive
Director of the Somali Women Development Centre.
My organization strives to combat gender-based
violence against women and girls by enhancing their
participation in all spheres of public life. The Somali
Women Development Center established the first free
hotlines for victims of sexual and gender-based violence
and provides medical, psychosocial, material and
legal support, in addition to safe spaces for survivors
through one-stop centres. My organization is also one
of the largest providers of legal aid and access to justice
programmes in many parts of Somalia. We support

S/PV. 8601

thousands of survivors of gender-based violence
every year.
My statement today will address four key points:
the impact of the conflict on women and girls in
Somalia, the challenges related to access to justice,
women’s participation in the peace and security sector
and women’s meaningful participation in economic and
political life.
The culture of violence bred by 30 years of war
and political instability has devastated Somali society,
from State institutions to ordinary households. Somalia
is today deeply unequal, and gender discrimination
affects the majority of women across social and
economic status. Somalia ranks at 0.77 on the Gender
Inequality Index, according to which 1 represents
complete inequality. Sexual and gender-based violence
is persistent and shrouded in silence. Minority groups,
for example, remain quiet on how it affects their
communities, in order to avoid stigmatization and
social exclusion.
We welcome some of the concrete steps taken by
the Government to address sexual and gender-based
violence, including the drafting of the sexual offences
bill and efforts to hold perpetrators to account. The
consultative process surrounding the drafting of the bill,
which included input from civil society, was a positive
example of inclusive policymaking that is responsive
to the needs of survivors of, and organizations working
on, sexual and gender-based violence.
However, much remains that must be urgently done,
including the implementation of the sexual offences
bill. To date, Somalia has not signed, adopted or
implemented the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women. The Somali
Government committed to developing a national action
plan in line with resolution 1325 (2000) but has yet
to do so. The Security Council must urge the Federal
Government of Somalia to ratify and implement all
regional and international legislation to protect the
rights of women and girls and ensure that all national
legislation, including the sexual offences bill and
the female genital mutilation bill, meet international
standards and are rigorously enacted and implemented.
The Somali Government must also accelerate the
establishment of the national human rights commission
and ensure respect for international human rights laws.
The Federal Government of Somalia and the
regional authorities must also ensure that impunity will

19-259209/28

S/PV.8601

The situation in Somalia

not be tolerated and that all reported cases of sexual
and gender-based violence, including those against
security personnel, are swiftly investigated, as well
as respect the rights, safety, and privacy of survivors
in any process. The Government should support the
creation of specialized courts for addressing cases of
sexual and gender-based violence against women and
girls and juvenile courts for children.
It is critical that the Government undertake
efforts to sensitize various stakeholders, including
religious and traditional leaders, local authorities, law
enforcement and the judiciary, to sexual and genderbased violence. Talking about sexual and gender-based
violence is the first step towards eliminating it.
In the fragile context of Somalia, women’s
access to justice is especially challenging owing to
discriminatory laws and the lack of gender-responsive
programmes. Women are therefore left with rights in
name, but without any actual remedies, while men
remain the providers of justice.
The participation of women in the judiciary and the
legal profession has also met with resistance in Somalia.
Despite many years of advocacy, there are few female
prosecutors and no female judges in the country. For 19
years, my organization has been working on increasing
women’s participation in the justice sector. We have
found that women’s inclusion in that sector not only
improves justice for women, but for society as a whole.
The inclusion of women as judges, prosecutors,
lawyers and court officials ensures that the judiciary
is more representative of Somali society and that it is
better able to respond to the needs of diverse groups,
including women. Access to justice must be about more
than prosecuting crimes; it must also empower women
and transform underlying gender inequalities that
render women vulnerable to violence.
Women have actively contributed to peace and
ending the civil war in Somalia. However, 14 of the
peace agreements that have been reached over the past
three decades have failed owing to the exclusion of
women. The most recent peace agreement, in 2000, was
signed after women were included. Yet their role as key
contributors to peace remains largely unrecognized.
The Somali Government has to date also failed to
implement the gender provisions in peace, security and
State-building agreements.
10/28

21/08/2019

The Government must ensure that women’s rights
are central to peace and security decisions at all levels.
In order to achieve that goal, we need to address all
barriers and protection risks that limit women’s full
participation in building peace in Somalia. Women
make up 11 per cent of the police force, making Somalia
the country with the third-highest number of female
officers in Africa. However, only one female brigadier
general is in a top decision-making role in the police
force. Therefore, the Government must do more to
ensure that women are not only reflected in the ranks,
but also in senior roles.
Somali women have been excluded from the
negotiating table, decision-making and leadership roles,
and in the economy and politics, despite the fact that
women are the main breadwinners in about 80 per cent
of Somali households today. Politically active women
also face retaliation to discourage them from engaging
in future activities. The Security Council should urge
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia to
work with the Government to develop a mechanism
to protect aspiring women and provide updates on
progress made in engaging with women’s civil society
in all activities.
The Council must also explicitly call on the
Government of Somalia to protect the rights of women
and all human rights defenders. It was the result of the
advocacy of local and international women’s groups
that a 30 per cent quota for women was included in the
Garowe Principles, although it was not mentioned in the
peace road maps or bylaws of the country. The Security
Council must now call on the Somali Government and
State authorities to ensure that a quota of a minimum
of 30 per cent for women is enshrined in the Federal
Constitution and in the electoral laws, which are
currently under review.
A 30 per cent quota for women must be secured
in the upcoming 2020 elections, which will offer a
historic opportunity for women to participate in the
first universal suffrage elections that the country has
held in 50 years. Somali women and girls deserve the
same rights, opportunities and protection in all spheres
of life as Somali men and boys.
The President: I thank Ms. Arale for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
19-25920

21/08/2019

The situation in Somalia

Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): Let me begin by
thanking our four briefers, who have genuinely enriched
our discussions here today, as well as by extending the
United Kingdom’s deepest sympathies to the families
of the victims targeted in attacks by Al-Shabaab. We
condemn those attacks in the strongest possible terms
and we pay tribute to the role of the Somali National
Army, the Somali Police Force and the troops from the
African Union Mission in Somalia in their efforts to
promote peace, security and stability in Somalia.
I want to give a particularly warm welcome to
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Swan
and pay tribute to him and his team for the work that
they have been doing over the past few months. The
United Nations has played, and will play, a vital role in
enabling the achievement of lasting peace and security
for Somalia, and we encourage full engagement and
cooperation with the United Nations. The sanctions
regime is of course a key part of security sector reform.
We encourage Somalia to engage in dialogue with
the Panel of Experts, who have been mandated by the
Security Council.
I would also like to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Pramila Patten for her very
important briefing today and for the excellent work
that she has been doing with the Somali Government to
address conflict-related sexual violence.
The Government’s commitment to developing a new
national action plan to end sexual violence in conflict
demonstrates willingness to tackle that pervasive issue.
However, we share concerns about the lack of progress,
in particular in passing the sexual offences bill, which
Special Representative Patten mentioned. I hope that
she will be able to come back to the Council in due
course to update us on progress on the many issues that
she flagged this morning.
I would also like to thank Ms. Arale for her
extremely brave and very powerful briefing today
about the work she is doing on the ground and the work
that her organization and other human rights defenders
do to strengthen human rights in Somalia. We all
heard loud and clear her message about the need for
the Security Council to integrate the issues of human
rights and tackling sexual violence into our work on
Somalia. I thank her for being so clear. Her presence at
our meeting today is a further reminder to the Council
of the importance of women playing a central role in

S/PV. 8601

conflict prevention, mediation and State-building. I
thank her very much.
As we heard from the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, the next 18 months will be crucial
for Somalia. I would like to briefly touch on three issues.
First, with regard to the elections in Jubaland, we,
together with other partners around the table, have been
encouraging all stakeholders to reach an agreement on
a single electoral process that is credible, inclusive, fair
and peaceful. We are very concerned about the fact that
an agreement on such a process has not been achieved
and that the existing approaches are reaching a point
beyond which the likelihood of instability and division
within Jubaland has been significantly increased.
We therefore call on all actors in Jubaland to
refrain from violence. We encourage a reinvigoration
of dialogue among States of the region, aimed at
maintaining stability in Jubaland, Somalia and the
wider region and call on all stakeholders to pursue any
possible changes that would result in a process that
enjoys wider support in Jubaland. The United Kingdom
stands ready to provide its full support to such
discussions through the efforts of Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Swan and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia and in partnership with
the African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development.
The second area I would like to touch on is the
national elections in 2020 or 2021. The swift passage
of an electoral law that ensures a fair process and
allows the representation of all Somalis is vital. If it
is not passed by November this year, it could seriously
impact the delivery of elections on time. As it stands,
the United Kingdom is particularly concerned about
the insufficient provisions on the rapid representation
of minority groups and women. It is an issue that
Ms. Arale also touched on in her briefing just now. We
stand ready, as the United Kingdom, to provide support
for the elections and urge others to do the same.
The third area of focus is security. It is vital that
the Federal Government of Somalia and the member
states work together to implement the national
security architecture agreed at the 2017 London
Somalia Conference and deliver the transition plan
towards Somali-led security, as the Council called
for in resolution 2472 (2019). We agree with the
Special Representative and Ambassador Madeira that
force generation of able, accountable, acceptable and

19-2592011/28

S/PV.8601

The situation in Somalia

affordable Somali security forces is absolutely vital
to that end. I would also agree with the message from
Special Representative Patten that we also need to
ensure that the Somali security forces are able to tackle
the issue of sexual violence against women and girls,
which is so prevalent in Somalia, as we heard today.
On that note, we welcome the ongoing Somali-led
joint security operations in the Lower Shabelle region as
an as an example of good coordination between Somali
and international forces, but much more remains to be
done to stabilize and hold the territory in the long term
and carry out similar work elsewhere in Somalia.
In conclusion, we agree with Special Representative
Swan that engagement between the Federal Government
of Somalia and the federal member states is at the heart
of all our efforts in Somalia. We therefore urge both
the Federal Government and the member states to come
together to settle the remaining questions about federal
power and resource-sharing through a process of
constitutional review to enable the continued trajectory
of Somalia to inclusive and peaceful one-person
one-vote elections in 2020 or 2021. It is important that
the Somalia Partnership Forum in October demonstrates
that the Federal Government’s relationship with the
federal member states is a genuine partnership and that
it delivers an agreed set of shared priorities to the end
of 2020. External pressures continue to pose risks to
political stability. The international community, States
of the region and the Council must use their influence
constructively, invest in the federal system and
institutions and increase our coordination to support
Somalia in its efforts.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I would
like to thank all our briefers today and congratulate
Special Representative Swan on his new role. His deep
experience will be of great help to the international
community in supporting Somalia in the challenging
period ahead, through its political and security reforms,
and we stand ready to support him.
Somalia continues to face significant challenges on
its path towards building a safe, stable and prosperous
State, underscored by Al-Shabaab’s recent attacks in
Mogadishu and Kismaayo that killed the mayor and
more than two dozen people, including two United
States citizens. Despite those attacks, the reform efforts
of the Federal Government of Somalia, with support
from the United Nations, the African Union and
international partners, offer hope that progress is under
12/28

21/08/2019

way. We encourage both the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali Government to
continue to work towards a conditions-based transfer
of security responsibilities and international partners to
closely coordinate in that effort. Similarly, the Somali
police need ongoing capacity-building support to help
stabilize areas reclaimed from Al-Shabaab.
As our colleague of the United Kingdom noted,
Somali officials must also cooperate and engage with
the sanctions committee Panel of Experts to address
shortcomings highlighted by that Panel that impede
Somalia’s progress.
On the political front, the Federal Government’s
political and governance reform, including the draft
electoral law and constitutional reform, offers the best
hope for sustainable stability and economic growth.
The United States regrets that those important reforms
have not yet been finalized or implemented. We urge all
Somali stakeholders to earnestly commit to advancing
those reforms.
We applaud Prime Minister Khayre’s reconciliation
efforts among competing clans and the Federal
Government and his support for the integration of local
militias into Somalia’s national security architecture.
Somalia’s success depends on continued productive
collaboration between Mogadishu and the member
states. The upcoming Jubaland presidential election
provides an opportunity to reaffirm mutual respect
between the central and state governments. We call on
all parties to support a peaceful election and to avoid
any interference in the electoral process. As the country
continues to work towards a one-person one-vote
democratic system in preparation for the presidential
election in 2020 or 2021, we underscore the need for
close coordination between the Federal Government’s
electoral security task force, AMISOM, the United
Nations Support Office in Somalia and the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia to provide
voter security during each stage of electoral planning
and implementation.
We must also not lose sight of Somalia’s ongoing
humanitarian crisis. Poor rainy seasons have caused
widespread crop failures, deteriorating livestock
conditions and a heightened risk of drought-related
diseases. An estimated 2.2 million people in Somalia
face life-threatening food insecurity, and at least
5.4 million people require urgent humanitarian
assistance. Since 2018, the United States has been
19-25920

21/08/2019

The situation in Somalia

helping by providing more than $670 million in
funding for food, water, health, nutrition, sanitation
and hygiene. We call on the international community to
also help fund the humanitarian response.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
to welcome Mr. James Swan, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia. We wish him success
in his new role and thank him for today’s important
briefing. We also thank Mr. Francisco Madeira,
Ms. Pramila Patten and the Executive Director of the
Somali Women Development Center for their briefings.
Today I will focus on three key issues. The first
pertains to political developments. We welcome the
efforts of the Federal Government of Somalia and
federal states to achieve reconciliation in spite of
the challenges facing them. We call on all parties to
overcome the obstacles that are impeding political,
economic and security integration in Somalia and to
put the interests of the State first, especially as the
upcoming phase will be decisive for the future of
Somalia, as we are closing in on the general elections,
to be held in 2020-2021.
The achievement of reconciliation will undoubtedly
have a positive impact. It will enable Somali leaders to
build on previous important achievements, including
continuing the implementation of the technical
aspect of the comprehensive approach to security;
enabling the Independent Constitutional Review and
Implementation Commission to complete its first
review of the Provisional Federal Constitution; the
adoption of the draft electoral bill; the completion of
the identification of voter registration centres; and the
adoption of many important laws.
We look forward to the efforts of the Federal
Government to implement the transition plan and its
comprehensive political reform agenda. We trust that
it will implement economic and development goals as
well as increase its financial capacity and revenues.
With regard to the security situation, unfortunately
the latest incidents in Somalia continue to remind us
of the threat posed by Al-Shabaab and other armed
groups. We reject and condemn in the strongest terms
their targeting of United Nations and humanitarian
personnel in Somalia. The Security Council must
address that issue with the utmost seriousness and
wisdom to ensure that such acts do not reoccur. We are
concerned about the growing ability of those groups

S/PV. 8601

to manufacture improvised explosive devices, hence
the importance of implementing the comprehensive
approach to security in order to enable the national
security forces to protect the State against the threat
of terrorism and violent extremism, in line with the
transition plan and the national security structure.
Concerning the humanitarian situation, the ongoing
food insecurity and the growing number of internally
displaced persons — which is reaching dangerous
proportions at 2.6 million people — are a source of
grave concern. Unfortunately, weather forecasts are not
encouraging, as they are predicting a new dry season
owing to the low level of precipitation. We fear that this
could impede Somalia’s harvests this year.
Despite all this, we are still optimistic regarding
the developmental steps taken by the Somali Federal
Government, which led the International Monetary
Fund to confirm that Somalia has thereby met
the conditionality standard for a credit tranche
arrangement. That is an important step in terms of debt
relief for the State, in line with the Heavily Indebted
Poor Countries initiative.
In conclusion, we reiterate our call for the need to
respect the sovereignty, political independence and unity
of Somalia. We call on the international community to
continue to provide political and financial support to
the Somali Federal Government in order to enable it to
rebuild the State and establish stability.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): South Africa wishes
to thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia (UNSOM), Mr. James Swan; the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila Patten; the
Special Representative of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission for Somalia and Head of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), Ambassador
Francisco Caetano José Madeira; and our sister, the
Executive Director of the Somali Women Development
Centre, Ms. Amina Arale, for their briefings.
My delegation commends the role that UNSOM,
the United Nations Support Office in Somalia
(UNSOS), AMISOM, the African Union (AU) and
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, as
well as international partners, have been playing in
facilitating State-building and peacebuilding processes
in Somalia. We pay tribute to the sacrifices that are
being made by AMISOM and the Somali security

19-2592013/28

S/PV.8601

The situation in Somalia

forces to ensure that the vision of a peaceful and stable
Somalia is realized.
My delegation would like to address the following
three issues: first, the political process and the imperative
of national dialogue and reconciliation; secondly, the
necessity of addressing security and humanitarian
issues; and, thirdly, the importance of creating suitable
conditions for the 2020-2021 national elections.
First, South Africa wishes to underline the critical
importance of ensuring that the political process in
Somalia is sustained. In that regard, my delegation
reiterates that the gains achieved in Somalia can be
strengthened and sustained only when all leaders
of the Federal Government and the federal member
States resume their efforts to engage in a genuine
national dialogue. That is the only way to address the
outstanding political issues and challenges that they are
currently encountering. That will require compromise,
cooperation and consensus on key issues on the part of
all stakeholders.
We also urge support and encouragement for
stakeholders to undertake dialogue and broad-based
and inclusive reconciliation at the regional level, with
the support and participation of the Federal Government
and the administrations of federal member states. That
will ensure that any differences or disagreements over
regional electoral processes are attended to as soon as
possible and resolved in a peaceful manner.
South Africa therefore welcomes the progress made
in the legislative process, especially the resumption of
cooperation between the two Houses of Parliament;
the submission of key legislation in Parliament; the
completion of the preliminary technical review of the
last five chapters of the Provisional Federal Constitution;
and the draft electoral bill. Equally significant are
efforts that include the reiteration of commitments to
dialogue between Somalia and “Somaliland”; the rollout of the National Reconciliation Framework to the
federal member states by the Federal Government;
and efforts towards regional and local-level
reconciliation meetings.
With regard to the prevailing security situation,
we note with serious concern that Al-Shabaab has
increased its acts of terror in Somalia, including in
Mogadishu. Of concern is its increased capability to
use improvised explosive devices and vehicle-borne
improvised explosive devices in attacks conducted
by the group. Al-Shabaab continues to undertake
14/28

21/08/2019

attacks on Government personnel and facilities,
which include the killing of civilians, United Nations
staff and humanitarian workers, AMISOM forces,
the Somali security forces and international partners.
These continued atrocities on the part of Al-Shabaab
must be condemned and cannot go unpunished. We
also believe in the importance of increasing efforts to
address inter-clan and communal clashes, which have,
regrettably, resulted in the loss of lives.
However, we commend the ongoing success of
the Somali National Army (SNA) on its offensive
operations and stabilization activities, with the support
of AMISOM and international partners, in Lower
Shabelle as a clear demonstration of its efforts to counter
and degrade Al-Shabaab. This further underscores not
only the significant role that AMISOM continues to
play in support of the SNA-led operations, but also its
critical importance, together with the United Nations
and international partners, in terms of addressing the
security challenges facing Somalia.
Furthermore, we reiterate that for Somalia to be
able to take ownership of addressing its own security
challenges, the area of capacity-building requires
sustained and coordinated international support. In
this regard, South Africa calls for the continuation of
the implementation of the comprehensive approach
to security, encompassing international support,
coordination and joint planning by AMISOM, the
Federal Government, the federal member states,
UNSOM, UNSOS and regional partners, among others.
This includes a focus on preventing and countering
violent extremism at the lower levels, thus ensuring that
efforts to address Al-Shabaab are not only military but
comprehensive and include the effective rehabilitation
and reintegration of defectors.
Thirdly, the current insecurity in Somalia is further
exacerbated by the continued humanitarian situation.
The ongoing climatic effects of decreased seasonal
rains, drought and flooding have had a negative impact
on food production, which, in turn, has increased food
insecurity and adversely affected the most vulnerable
communities, including children, especially among
internally displaced persons. In addition, many people
are also being internally displaced due to evictions, food
insecurity and other factors. All together, these various
developments have further increased the duration of the
humanitarian situation in Somalia.
19-25920

21/08/2019

The situation in Somalia

For those reasons, we support the appeal by the
Secretary-General for an increase in efforts aimed
at supporting the delivery of life-saving assistance
and protection. Continued support in addressing
the humanitarian situation in Somalia remains
of paramount importance. We therefore urge the
international community to support the funding of the
2019 humanitarian response plan for Somalia in order
for the humanitarian community to deliver necessary
services to civilians in need. We also echo the SecretaryGeneral in commending the Somali authorities for
demonstrating leadership by prioritizing the scaling
up of its drought response and its collaboration with
aid agencies.
Lastly, South Africa wishes to underline the
imperative of creating suitable conditions for the
2020 and 2021 national elections in Somalia. In that
respect, we agree with the Secretary-General about
the need for Somali stakeholders to reach consensus
on key electoral issues, including the adoption of the
draft electoral law and the need to mobilize financial
support for conducting such electoral activities as voter
registration. Above all, it is of critical importance that
the electoral security coordination mechanisms be
established to ensure proper planning and operations.
The need for assistance and support from the United
Nations through UNSOM, but also in coordination
with the Somali National Army and AMISOM, as well
as all other international partners, is paramount for
delivering secure and successful elections in 2020 and
2021 in Somalia. Creating the suitable conditions for,
and ultimately holding, successful national elections
will be a key milestone towards State-building and
peacebuilding for Somalia, which includes resolving
the reported targeted assassinations of participants in
electoral processes.
In conclusion, it is pleasing to note that UNSOM has
worked diligently to include the participation of women
and youth in the political processes in Somalia through
the holding of various events aimed at building capacity
and awareness, particularly on constitutional review
and election-related matters. We equally commend
the Federal Government of Somalia for ratifying the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
These developments constitute positive steps towards
an inclusive State-building and peacebuilding process
in Somalia. It is therefore the responsibility of the
international community to continue supporting the

S/PV. 8601

cause of the Somali people towards sustainable peace
and stability. We in South Africa will play our part.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes this briefing on the review of
the Secretary-General’s report on the situation in
Somalia (S/2019/661), as well as the implementation
of the mandates of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) and the United Nations
Support Office in Somalia (UNSOS). We congratulate
Mr. James Swan on his recent appointment as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
UNSOM and on his excellent briefing. My delegation
also commends Mr. Francisco Caetano José Madeira,
Special Representative of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission for Somalia and Head of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), Ms. Pramila
Patten, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and Ms. Amina Arale,
Executive Director of the Somali Women Development
Centre, for their enlightening briefings.
The presentation of the Secretary-General’s report
on Somalia calls for comments from my delegation
in the political, security, economic and humanitarian
fields, as well as on the question of human rights.
With regard to the political situation, Côte
d’Ivoire notes with concern the persistence of tensions
between the Federal Government and the federal
member states fuelled by differences over electoral
processes in the federal member states and the draft
electoral law. In our view, this institutional crisis is
likely to undermine initiatives to revive the political
process and reconciliation between the Somali Federal
Government and the member states of the federation,
slow down the pace of the Government’s reform efforts
and prevent the swift implementation of the country’s
stabilization plans.
My delegation therefore urges both sides to make
every effort to overcome their differences in order to
create conditions conducive to the holding of fair and
credible regional elections, the conclusion of agreements
on power- and resource-sharing, constitutional review
and the establishment of Somalia’s federal model.
We also welcome the resumption of collaboration
between the two Chambers of the Somali Federal
Parliament, which should lead to legislative progress.
From this point of view, the adoption of the law on
the establishment of an anti-corruption commission to

19-2592015/28

S/PV.8601

The situation in Somalia

strengthen the framework for managing public finances
is to be welcomed.
On the security front, Côte d’Ivoire notes the
persistence of targeted attacks by the terrorist group
Al-Shabaab, which continue to create a climate of
insecurity and instability in the country. The situation
is all the more worrisome given the surprising resilience
and adaptability of this terrorist group, despite, in
particular, the joint air raids by AMISOM and the Somali
security forces. It is therefore imperative that the joint
actions of AMISOM and Somali forces be supported by
building the capacity of security institutions to enable
them to retain control over areas they have recovered.
This capacity-building should also increase their
strike force in the necessary campaign to stabilize the
situation as well as to fight violent extremism.
In the economic field, Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the
International Monetary Fund’s approval, on 1 August,
of the staff-monitored programme for Somalia,
which is an important step towards debt relief for the
country, as part of the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
Initiative. My country therefore encourages the
Somali Government to continue its efforts to meet the
remaining conditions for reaching the decision point set
forth in the Initiative.
Human rights violations, in particular targeted
killings and abductions, sexual violence against women
and children, as well as the use of child soldiers, as
Ms. Patten has just noted, remain a matter of concern
to the international community. Convinced that the
promotion and protection of human rights is part of the
process of strengthening security and peacebuilding,
my country calls on the Somali Government to continue
its relentless efforts to combat impunity. In that regard,
Somalia’s ratification, on 31 July, of the Convention on
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the measures
taken to strengthen the legal framework for protecting
human rights are encouraging signs.
The deteriorating humanitarian situation, marked
by increasing food insecurity, increased internal
population displacement and expanding needs for
assistance and protection, remains another cause for
concern. While it needs to be further strengthened,
we nevertheless prefer to commend the Somali
Government for its outstanding actions achieved
through its intensification of the drought response and
its full collaboration with aid agencies. My delegation
would therefore like to urge international partners to
16/28

21/08/2019

further support the 2019 humanitarian response plan
and provide food assistance and increased protection
to populations in distress. We also call on the Somali
parties to ensure the safe and unhindered delivery of
humanitarian assistance to the affected areas.
Finally, Côte d’Ivoire would like to reiterate its
support for UNSOM, AMISOM and UNSOS for their
indispensable role in Somalia. We call on them to
strengthen their cooperation with other international
partners on the ground, with a view to supporting the
Government’s efforts to restore peace and stability
in Somalia.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): Allow me to thank Mr. James Swan, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Francisco
Caetano José Madeira, Special Representative of
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
Ms. Pramila Patten, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and
Ms. Amina Arale, Executive Director of the Somali
Women Development Centre, not only for their briefings
but also for their commitment, work and energy for the
well-being of Somalia and in favour of the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
I also take this opportunity to welcome the Somali
Ambassador to the United Nations, Mr. Abukar
Dahir Osman.
After two years of peaceful transition of power,
Somalia is in the process of rebuilding a State and is
making significant progress in the political, economic
and security spheres thanks to the Government’s
development programme under President Mohamed
Abdullahi Mohamed. The support of its people,
the countries of the region, the United Nations, the
African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development and other international players has been
key in speeding up this important and delicate process.
Equatorial Guinea welcomes the efforts of the
international community to achieve peace and stability
in Somalia and to counter and overcome policies that
promote stagnation and the ongoing terrorist threats
that seek to reverse this process.
Good relations between the federal member states
and the Federal Government of Somalia are important
for addressing the country’s continuing challenges
and are necessary for the implementation of the joint
development projects. Since the end of last year, the
19-25920

21/08/2019

The situation in Somalia

Secretary-General’s reports have reflected a climate of
estrangement between those two levels of Government,
a situation that continues to this day and jeopardizes
some of the gains made on issues such as federal
elections, enhanced security and debt relief. In that
regard, we urge the parties concerned to engage in a
spirit of consensus and cooperation, and to do all they
can to accelerate political discussions on key issues as
an immediate priority.
We welcome the announcement of the Speakers of
the House of the People and the Upper House of the
resumption of cooperation between the two houses of
the Federal Parliament, after seven months of rupture.
That enabled more positive developments to take place
in the overall political process in Somalia.
On this year’s pending electoral processes of the
federal member states, we urge all parties concerned
to ensure transparency and to refrain from violence.
Similarly, we encourage the relevant authorities to ensure
the broad participation of women in those elections. We
ask the same of the 2020 and 2021 general elections, as
women’s participation in all decision-making bodies in
Somalia will help to consolidate the process of the State
recovery process.
Before concluding, I would like to express our
concern about the series of attacks perpetrated in
Mogadishu and other parts of the country by Al-Shabaab
and factions of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
We strongly condemn those heinous attacks and
firmly maintain our support for and solidarity with the
Government and the people of Somalia in combating
the threat of terrorism in their country.

S/PV. 8601

Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict; and
Ms. Arale, Executive Director of the Somali Women
Development Centre, for their briefings.
Located in the Horn of Africa, Somalia represents
an important strategic location. The maintenance of
peace and stability in the country is important to peace
and development in Africa as a whole. According to the
Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2019/661), in the
past three months the Federal Government of Somalia
has actively engaged in national reconstruction,
making progress in the political, economic and security
spheres. It is currently actively preparing for the 2020
general elections.
Nevertheless, the overall situation in Somalia
remains relatively complex, and peace and stability are
still facing challenges. The international community
should continue to play close attention to the situation
in Somalia and actively provide help.
I would like to make the following observations.
First, we should continue to help Somalia to strengthen
its governance capacity. On the basis of respect for
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Somalia, the international community should
help improve the federal mechanism, strengthen the
relationship between the Federal Government and
the federal member states, and properly review the
Constitution. In the spirit of cooperation, all federal
member states of Somalia should fully respect and
safeguard the authority of the Federal Government
and jointly work towards national peace, stability
and development.

Finally, the delegation of Equatorial Guinea would
like to express its confidence in the work of the United
Nations in Somalia. We are convinced that the collective
response to terrorist threats and political instability in
Somalia must be strong and consistent. The international
community must continue to strengthen cooperation to
ensure the full implementation of the national security
architecture throughout Somali territory so that, in the
very near future, Somali security forces can assume
full responsibility for maintaining the security of their
country and its people.

Secondly, we should continue to help Somalia to
build its security capacities. All international partners
should strengthen coordination and create synergies to
help the Somali Government steadily implement the
Somali transition plan so as to eventually transfer the
security tasks of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) to the Somali security forces. The United
Nations and the international community should provide
stable, predictable and sustainable financial support
to AMISOM in order to help the troop-contributing
countries build their capacities to more effectively
combat terrorism.

Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
wishes to thank Mr. Swan, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General; Mr. Madeira, Special Representative
of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
for Somalia; Ms. Patten, Special Representative of the

Thirdly, we should continue to increase support for
humanitarian aid and economic and social development
in Somalia. This year, owing to the effects of climate
change, wars and conflicts, the humanitarian situation
in the country has deteriorated, and international

19-2592017/28

S/PV.8601

The situation in Somalia

humanitarian assistance has major shortfalls. China
calls on the international community to further
increase humanitarian assistance and help Somalia
achieve internal social and economic development, thus
addressing the root causes of the conflict and ensuring
the long-term stability of Somalia.
Since its deployment, the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) has played a key role
in maintaining peace and stability in Somalia. China
appreciates its efforts and will continue to support the
Special Representative and UNSOM in the discharge of
their duties.
China has always supported Somalia’s efforts
to achieve peace and development. It has actively
participated in the peace process in Somalia and has
played a positive role in promoting a political settlement
of the Somali issue. In June, in order to help the Somali
Government with the food crisis, China sent a shipment
of food aid to Somalia. China will continue to support
the Somalia’s national reconstruction process and play a
constructive role in the achievement of peace, stability
and development in Somalia and the Horn of Africa.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank all the
speakers for their briefings today.
We commend the efforts of President Farmajo and
the leaders of the federal member states to resume
dialogue. However, we note with concern the persistence
of tensions and the political stalemate between the
parties. We understand that overcoming that impasse
must be the main objective in support of the national
reconciliation process taking place in Somali society.
We are also deeply concerned by the security
vulnerability in Somalia. We condemn the attacks
perpetrated by the terrorist group Al-Shabaab, carried
out through the use of improvised explosive devices
placed in vehicles.
We welcome the progress made in the constitutional
review process. We urge the stakeholders to continue
to make the necessary efforts to ensure that the
review is inclusive and transparent and guarantees
the participation of women in political processes
throughout Somalia.
We appreciate the briefing delivered by Ms. Arale,
who spoke on the role of Somali women in the
settlement of conflicts. We are convinced that investing
in girls and women in Somalia would create a domino
18/28

21/08/2019

effect leading to numerous benefits, not only for them
but also for their families and communities. Greater
participation by women is needed in the various areas
of public and political life. The introduction of the
quota system in the draft electoral law of at least 30 per
cent of seats for women on the list of political parties in
Somalia is a breakthrough that we hope to see come to
fruition in the near future when that law is enacted. The
representation of women in the political system is key
to promoting socioeconomic development.
We welcome the strides made in technical
preparations for the elections and underscore the need
to continue making progress on the legal framework
for the 2020 and 2021 elections. We call on the Federal
Government and the federal member states to spare no
effort in reaching an agreement on a political framework
for the fundamental electoral issues. With regard to the
elections in Jubaland, we urge all actors to reach an
agreement on a single electoral process that is credible,
inclusive, fair and peaceful.
The effects of climate change continue to be a
challenge for Somalia. Added to existing vulnerabilities
and the absence of resilience in communities, lower
than normal seasonal rains have resulted in a troubling
intensification of humanitarian needs in the country,
whereby humanitarian assistance is necessary for
survival. Food insecurity, largely caused by adverse
climatic conditions, increased by almost 30 per cent
over projections made in February. The lack of access to
potable water and the increase in the number of displaced
persons have led to a deterioration in the humanitarian
situation, which comes at a time when humanitarian aid
agencies have had to curtail their activities due to a lack
of resources. We urge the international community to
redouble its cooperation efforts and suggest that those
who are able contribute to the humanitarian response
plan for Somalia so as to alleviate the country’s present
humanitarian needs.
To conclude, I would like to highlight and
acknowledge the role of the United Nations Support
Office in Somalia, the African Union Mission in
Somalia and the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia, as well as all the stakeholders who support
Somalia in achieving peace, lasting stability and
sustainable development in the country.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): Allow me first to join
others in expressing our appreciation to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. James
19-25920

21/08/2019

The situation in Somalia

Swan, the Special Representative of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission for Somalia,
Mr. Francisco Madeira, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Pramila Patten, and
Ms. Amina Arale for their very comprehensive
and insightful briefings. My statement will focus
on three issues, namely, the political, security and
humanitarian situations.
First, I wish to commend the Somali Government
for its determination in executing its comprehensive
reform agenda. We welcome progress in preparing for
the inclusive 2020 or 2021 elections, promoting internal
reconciliation and putting Somalia on a clear path to
debt relief. In that regard, we concur with Special
Representative Swan that the next meeting of the
Somalia Partnership Forum, to be held in October, will
provide an opportunity for Somalia and international
partners to agree on priority areas for action on
Somalia’s State-building priorities between now and
2020. Encouraging development is also evident in the
Federal Parliament, as both houses announced the
resumption of their cooperation.
However, Somalia continues to face persistent
challenges on multiple fronts, many of which require the
continued engagement of the international community.
In the meantime, we must not allow the political impasse
between the Federal Government and the federal
member states to jeopardize the many hard-won gains.
The two must engage in a sustained and constructive
dialogue to resolve their outstanding differences and
accelerate progress in key political processes. Any
dispute, including on the regional electoral process,
must be resolved in a peaceful manner.
My delegation reaffirms its support for the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) in
promoting a Somali Government-led inclusive political
settlement and providing advice for peacebuilding
and State-building efforts. We are pleased to see
a collaborative relationship between the Somali
Government and UNSOM, in line with their mutual
commitment to strengthen cooperation.
Secondly, the ongoing threat from Al-Shabaab,
including its enhanced use of improvised explosive
devices and other asymmetrical attacks, remains
the most serious security challenge for Somalia. My
delegation condemns the recent attacks by Al-Shabaab.
We are very concerned that Al-Shabaab continues
to maintain its capacity to recruit, train and deploy

S/PV. 8601

fighters, while raising considerable financing. The
continued presence of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) and the need for predictable and
sustainable financing cannot be overstated.
We recognize the gains made from the joint
operations by the Somali National Army and
AMISOM in Lower Shabelle, including the capture
and establishment of forward operating bases and the
delivery of stabilization efforts in recovered areas.
Accelerated and coordinated international assistance
is essential to support force generation and build a
well-trained and well-equipped Somali security force
that will eventually be able to take over security
responsibilities. We look forward to the joint threat
assessment by the African Union and the United
Nations, in line with resolution 2472 (2019), to inform
AMISOM’s reconfiguration plan.
Thirdly, efforts to promote peace and stability
in Somalia are taking place against the backdrop
of a troubling humanitarian situation and resource
constraint. Around one third of the population requires
humanitarian assistance. There are 2.2 million people
who are facing acute food insecurity. With 2.6 million
internally displaced persons, Somalia has one of the
world’s largest displaced populations. Humanitarian
assistance is a daunting but essential task. Yet only
40 per cent of the 2019 Somalia humanitarian response
plan is funded. We call on the international community
to contribute more. The operating environment for
humanitarian actors in Somalia continues to be
challenging and dangerous. All sides must respect
international humanitarian law, protect civilians and
provide access for humanitarian assistance.
Let me also emphasize that our collective efforts
should always be aimed at saving human lives. In that
regard, we commend the efforts of Special Representative
Patten in engaging with national authorities and other
stakeholders with a view to assisting the Government
of Somalia in developing a national action plan to end
sexual violence in conflict.
I should like to conclude by reaffirming Indonesia’s
solidarity with our Somali brothers and sisters in their
quest for peace and stability, as well as our respect
for Somalia’s sovereignty and territorial integrity. We
pay the utmost tribute to UNSOM, the United Nations
Support Office in Somalia, AMISOM and all actors
working to bring about peace and stability in Somalia.

19-2592019/28

S/PV.8601

The situation in Somalia

Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I thank
our briefers for their very informative presentations.
In particular, I congratulate the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Swan, on beginning his
functions in Somalia and reaffirm France’s full support.
I also thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Patten, for
her visit to Somalia and for her efforts, together with
all parties, to combat such violence. Inviting Special
Representatives who are responsible for thematic issues
to briefings on specific conflict situations is a good
practice that we must continue.
At the outset, I underscore that we welcome the
cooperative attitude adopted by the Somali federal
authorities with the new Special Representative. We
hope that those good relations will be pursued and make
addressing all subjects possible, particularly those
related to respect for human rights and the rule of law.
We also hope that those good relations will be extended
to all United Nations entities, especially the sanctions
committee Panel of Experts. I will make three points.
First of all, with regard to the political situation in
Somalia, France remains concerned about the deadlock
in relations between the Somali Federal Government and
the federal member states, which poses a major obstacle
to carrying out the tasks crucial to achieving lasting
peace in Somalia. In particular, I would note, first, the
organization and holding of the 2020 or 2021 elections;
secondly the constitutional review process and the
needed agreement on power-sharing and the allocation
of revenues emanating from natural resources; thirdly,
the implementation of the security transition plan; and,
fourthly, the implementation of the national security
architecture and the integration of regional forces into
the Somali National Army. It is therefore urgent that
dialogue on those matters be resumed.
Furthermore, France is concerned about tensions
relating to the electoral process scheduled to begin
tomorrow in Jubaland, despite mediation attempts by
the Special Representative, the African Union and
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development.
In that regard, we call on all parties to show a spirit
of compromise to reach an agreement on a single,
transparent and universally accepted electoral process.
We also call on all parties to refrain from violence and
rely on dialogue to resolve their differences.
Secondly, concerning the security situation, France
remains concerned about the frequency of attacks by
20/28

21/08/2019

Al-Shabaab, particularly in Mogadishu. In that context,
we welcome the operations carried out by the Somali
National Army with the support of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) in Lower Shabelle,
which have enabled taking back key cities from
Al-Shabaab. We also encourage the Somali federal
authorities to intensify their force generation efforts
so that they can pursue those operations, as well as
accelerate the implementation of the security transition
plan to transfer security responsibilities from AMISOM
to the Somali security forces.
With regard to AMISOM, France remains
committed to meeting the deadlines set out in resolution
2472 (2019), adopted in May, including with regard to
the reduction of the troop ceiling by 1,000 military
personnel by 28 February 2020. While we believe
that the reconfiguration of AMISOM must take place
gradually in the most stable areas of the country, we
deem it imperative that the decisions of the Security
Council be respected. That desire has also been
expressed by the Somalis. The transition plan they have
developed will allow them eventually to master their
own destiny.
Moreover, the European Union intends to continue
its support for AMISOM, given its important role in
ensuring the security of Somalia, through significant
financial support in the amount of €400 million for
the period from 2019 to 2020, as well as €20 million
destined for the Somali security forces. Nevertheless,
we continue to believe that that support must be part
of the frameworks involving the transition and mutual
commitments that each party must respect. All things
considered, the European Union cannot continue to
finance the bonuses of AMISOM soldiers alone. The
Security Council must therefore send a clear message
to Somalia’s other partners on the need to contribute to
funding AMISOM.
Thirdly, and lastly, concerning the humanitarian
situation, respect for human rights and the fight against
sexual violence continue to be areas of concern. We
are concerned about the humanitarian situation in
Somalia, which has worsened owing to the drought
facing the country. That situation attests once again
to the importance that we must continue to attach to
the impact of climate change in Somalia and the Horn
of Africa.
We are also deeply concerned about the persistence
of numerous human rights violations and acts sexual
19-25920

21/08/2019

The situation in Somalia

violence committed in Somalia. In that regard, we
stress the importance of cooperation among the various
Somali ministries to ensure that justice is done, that it
is accessible to all and that victims are provided with
assistance. We also call on all local and religious leaders
to commit themselves to ensuring that the sexual
offences bill is adopted and effectively implemented
throughout the country.
In conclusion, I reiterate that stabilization and the
return of lasting peace in Somalia for the benefit of all
Somalis remain a priority for France.
Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We are
grateful for the holding of this meeting and the important
presentations by the briefers. We also welcome and
wish Mr. James Swan every success in his endeavours,
whose work we hope will mark the beginning of a new
phase of cooperation between the Federal Government
of Somalia and the United Nations.
At the outset, we reaffirm our conviction that it
is only through close cooperation and coordination
among the Federal Government of Somalia, the federal
member states, the African Union, the United Nations
and other international partners that we will be able to
achieve the priority objectives laid out for Somalia. We
therefore call on the Federal Government of Somalia and
the federal member states to resolve outstanding issues
through dialogue. The country cannot waste valuable
time and requires the consensus and cooperation of
both levels of Government to move forward on the key
issues necessary for consolidating the Federal State,
such as federal elections, security and debt relief.
We recognize the efforts of the Federal Parliament
to move forward the legislative agenda and welcome
the resumption of cooperation between the Upper and
Lower Houses of that body. We ask the Somalis to
accelerate their efforts to advance the federal election
process with the same momentum. We stress that, to a
large extent, the success of the elections will depend
on the consensus reached by the Federal Government
and the federal member states on the political
framework and key issues for the upcoming national
and regional elections.
In that regard, we encourage the state and federal
authorities of Jubaland to reach a consensus on
the upcoming elections for the state Assembly and
state President so that they are held in a transparent
and peaceful manner, while avoiding parallel and
unrecognized electoral processes. We also underscore

S/PV. 8601

the importance of promoting the active participation
of women in the political life of the country. We hope
that reforms by the Government will include gendersensitive provisions and that the means for achieving a
30 per cent quota of women in the Federal Parliament in
2020 and 2021 will be provided.
Peru regrets, however, that, despite the increase
in security measures by the Government of Somalia,
Al-Shabaab continues to show resilience and carry out
abhorrent terrorist attacks with` improvised explosive
devices, which can be countered only through adequate
cooperation between the Federal Government and the
federal member states.
With regard to that last point, we would like to
highlight the progress made in the coordination efforts
of the Federal Government and the authorities of SouthWest State. They are an encouraging collaboration
model, which, if replicated in the other states, would
make it possible for Somali forces to regain control
of security in 2021. We also welcome the fact that the
Somali Government’s efficient financial management
has enabled it to qualify for debt relief from the
International Monetary Fund. We expect that the
national development plan 2020-2024 will enable
Somalia to overcome poverty and food insecurity,
which are seriously affecting 2.2 million people.
Peru notes with concern the precarious
humanitarian situation faced by internally displaced
persons and marginalized communities in Somalia,
which is exacerbated by adverse climatic conditions and
requires urgent and increased financial contributions
from the international community.
We commend Ms. Pramila Patten on her trip
to Somalia in July to work with the Government of
Somalia on the issue of eliminating conflict-related
sexual violence. We trust in the Government’s strong
commitment to developing the national action plan to
end that scourge.
I would like to conclude by underscoring the work
of the African Union Mission in Somalia, the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia and the United
Nations Support Office in Somalia, in support of the
efforts of the Somali authorities and people to build
lasting peace, in spite of the remaining difficulties
and challenges. We also commend the efforts of the
African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development and the United Nations to provide

19-2592021/28

S/PV.8601

The situation in Somalia

the necessary conditions for the construction of a
Somali State.
Mr. Cooreman (Belgium) (spoke in French):
I would like to thank the briefers for their insightful
briefings on the situation in Somalia.
Today I will focus on the political situation, security
issues and, lastly, the humanitarian situation.
Elections will be held in Jubaland tomorrow.
Presidential elections at the level of a federal member
state provide an opportunity for the Somali political
class to demonstrate its willingness to participate fully
in the exercise of democracy. We hope to see a calm
and transparent process and a peaceful and non-violent
transition of power, regardless of the outcome of
the election. The future president of Jubaland must
contribute to rebuilding relations between the Somali
Federal Government and its federal member states.
Federalism can work, but only if there is readiness
to engage in dialogue along with a spirit of cooperation,
as well as an ongoing quest by the Federal Government
and member states to reach compromise. That also
means being ready to cede some power and share rights
and responsibilities. It is also time to make progress in
preparing for the general elections to be held in 20202021. We call on the federal authorities to redouble their
efforts to adhere to the electoral timetable by reaching
an agreement with the federal member states on key
electoral issues and by rapidly adopting the electoral
law with the necessary amendments.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/661) once
again confirms that Al-Shabaab is the primary threat
to the country’s security and stability. Terrorist attacks
have continued to plunge Somalia into mourning.
Government ownership of security — that is, by the
Somali armed forces — is a priority. The continued use
by Al-Shabaab of improvised explosive devices makes
clear the need to maintain and implement the arms
embargo in a prudent and thoughtful manner.
We would like to see a greater number of initiatives
aimed at creating the conditions necessary for a gradual
withdrawal of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM). In that regard, we thank Ambassador
Madeira for the importance he attaches to monitoring
the transition, as set out in his briefing to the Council.
We pay tribute to the men and women who are
risking their lives for Somalia as part of AMISOM and
mourn the victims of the recent attacks. Weapons alone
22/28

21/08/2019

are not enough to protect people from security threats;
well-trained, well-prepared and well-supported armed
forces and police, with a well-thought-out strategy and
a clear code of conduct, are needed. I would add that
successful security-sector reform requires coordination
among all relevant actors, including international actors.
The plight of the people of Somalia remains at
the heart of our concerns, as 5.4 million people are in
need of humanitarian assistance, including more than
2.6 million internally displaced persons, of whom
220,000 were newly internally displaced in the first
half of the year. Somalia is also particularly vulnerable
to climate shocks. Droughts are increasingly frequent
and undermine the resilience of the population.
The issue of sexual violence in conflict and the
plight of the tens of thousands of women and girls
who are victims of that barbaric practice remain one
of Belgium’s major concerns. We advocate a victimcentred approach and the need to make further
progress in ensuring that the perpetrators of sexual
violence are held accountable, as underscored by
resolution 2467 (2019). Justice must be served for those
crimes. We advocate the specific inclusion of sexual
violence as a designation criterion for sanctions. It is
encouraging that the Federal Government of Somalia
has committed to working on a new national action
plan and to encouraging the involvement of the federal
member states.
In conclusion, I would like to congratulate Special
Representative Swan on the dynamic manner in which
he has begun the first few weeks of his mandate. The
upcoming months look to be complex, and Somalia has
everything to gain from full and sincere cooperation
with the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral. We have every confidence in him.
Mr. Repkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. James Swan, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia, for
his comprehensive briefing on developments in the
country. We also thank Ms. Pramila Patten, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict; Mr. Francisco Madeira, Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission for Somalia and Head of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), and Ms. Amina Arale
for their briefings.
19-25920

21/08/2019

The situation in Somalia

We agree that the political situation in Somalia
remains fragile. There are complexities in relations
between Mogadishu and the federal member states.
The situation is also complicated by the conflict among
various clans in some states and by the start of the
electoral cycle. The general elections planned for 20202021 also pose a serious challenge for the country.
We are particularly concerned about the activities of
the terrorist group Al-Shabaab. It continues to control
broad swathes of the country and is also a threat to the
region. In Kenya, terrorists have virtually been able to
establish a full-fledged independent cell. We are also
extremely concerned about Al-Shabaab’s incursions
and use of improvised explosive devices. Our
delegation specifically asked for a separate briefing at
today’s meeting by the Director of the United Nations
Mine Action Service on the threat from such devices in
Somalia. We regret that the Director was unable to meet
our request.
We welcome the successes that have been achieved
in the joint military operations between the Somali
armed forces and AMISOM against Al-Shabaab in
South Shabelle. Those activities should be continued.
We believe that in order to cut off the terrorist threat,
there is a need for effective joint work to establish a
unified national security architecture. The main goal is
to ensure the gradual transfer of responsibility for the
country’s security to the Somalis themselves. We trust
that this process will be carried out in line with existing
plans and take into account specific developments on
the ground.
AMISOM continues to play a key role in addressing
security challenges in Somalia. Its reconfiguration
should go hand in hand with the establishment of Somali
military and law-enforcement structures. Cuts in the
number of African peacekeepers in current conditions
are not only counterproductive but also dangerous.
We also must address the humanitarian situation
in the country. We note with concern that the lack of
rainfall and the forced displacement of the population
have caused the situation in the area to deteriorate
further in recent months. Despite all the difficulties,
we also note the encouraging trends in Somali
State-building. We commend Mogadishu’s efforts to
build bridges with the federal member states.
Strides have been made in constitutional reform.
Progress has also been made in the reconciliation
process in Galmudug and South-West State. There has

S/PV. 8601

also been renewed cooperation between the two houses
of the Parliament. Moreover, a positive trend is being
maintained in establishing the legal framework for the
upcoming electoral cycle. The financial and economic
sector is being effectively restructured as well.
In conclusion, we would like to note that an effective
fight against the challenges that I have listed is possible
only through strict respect for Somali sovereignty and
the non-interference of external players in the internal
affairs of the country. We hope that those are the
principles that will guide the work of the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia.
In that regard, we welcome the determination of the
country’s authorities to continue fruitful cooperation
with the United Nations presence.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): Let me begin by thanking
our two Special Representatives of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. James Swan and Ms. Pramila Patten,
for their comprehensive briefings. I would also like to
extend a particularly warm welcome to Mr. Swan, who
is joining us in the Council for the first time. I further
thank Ambassador Madeira and Ms. Amina Arale for
their very insightful briefings.
The situation in Somalia continues to be volatile
and fragile, and, for that reason, I will make a few
remarks from our point of view on three aspects.
First, I will address the political, security and
humanitarian aspects. We would like to start by
expressing our appreciation for the work of the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, James
Swan, and his team. We fully support the efforts of the
United Nations and joint international efforts to help
stabilize Somalia. The upcoming Somalia Partnership
Forum will be a good opportunity to take stock of
mutually agreed commitments and to set priorities for
the coming months.
With regard to the coming months, we agree
with Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Swan’s assessment that we need accelerated efforts
in the next month to reach the ambitious goals for the
2020-2021 general elections. For that to succeed, we
need constructive cooperation between the Federal
Government of Somalia and the federal member states
on accomplishing the constitutional review, adopting
the electoral law and delivering on the security reform
agenda. We believe that coordination meetings should
be resumed and take place regularly in order to resolve

19-2592023/28

S/PV.8601

The situation in Somalia

the remaining differences. In view of the 2020 elections,
political processes must noticeably catch up.
We see federalism as key to achieving sustainable
peace. A strong Federal Government and strong federal
member states do not exclude but support one another.
As many other speakers before me have said, we are
also deeply concerned about the electoral process
in the federal member states, especially in Jubaland
tomorrow. There is high potential for escalation, which
could potentially destabilize the region. Right now,
we still have two separate processes, but we need a
single agreed electoral process, and that requires some
compromise. Although we are in the very last hours
before those elections take place, we still hope that such
a compromise can still be reached.
With regard to security, for the effective and
timely implementation of the security transition
plan, a comprehensive approach involving joint and
coordinated planning and operation is essential. In
particular — as noted by many, especially by the African
Union Mission in Somalia itself — force generation
and integration, as well as the training of new police
officers, are key. That requires Somali ownership
and buy-in from all stakeholders and partners. The
progress made in the preparations for the building up
of five forward operating bases for the Somali police
is yet another milestone in strengthening the role of the
Somali police and the security architecture.
Lastly, on the humanitarian situation, given what we
have heard today, we continue to be deeply concerned
about the very difficult humanitarian situation. More
than 2 million people are severely food-insecure, and
that has worsened due to insufficient rainfalls and
ongoing conflicts. In 2017, the Federal Government,
the federal member states, the United Nations and
humanitarian organizations, together with donors, were
able to avert an even worse humanitarian catastrophe. It
continues to be urgent to continue those efforts.
Secondly and briefly, on Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Patten’s briefing, we very much
welcome her visit to Somalia. As documented in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/661), cases of
conflict-related violence are still often underreported
throughout Somalia, especially due to cultural and
social factors and the limited availability of police and
justice services. Access to justice and the enhancement
of respective capabilities within Somali institutions are
therefore essential to enforce accountability. In line
24/28

21/08/2019

with resolution 2467 (2019), survivors must be at the
centre of all efforts, and medical and psychological
care and opportunities for economic participation and
legal protection are some of the key aspects. In order to
actively prevent and address sexual violence, it remains
essential to recognize and tackle gender inequality as
the root cause and driver of sexual violence. We call
upon the Somali Government to advance gender equality
and ensure women’s full and effective participation in
the implementation of the transition plan as well as in
current electoral processes.
On a more positive note before I conclude, we
very much welcome the commitment of the Somali
Government to work with the United Nations and the
Office of the Special Representative to develop a new
national action plan to end sexual violence in conflict.
Thirdly and lastly, I would also like to add my
words to those who strongly encourage the Somali
authorities to cooperate with the United Nations Panel
of Experts to address the shortcomings in implementing
the sanctions regime.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Poland.
Allow me to begin by thanking all our briefers
today for their very comprehensive presentations.
As this is the first time that the Security Council has
received a briefing from Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Swan, I wish to welcome him in his
new assignment and wish him every success.
Poland welcomes the resumption of cooperation
between the two houses of the Federal Parliament
of Somalia and looks forward to the advancement
of crucial legislation, including the electoral bill.
However, we remain concerned about the protracted
political impasse between the Federal Government
and the federal member states. It is our belief that
the upcoming political processes — if conducted in a
transparent and consensual manner — can contribute to
the re-establishment of constructive dialogue between
the Government and the regional authorities, for the
benefit of the Somali population. We continue to stress
the need for consensus and cooperation in order to keep
to the timelines of crucial reforms.
In that context, I would like to once again underline
the critical importance of political inclusiveness and
of ensuring the genuine involvement of women and
young people in political processes in Somalia. Poland
19-25920

21/08/2019

The situation in Somalia

condemns in the strongest terms acts of sexual and
gender-based violence. We welcome the constructive
approach of the Somali Government in addressing
conflict-related sexual violence and its willingness to
work with Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Patten to develop a new national plan to end
sexual violence in conflict.
We are deeply worried about the increasing
number of attacks by Al-Shabaab in Somalia and by the
increased use of improvised explosive devices. We see
a need to address the threats posed by explosive devices
in a comprehensive manner and to reflect on the critical
nexus linking mine-action activities and peace and
security. We believe that the international community
should step up its efforts against the trafficking and
illicit diversion of precursor chemicals by Al-Shabaab.
Poland remains deeply concerned about the dire
humanitarian situation in Somalia and the fact that today
more than 5 million people are affected by drought and
conflict, and in urgent need of humanitarian assistance
within Somalia. Children are bearing the brunt of the
drought, with increasing malnutrition, disease and
displacement, which we find particularly worrisome.
Let me conclude by expressing Poland’s continued
appreciation for United Nations actors and those of the
African Union Mission in Somalia for their everyday
efforts and sacrifices.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Somalia.
Mr. Osman (Somalia): As I am taking the floor
for the first time during your presidency, Madam,
allow me, on behalf of my delegation, to sincerely
congratulate you on your stewardship of the Security
Council’s work for the month of August. I also wish
to congratulate your predecessor, the representative of
Peru, on his efforts in presiding over the work of the
Council for the month of July. I extend the thanks of
the Federal Government of Somalia to the briefers, in
particular the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ambassador James Swan, in his first briefing
to the Security Council.
At the outset, I would like to reiterate the
commitment of Somalia to cooperate with the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia so that it
can fulfil its mandate, as well as our gratitude for
the service of the personnel of the African Union

S/PV. 8601

Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). We also want to thank
Ambassador Madeira, Special Representative of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission for
Somalia and Head of the African Union Mission in
Somalia, for his briefing today.
It is with great pleasure that the Federal Government
of Somalia welcomes Mr. Swan back to Somalia. In
particular, Mr. Swan’s long association with my country
gives him an important perspective that situates current
events and developments in Somalia within the arc of
progress. It is inevitable that we all focus on the most
immediate challenges and tasks in front of us, but, as
we discuss the issues of immediate importance today,
I encourage the Council to see them in the context of
Somalia’s continued upward trajectory and steady path
towards rebuilding our State.
Let me also take this opportunity to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila Patten, for her
briefing and her visit to Somalia. Let me also express
our gratitude for the briefing by Ms. Amina Arale.
A State can only be as strong as the people within it.
During the reporting period, Somalia has demonstrated
the resilience and determination necessary to
reconcile differences. Galmudug state — one of the
federal member states — was until recently divided
between two administrations in two cities seeking to
lead a divided population, with independent armed
groups providing security. As a result of the Federal
Government’s sustained and inclusive engagement, the
state is now an example of what we hope to achieve
throughout all of Somalia.
Prime Minister Hassan Ali Khayre, many Cabinet
members and his security force chiefs and officials spent
nearly six weeks in Galmudug. During the visit, they
spoke to local communities, including elders, members
of the business community, young people and women.
They brought groups together and discussed a vision of
a united Somalia that will benefit all of its people.
As a result of that engagement, there is now
agreement to hold a state-wide reconciliation
conference that will begin in a few days, bringing
together Galmudug’s 11 clans, geared towards the
holding of elections following a period of reconciliation.
The armed group Ahl Al-Sunna Wal-Jama’a has also
entered into an agreement with the Federal Government
of Somalia, and their forces are now being integrated
into the Somali security forces. Like all other army

19-2592025/28

S/PV.8601

The situation in Somalia

personnel, those integrated are being biometrically
registered, trained and paid directly via their personal
bank accounts.
It is said that Galmudug is the heart of Somalia
and that, if there is stability, unity and prosperity in
Galmudug, the same will be true in the whole country.
Not only are those State-building, security and
reconciliation efforts vital for the people of Galmudug,
but they also lay the foundations for similar unity and
reconciliation across Somalia.
We do not pretend that this is easy. In that regard,
it is necessary to remember the wider context and the
painstaking path towards stability that Somalia is on.
Tomorrow, there will be so-called elections in Jubaland,
which have been marred by threats, intimidation,
violence and outside interference.
As the Federal Government of Somalia, the
international community and its partners have made
clear throughout the process, the election has not been
credible, inclusive or legal. The Federal Government
and its international partners have consistently pointed
out its flaws and the risks that that corrupted process
poses to Somalia’s democratic development. From the
outset it has been our fear that the methods and approach
taken by the incumbent state President will result in a
deeply divided state, with whole communities excluded
from the process, and will create a dangerous precedent
for future elections in Somalia, including the federal
elections to be held in 2020 and 2021. The worst-case
scenario — God forbid — could involve violence and
the loss of lives.
We are making good progress towards the holding
of federal elections in 2020 and 2021. Voter registration
work is on track, and we are committed to ensuring that
a historic number of Somalis will have the opportunity
to elect their leaders.
Somalia has much to do in the coming months, with
key milestones ahead on our State-building journey.
That includes building on the significant progress
that we have made under the fourth staff-monitored
programme, working towards a decision point on
debt relief, preparations for elections in 2020, the
continuation of decisive operations against Al-Shabaab
and the conclusion of our constitutional review process.
Re-engaging with international financial institutions,
which will pave the way for arrears clearance and debt
relief, will not only contribute to economic growth and
26/28

21/08/2019

security in the country but will also promote peace,
unity and cohesion.
The Federal Government is focused on those
objectives and determined to ensure that Somalia
continues its steady progress in achieving them. To that
end, we look to the federal member states to play their
role in Somalia’s future and work towards deepening
federalism and fostering collaborative engagement with
the Federal Government. As the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2019/661) highlights, at the technical level
that is well under way with good cooperation. It is now
up to the leaders to put aside political differences and
work to deliver on the critical milestones that will lay
the economic, social, security and political foundations
for Somalia’s future.
Somalia’s resilience has been tested once again by
the deadly attack on the Asasey Hotel in Kismaayo,
which killed one of our prominent Somali journalists,
Ms. Hodan Nalayeh, and the attack on the Benadir
Regional Administration in which Somalia lost a great
citizen and leader, Mr. Abdirahman Omar Osman,
Mayor of Mogadishu and Governor of Benadir. His
legacy will endure with many of the initiatives that he
put in place to create opportunities for Mogadishu’s
young people, businesses and communities.
The security of Mogadishu is one of the objectives
of the ongoing operations conducted by the Somali
National Army on the outskirts of Mogadishu in
Lower Shabelle. With the strong support of AMISOM
and international partners, the Somali National Army
has demonstrated its ability not only to retake and
liberate the strategic towns of Sabiid, Bariira and,
more recently, the town of Awdheegle, which were in
the grip of Al-Shabaab, but, critically, to hold those
locations to enable stabilization and local governance
to be reinstated.
In addition to those critical tactical gains,
operations provide a vehicle for the implementation
of the institutional capacity-building elements of the
transition plan and national security architecture.
In addition to engaging in comprehensive planning,
which has included military, police and stabilization
planners drawn from across the Federal Government,
regional administration and international partners, we
are strengthening the institutions that will sustain our
security forces and early recovery initiatives. Operations
have provided a pilot for force generation, with one
mixed integrated battalion drawn from across Somalia
19-25920

21/08/2019

The situation in Somalia

generated, trained and deployed and a second being
generated. We remain grateful for the commitment and
bravery of AMISOM, which is deployed side by side
with the Somali security forces and fighting a vicious
enemy. My Government would again like to thank
Ambassador Francisco Madeira, Special Representative
of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
for Somalia, for his unwavering and tireless efforts to
help Somalia.
We are currently undertaking significant reforms,
including on screening, systematic human rights
training, professionalization and, more important,
discipline and a code of conduct for our security
forces. The Ministry of Women and Human Rights
Development has conducted training with ministries,
departments, international agencies and human rights
civil society organizations and facilitated human rights
skills training for public officials, including members
of the security forces. Those are vital steps towards
addressing many of the issues raised in the SecretaryGeneral’s report on sexual violence in conflict as it
pertains to the Somali National Army and Somali
Police Force.
Security is critical not for its own sake but in order
to improve the lives of all Somalis. Alongside our
political and security efforts, the Federal Government
continues to revive social institutions, such as health,
education, sanitation and recreational facilities,
among others. The Government has managed to
regain possession of a couple of national hospitals and
schools. And, for the first time in three decades, Somali
students sat for harmonized national examinations. A
cadre of students from the Somali National University
graduated in June — the first batch of students in 30
years to graduate.
I have set out the evolving nature of Somalia’s
political, economic and security reform developments.
Despite major challenges and continuing security
threats, there is a clear trend of improved stability and
development in Somalia. However, the gains made
remain fragile, serious protection concerns persist and
humanitarian needs in Somalia remain high. Therefore,
the Federal Government of Somalia asserts that any
current or proposed measure that aims to prevent and
combat violent extremism in Somalia should advance,
rather than hinder, our common and shared objectives
of achieving lasting peace, stability and security in
the region.

S/PV. 8601

Al-Shabaab has been listed under the sanctions
regime of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 751 (1992), concerning Somalia, since
12 April 2010. That listing was intended to deny the
group financial and material support to carry out terrorist
attacks. The measures include an arms embargo, a travel
ban and an assets freeze on members of the group, as
well as a charcoal ban to prevent that resource from
being used to finance terrorist activities. The proposed
listing of Al-Shabaab under the sanctions regime of the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, comes
at a time when a heightened humanitarian response
is urgently needed to respond to climate shocks and
deteriorating drought-related humanitarian needs.
Under the 751 sanctions regime, there is an
exemption clause for humanitarian access. It could not
be expected that the same blanket exemption could be
made under the 1267 regime. Humanitarian access to
some of the most vulnerable parts of the country would
be severely impeded and the delivery of assistance to
persons in those areas would be hampered. The ability
of the Federal Government of Somalia to provide
assistance to vulnerable populations, with the support of
partners, would be restricted and play into Al-Shabaab’s
narrative and self-image as a de facto Government in
areas where State reach is limited. It would also deter
investment and hamper economic growth.
The Federal Government of Somalia takes this
opportunity to reiterate its condemnation of any
interference in the internal affairs of Somalia and
cautions against the repercussions that may arise
from such actions, with serious consequences for
regional instability.
Somalia calls on all States to abide by General
Assembly resolution 2625 (XXV) on the “Declaration
of Principles of International Law concerning Friendly
Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations”, which
emphasizes that all States enjoy sovereign equality,
every State must respect the personality of other
States and that no State may use or encourage the use
of economic, political or any other type of measures
to coerce another State in order to obtain from it the
subordination of the exercise of its own sovereign
rights or to secure from it advantages of any kind.
Furthermore, the Federal Government of Somalia calls

19-2592027/28

S/PV.8601

The situation in Somalia

attention to articles 53 and 54 of the Constitution of the
Federal Republic of Somalia, which grants the Federal
Government of Somalia the exclusive authority to
enter into international agreements with other States,
including international treaties related to international
boundaries — either land or sea boundaries — and
control over the airspace of Somalia.
The contours of the Somali State are emerging. It is
natural that there should be vigorous and divergent views
as they evolve. We encourage all Council members to

28/28

21/08/2019

see it as an essential part of the State-building process.
As Somalia’s federalism deepens and the contours
become more defined, we are grateful for the continued
support of our partners and the Council in building a
progressively more stable and prosperous Somalia.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

19-25920
