S/2020/219

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
20 March 2020
Original: English

United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report provides an account of the activities of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) for the period from 23 November 2019 to
5 March 2020, pursuant to the mandate set out in Security Council resolution 350 (1974)
and extended in subsequent Council resolutions, most recently resolution 2503 (2019).

II. Situation in the area of operations and activities of the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
2.
During the reporting period, the ceasefire between Israel and the Syrian Arab
Republic was generally maintained, despite an increase in the number of violations
of the Agreement on Disengagement between Israeli and Syrian Forces
(Disengagement of Forces Agreement) of 1974. While the overall security situation
in the UNDOF area of operations remained stable, there was some military activity
both across the ceasefire line and in the area of separation in violation of r elevant
Security Council resolutions, including resolution 2503 (2019).
3.
In employing its best efforts to maintain the ceasefire and see that it is
scrupulously observed, as prescribed in the Disengagement of Forces Agreement,
UNDOF reports all breaches of the ceasefire line that it observes. All incidents of
firing into the area of separation and across the ceasefire line, as well as the crossing
of the ceasefire line by individuals, constitute violations of the Agreement. In its
regular interactions with both sides, the leadership of UNDOF continued to call upon
the parties to exercise restraint and prevent any miscalculation that might lead to an
escalation of the situation.
4.
On 22 December 2019 and 14 January 2020, the Israel Defense Forces informed
UNDOF that they had carried out strikes on infrastructure in Syria. In neither incident
did UNDOF hear or observe any airstrikes.
5.
On 6 February, UNDOF personnel at observation post 72 heard aircra ft flying
over the area of separation and observed anti-aircraft fire launched from Syrian armed
forces positions in the area of limitation on the Bravo side. At about the same time,
United Nations personnel at positions 60 and 80 observed drones crossing the ceasefire
line, flying over the area of separation. The United Nations personnel observed one of

20-03998 (E)

230320

*2003998*

S/2020/219

the drones being shot down on the Bravo side. United Nations personnel observed two
missiles fired from the Alpha side (Israeli-occupied Golan) across the ceasefire line,
impacting the vicinities of Nawa and Ankhula in the area of limitation on the Bravo
side. United Nations personnel at observation post 56 observed unidentified objects
flying from west to east which were engaged by anti-aircraft fire and exploded in the
vicinity of Ankhula. The Israel Defense Forces informed UNDOF that they had
conducted a “precision strike on Iranian Quds Forces operating inside Syria”. The
Syrian authorities informed UNDOF that the strikes conducted by the Israel Defense
Forces had resulted in 10 casualties, including 2 fatalities.
6.
On 13 February, United Nations personnel at positions 80 and 85 observed two
aircraft flying from the Alpha side crossing the ceasefire line. United Nations
personnel at several positions observed the aircraft being engaged by Syrian armed
forces anti-aircraft fire on the Bravo side. Subsequently, the Israel Defense Forces
informed UNDOF that they had conducted a “precision strike on Iranian Quds Forces
operating inside Syria”.
7.
On 23 February, United Nations personnel at positions 60 and 68 observed two
aircraft crossing the area of separation from west to east. United Nations personnel
also observed Syrian armed forces anti-aircraft fire engaging the aircraft from different
locations on the Bravo side. The Israel Defense Forces informed UNDOF that they
had conducted precision strikes on Palestinian Islamic Jihad in the Damascus area.
8.
The Syrian authorities informed UNDOF on 27 February that the Israel Defense
Forces had carried out a targeted strike in the vicinity of Hadar, in the area of
separation, resulting in the death of a Syrian police officer. The Israel Defense Forces
did not confirm the incident to UNDOF. Later the same day, UNDOF personnel
observed a number of explosions and aircraft activity in the vicinity of Qunaytirah,
in the area of separation. The Israel Defense Forces confirmed to UNDOF that they
had conducted a strike on Syrian armed forces positions in south -west Syria “where
Iranian and Hizbullah operatives are active”.
9.
On 2 March, UNDOF personnel at position 73 heard detonations and observed
a burning vehicle in the vicinity of United Nations position 16 (Ayn al -Tinah area),
which is close to the ceasefire line. Shortly thereafter, the Israel Defense Forces
informed UNDOF that they had carried out a “precise strike against a terror element
attempting to act against Israeli soldiers”. The Syrian authorities informed UNDOF
that a vehicle belonging to a Syrian national had been attacked in a helicopter strike
in the Ayn al-Tinah area. United Nations personnel who patrolled the area after the
incident observed a vehicle that had been destroyed and a crater on the ground.
10. On 5 March, United Nations personnel at position 80 observed one of two
helicopters flying from the northern part to the southern part of the area of limitation
on the Alpha side fire one missile towards Tall Ahmar al-Sharqi in the area of
limitation on the Bravo side. At about the same time, United Nations personnel at
positions 80 and 68 observed 10 missiles fired from the Alpha side towards the Bravo
side. Five of the missiles impacted the vicinity of Tall Ahmar al-Gharbi in the area of
limitation. Subsequently, Israel Defense Forces informed UNDOF that they “had
carried out a precision strike aiming to prevent a terror attack towards IDF forces in
the Kudnah area…”.
11. The Israel Defense Forces continued to carry out their planned operation, which
they had begun on 1 May 2019, of laying razor concertina wire along the ceasefire line
on the Alpha side. UNDOF deployed forces to that area to de-escalate potential tension.
12. Sporadic heavy explosions, bursts of heavy machine gun and small arms fire
persisted throughout the reporting period in the areas of separation and limitation on
the Bravo side. UNDOF assessed that this military activity was due to controlled
2/7

20-03998

S/2020/219

detonations of unexploded ordnance as part of clearance and training by the Syrian
armed forces. UNDOF observed the continuous presence of the Syrian armed forces,
some of whom were armed, staffing a number of checkpoints within the area of
separation, including in the vicinity of Ba‘th and Khan Arnabah, as well as along the
main road connecting Qunaytirah to Damascus.
13. The military violations on the Alpha side included the presence of Iron Dome
systems and multiple rocket launcher systems, within 10 km of the ceasefire line,
which are considered unauthorized military equipment in the area of limitation
pursuant to the terms of the Disengagement of Forces Agreement.
14. UNDOF continued to observe daily crossings of the ceasefire line by
unidentified individuals from the Bravo side. UNDOF assessed that these individuals
were shepherds and farmers from the surrounding areas tending livestock. The Israel
Defense Forces continued to express deep concern about these crossings, which they
stated were a threat to the safety and security of Israel Defense Forces personnel
operating in close proximity to the ceasefire line. UNDOF continued to place warning
signs along the ceasefire line to deter such crossings.
15. UNDOF protested to the parties all violations of the Disengagement of Forces
Agreement that it had observed, including the firing across the ceasefire line and from
the area of separation, the presence of unauthorized equipment and personnel in the
areas of separation and limitation and the crossings of the ceasefire line by civilians
from the Bravo side. UNDOF closely liaised with the parties, including during periods
of heightened tension, to de-escalate the situation.
16. The security situation in the southern part of the area of limitation continues to
be volatile, with open source reporting of assassinations, attacks on government
checkpoints, the use of improvised explosive devices and protests increasing. Despite
the improvement in the security situation in the UNDOF area of operations, open
sources reported continued attacks carried out against Syrian security forces and other
government authorities, as well as on opposition leaders that had “reconciled” with
the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic in Nawa, Tasil, Tafas and Muzayrib in
the area of limitation on the Bravo side. Open sources also reported a fatal attack
against local employees of an international non-governmental organization in the area
of limitation on the Bravo side.
17. During the reporting period, UNDOF did not observe any internally displaced
persons or tents in the area of separation. On 27 January, at the request of the Israel
Defense Forces and with the agreement of the Syrian authorities, UNDOF and the
International Committee of the Red Cross facilitated the handover to Syrian
authorities of a Syrian national who had been detained by the Israeli authorities after
allegedly crossing the ceasefire line. On 10 February, UNDOF and the International
Committee of the Red Cross also facilitated through the Qunaytirah crossing the
return of the remains of a Syrian national. UNDOF was informed that the individual
had been residing in Lebanon and that his remains had been recovered on the Israeli
coast of Ashdod on 30 May 2019.
18. UNDOF made progress towards its gradual return to vacated positions in the
area of separation. UNDOF currently maintains five positions on Mount Hermon in
the northern part of the area of separation, three in the central part and three in the
southern part, as well as one on the Alpha side. The Force enhanced its visibility of
the area of separation and the ceasefire line through increased patrolling and from its
static positions. During the reporting period, UNDOF continued to develop the
infrastructure of positions 27 and 80 and improve the force protection measures at
these positions.

20-03998

3/7

S/2020/219

19. UNDOF operations continued to be supported by the military observers of the
United Nations Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO) in Observer Group Golan,
who are under the operational control of UNDOF, and maintain seven fixed and one
temporary observation posts in the area of separation. The focus of the Group remains
on continuous static observation and situational awareness.
20. Through Observer Group Golan, UNDOF continued to carry out fortnightly
inspections of equipment and force levels in the area of limitation on the Alpha side.
Liaison officers from the Alpha side accompanied the inspection teams. With the
improvement in the security situation on the Bravo side, UNDOF plans to
progressively resume inspections in the area of limitation, which were suspended for
security reasons.
21. UNDOF continued to engage with the Israel Defense Forces with a view to
addressing restrictions on movement and access to United Nations positions in the
area of separation. This was aimed at reducing the delays and challenges experienced
by United Nations personnel in crossing the Israeli technical fence to United Nations
observation posts. The leadership of UNDOF continued to remind the parties of their
obligation to scrupulously abide by the terms of the Disengagement of Forces
Agreement, to ensure the safety and security of United Nations personnel on the
ground and to extend all cooperation to UNDOF in the fulfilment of the tasks under
its mandate.
22. UNDOF, in consultation with both parties, continued to review the situation in
the area of separation as the Mission advanced its return to vacated positions in the
area of separation. During the reporting period, UNDOF maintained its monthly
patrols on routes in the areas of separation and limitation on the Bravo side at 836 in
February. UNDOF continues to enhance its operational capability and reach on the
Bravo side through progressively opening new patrol routes in the areas of separation
and limitation. UNDOF patrol routes covered approximately 95 per cent of the area
of separation and about 50 per cent of the area of limitation.
23. UNDOF regularly used the Qunaytirah crossing to move equipm ent and
personnel between the Alpha and Bravo sides. UNDOF continues to liaise with the
Israel Defense Forces with regard to their facilitation of the crossing of UNDOF and
Observer Group Golan personnel at the Qunaytirah crossing, in particular the need
for the United Nations personnel to cross using only documents issued by UNDOF
and for an increase in the opening hours of the Alpha gate. With effect from 2 March,
the Alpha gate was closed owing to concerns regarding Coronavirus disease (COVID 19), thus affecting the movement of UNDOF and Observer Group Golan personnel
between the Alpha and Bravo sides. The administrative procedures involved in
crossing have placed a significant additional administrative and logistics burden on
the Mission.
24. The developments related to public protests in Lebanon since October 2019
have affected the primary supply route for UNDOF between Beirut and Damascus.
This has resulted in significant challenges for the Mission, in particular the movement
of UNDOF personnel, fuel, rations and other supplies.
25. UNDOF assessed that there continued to be a significant threat to United
Nations personnel in the UNDOF area of operations from explosive remnants of war,
including unexploded ordnance and mines, and from the possible prese nce of sleeper
cells of armed groups, including listed terrorist groups. On 26 November, an UNDOF
armoured vehicle travelling as part of a logistics convoy between United Nations
positions 60 and 68 in the area of separation was damaged when an explosion
occurred near Ruhinah, in the area of separation. No United Nations personnel were
injured in the incident. UNDOF investigated the circumstances of the explosion but

4/7

20-03998

S/2020/219

could not determine the cause. UNDOF assessed that the probable cause was a buried
piece of unexploded ordnance that was triggered when the convoy passed by.
26. In accordance with the provisions of Security Council resolution 2503 (2019)
and the UNDOF operational concept, UNDOF continued its efforts to deploy
appropriate technology to ensure the safety and security of UNDOF personnel and
equipment. UNDOF continued to conduct and update its contingency planning for the
reinforcement and evacuation of United Nations positions and observation posts on
both the Alpha and Bravo sides, as well as facilities in Damascus. UNDOF conducted
regular rehearsals, exercises and training for identified contingencies. Risk mitigation
measures, including force protection measures, continued to be developed at United
Nations positions and observation posts and at the UNDOF operational base at Camp
Ziouani and headquarters at Camp Faouar.
27. As at 16 February, UNDOF comprised 1,016 troops, including 41 women.
Troops are deployed from Australia (1), Bhutan (3), Czechia (4), Fiji (133), Ghana (13),
India (187), Ireland (135), Nepal (366) Netherlands (2) and Uruguay (172). In
addition, 75 military observers from Observer Group Golan, including 8 women,
assisted UNDOF in carrying out its tasks.

III. Implementation of Security Council resolution 338 (1973)
28. In its resolution 2503 (2019), the Security Council called upon the parties
concerned to immediately implement its resolution 338 (1973). It decided to renew
the mandate of UNDOF for a period of six months, until 30 June 2020, and requested
the Secretary-General to report every 90 days on developments in the situation and
the measures taken to implement resolution 338 (1973). The search for a peaceful
settlement of the conflict in the Middle East, in particular the efforts made at various
levels to implement resolution 338 (1973), was addressed in my report on the situation
in the Middle East (A/73/322/Rev.1), submitted pursuant to General Assembly
resolutions 72/15 on Jerusalem and 72/16 on the Syrian Golan.
29. Since the discontinuation of indirect peace talks in December 2008, there have
been no negotiations between the parties. I look forward to a peaceful resolution of
the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic and the resumption of efforts towards a
comprehensive, just and durable peace settlement, as called for by the Security
Council in its resolution 338 (1973) and other relevant resolutions.

IV. Observations
30. I am concerned about the increased number of violations of the Disengagement
of Forces Agreement during the reporting period, in a particularly volatile time for
the region, including the breaches of the ceasefire that occurred on 22 December
2019, 14 January 2020, 6, 13, 23 and 27 February and 2 and 5 March. The Israel
Defense Forces should refrain from firing across the ceasefire line. I remain
concerned by the continued presence of the Syrian armed forces in the area of
separation. There should be no military forces in the area of separation other than
those of UNDOF. The continued presence of unauthorized weapons and equipment in
the area of limitation on both the Alpha and the Bravo sides is also of concern. These
developments further undermine the Disengagement of Forces Agreement. I urge the
parties to the Agreement to exercise utmost restraint and comply with the Agreement.
I continue to encourage members of the Security Council to support efforts to
sensitize both parties to the risk of escalation and the need to preserve the ceasefire
between Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic.

20-03998

5/7

S/2020/219

31. It remains critical that the parties maintain their liaison with UNDOF. All
violations of the ceasefire line increase tensions between the signatories to the
Disengagement of Forces Agreement and contribute to undermining stability in the
area. The continued liaison by UNDOF with the parties has contributed to
de-escalation during times of heightened tension.
32. I note the continued support of the parties in facilitating the return of UNDOF
to full operations on the Bravo side. It is crucial that the parties provide all necessary
support to allow the full utilization of the Qunaytirah crossing by UNDOF in line with
established procedures, ensuring the necessary freedom of movement. It is important
that UNDOF be able to carry out its operations without facing any administrative
obstacles. This is even more important as UNDOF increases its operations on the
Bravo side to facilitate effective and efficient mandate implemen tation.
33. The commitment of both Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic to the
Disengagement of Forces Agreement and support for the presence of UNDOF remain
essential. The full return of UNDOF to the area of separation continues to be a priority
for the Mission. I count on the continued cooperation of both parties to facilitate the
advancement of the Mission’s plans for an incremental return to operations and
positions in the area of separation and to ensure that the Mission can implement its
mandate fully, including through inspections on the Bravo side. At the same time, the
parties must continue to support the enhancement of the liaison function of UNDOF.
34. Given the worrying trend of increased number of violations of the
Disengagement of Forces Agreement during the reporting period, the safety and
security of military and civilian personnel in UNDOF and Observer Group Golan is
of particular concern. It is therefore of particular importance that the Security Council
continue to bring to bear its influence on the parties concerned to ensure that UNDOF
is accorded the ability to operate in a safe and secure manner and is allowed to operate
freely in accordance with the Disengagement of Forces Agreement. The support of
the parties in facilitating the clearance of mines, unexploded ordnance and explosive
remnants of war in the UNDOF area of operations is crucial. It is also necessary for
UNDOF to continue to have at its disposal all means and resources necessary for it to
return fully to the area of separation, conditions permitting.
35. The support of Member States and the confidence and commitment of troop contributing countries in UNDOF remain key factors in the Mission’s ability to carry
out its mandate. I continue to count on the support of troop-contributing countries. I am
grateful to the Governments of Australia, Bhutan, Czechia, Fiji, Ghana, India, Ireland,
Nepal, the Netherlands and Uruguay for their contributions, commitment, resolve and
the consummate professionalism of their military personnel in UNDOF. I am also
thankful to the Member States that have contributed military observers to UNTSO.
36. In conclusion, I wish to express my appreciation to the leadership of UNDOF and
all military and civilian personnel of UNDOF and Observer Group Golan serving under
their leadership, who continue to perform the important tasks assigned to them by the
Security Council with efficiency and commitment under challenging circumstances.

6/7

20-03998

S/2020/219

20-03998

7/7
