S/PV.8918

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8918th meeting

Monday, 6 December 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Abarry. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Niger)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Mr. Kvalheim
Ms. Evstigneeva
Ms. Mark
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Roscoe
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield
Mr. Pham

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2021/987)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-36987 (E)
*2136987*

S/PV.8918

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

In my recent briefings to the Council, I have
underlined the main challenges and opportunities,
particularly with respect to the protection of civilians
in the east of the country. These challenges are still
relevant today.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2021/987)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Bintou Keita,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo; and
Ms. Marie-Madeleine Kalala, women’s rights activist
and member of the African Women Leaders Network.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2021/987, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Ms. Keita, by me, in my capacity as Chair
of the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and by Ms. Kalala.
I now give the floor to Ms. Keita.
Ms. Keita (spoke in French): I thank you, Sir,
for this opportunity to address the Security Council
to present the current situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, following the publication of the
latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2021/987). I
look forward to providing this briefing in person after a
long period of remote interaction due to the coronavirus
disease pandemic.
2/21

06/12/2021

It is in that context that on 30 November, the Forces
armées de la République démocratique du Congo
(FARDC) initiated joint military operations with the
Ugandan army against the Allied Democratic Forces
(ADF). Air and artillery strikes against ADF positions
in North Kivu and Ituri were followed that same day by
the entry of Ugandan units into Congolese territory in
Nobili, North Kivu, which were then directed towards
the Kamango area, 50 kilometres from Beni. At this
time, ground operations continue to neutralize enemy
combatants in areas of bombardment today.
In my interactions with the highest authorities of the
two States, I have taken note of the sovereign decision
to carry out this joint military action and underlined
the absolute necessity to put in place operational
mechanisms of cooperation in order to ensure the
security of the United Nations peacekeepers and allow
the Mission to continue to support the FARDC in the
protection of civilians and the neutralization of armed
groups, in accordance with the mandate granted to it by
the Council. These mechanisms are being put in place.
To that end, on 2 December the Force Commander of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
went to Kampala to define with the authorities the
practical modalities of that tripartite coordination,
which will cover, inter alia, aspects related to the
security of the aviation, the protection of forces
participating in operations and humanitarian access to
affected populations. Tomorrow, the Force Commander
will be in Kinshasa to meet with the FARDC military
hierarchy in order to pursue the dialogue initiated in
Kampala. I also stress that MONUSCO, within the
framework of its mandate, will continue to monitor and
report any potential human rights violations committed
on Congolese territory.
It should be recalled that, with a view to responding
to the security challenges in the east of the country,
the Congolese authorities decided in May to declare a
state of siege in the provinces of Ituri and North Kivu,
whose duration has just been extended for the thirteenth
time. Given the difficulties associated with the
implementation of the many criticisms that have resulted
from it, the Defence and Security Standing Committee
21-36987

06/12/2021

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

of the National Assembly carried out an assessment
of the state of siege and made recommendations to
the Government, in the contexts both of security
and of territorial administration and justice. I would
welcome that constructive and democratic approach,
which has been accepted by the Government. An
interinstitutional commission headed by the Minister
of Defence is carrying out a complementary assessment
by consulting the population and the local political
class in the provinces of North Kivu and Ituri. These
consultations are also a step in the right direction.
The challenges facing the Government in
implementing the state of siege highlight the limits of a
strictly military approach to the protection of civilians
and the neutralization of armed groups. The period of
the state of siege in fact saw a 10 per cent increase in
the number of violations and abuses of human rights
in the country, compared to the previous period,
attributable in the great majority to armed groups
and the security forces in the two provinces of North
Kivu and Ituri. A sustainable solution to the violence
in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo will
require a broader political commitment to addressing
the root causes of conflict. If stability is to return to
eastern Congo, the State must succeed in restoring and
maintaining the confidence of the people in its ability to
protect, administer, deliver justice and meet their basic
needs. I have stressed that regularly in my exchanges
with the Head of State and with the Prime Minister.
The humanitarian situation continues to deteriorate
in the east of the country due to insecurity and epidemics,
combined with limited access to basic services. The
number of internally displaced people stands at nearly
6 million, of whom 51 per cent are women. This is the
highest number of internally displaced people on the
continent. This situation has been compounded by the
emergence of new cases of the Ebola virus. In that
regard, I commend the involvement of humanitarian
partners that quickly mobilized to help the Ministry
of Health prevent the spread of the disease. I take this
opportunity to reiterate the appeal to international
partners and donors to redouble their efforts under
the humanitarian response plan for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which has so far received only
34 per cent of the necessary funding.
Following the establishment of the Disarmament,
Demobilization, Community Reintegration and
Stabilization Programme, the Government created a
joint technical working group to ensure coordination

S/PV. 8918

between the United Nations and the Congolese
authorities in the operationalization of the programme.
I hope that the group will serve as an instrument to
catalyse international support for the programme.
I encourage the Government to proceed without
delay to the appointment of the provincial coordinators
of the Disarmament, Demobilization, Community
Reintegration and Stabilization Programme. I invite
the national coordination to sensitize all the actors
concerned, including the defence forces and security, on
the civilian and decentralized nature of the programme,
favouring the community reintegration of combatants
and banning any amnesty and automatic integration
into the army, in accordance with the agreed principles.
International support and the success of the programme
depend on it.
(spoke in English)
The implementation of the transition plan for
the progressive, responsible and conditions-based
drawdown of MONUSCO is making progress. At the
national level, the Mission, the United Nations country
team and the Government continue to coordinate the
operationalization of the joint transition plan presented
in October to the Council, through a joint working group.
At the provincial level, MONUSCO and the United
Nations country team, in collaboration with national
and international stakeholders, are operationalizing
the humanitarian-development-peace triple nexus
approach in Tanganyika, in anticipation of the Mission’s
drawdown from the province by June 2022. In recent
weeks, the Mission’s senior leadership, together with
the United Nations agencies, funds and programmes,
have led field visits to jointly assess progress towards
the implementation of the exit strategy and enhance
coordination with provincial and local authorities.
Meanwhile, in the Kasai region, the United Nations
system remains focused on continued efforts to sustain
peacebuilding gains, following the withdrawal of
MONUSCO. The international community, represented
by the partners coordination group, has continued to
show its commitment to a responsible and sustainable
transition process. In October, the group undertook
a field visit to Kasai and Kasai Central provinces to
review the implementation of nexus-related projects
and the provincial coordination mechanisms.
Long-term stability also requires a firm
commitment to good governance and the rule of law.

21-369873/21

S/PV.8918

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

06/12/2021

In that regard, I welcome the holding of the general
assembly for the fight against corruption, organized by
the Government in October, which led to a series of
recommendations for reforming and strengthening the
regulatory system and State anti-corruption agencies.
I encourage the Congolese authorities to continue the
implementation of measures against corruption.

months, on taking forward the key reforms needed to
consolidate the hard-won stabilization gains achieved
so far and overcome continuing challenges, particularly
in the east. I count on the Council to renew its support to
MONUSCO and provide adequate resources to enable
the Mission to carry out its mandate for the benefit of
the Congolese people.

The illegal exploitation of natural resources is a
major driver of conflict that needs to be addressed. I
am encouraged by the Government’s efforts to reform
the mining sector and reiterate the Mission’s readiness
to support these efforts, within the limits of its
mandate and the means at its disposal. The sustainable
exploitation of natural resources is also a State
responsibility vis-à-vis the international community
in the global fight against climate change. I commend
President Tshisekedi’s intervention at the twenty-sixth
Conference of the States Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change in Glasgow
and his commitment to combating deforestation in the
Congo basin rainforest and to reducing greenhouse gas
emissions by 21 per cent by 2030.

The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Keita
for her briefing.

As I have underscored before, the process of
democratic consolidation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo presents both challenges and opportunities.
I am encouraged by the recent meetings between the
presidency, the Prime Minister and the Presidents of the
Senate and National Assembly with the leadership of
the Catholic and Protestant churches, which have helped
reduce tensions arising from the disputed appointment
of the leadership of the Independent National Electoral
Commission (CENI). I also want to salute the efforts
of the Congolese civil society national coordination, to
which Ms. Kalala belongs, and which worked hard to
help the different stakeholders find an agreement on the
CENI leadership. I encourage them to continue their
efforts to foster a peaceful, credible and violence-free
electoral process. MONUSCO will continue to use its
good offices to build trust among all stakeholders. A
national consensus on the reform of the electoral law
will be absolutely critical in that regard.

On that occasion, I was accompanied by
representatives of the Permanent Missions of Estonia,
France, India, Ireland, Kenya, Mexico, the Niger,
Norway, the United Kingdom and Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines to the United Nations. Representatives
of the Kinshasa Embassies of China, the United States,
the Russian Federation and India were also present.

In conclusion, I wish to thank all members of this
Council for their steadfast support to MONUSCO.
I also wish to pay a special tribute to the troop- and
police-contributing countries and all my colleagues,
whether military or civilian staff, whose support makes
possible the implementation of the Mission’s mandate.
As the country looks ahead to elections in 2023, I urge
all political stakeholders to focus, over the next twelve
4/21

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004), concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
I have the honour to speak in my capacity as
Chair of the Committee. My previous briefing to the
Council on the work of the Committee dates back to
5 October 2021 (see S/PV.8873), and the one before
that to 6 October 2020 (see S/2020/987). Today I intend
to provide an overview of my visit to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo from 6 to 10 November this year.

I would first like to thank the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo for its close
cooperation and for the relevant information it provided
to my delegation. I would also like to express my
gratitude to Special Representative Bintou Keita and
her colleagues at the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO), as well as to other institutions
and United Nations organizations in country, for their
support and excellent reports.
Overall, as stated in the mandate, the purpose
of my visit was to gather first-hand information
regarding the effective application of the sanctions
imposed by resolution 2360 (2017) — reaffirmed by
resolution 2582 (2021) — and, in accordance with
paragraph 30 of resolution 2360 (2017), to explore
the possibility of holding consultations with the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and with representatives of MONUSCO, the diplomatic
21-36987

06/12/2021

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

community and civil society groups in order to
guarantee the full application of sanctions measures.
During our stay in Kinshasa, my delegation held
fruitful discussions with various Congolese authorities,
in particular the Prime Minister and the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, the Special Adviser to the President in
charge of youth, gender and violence against women,
and the Auditor General of the Forces armées de la
République Démocratique du Congo.
We also held an exchange of views with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
the Deputy Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. David McLachlan-Karr, and took stock
with representatives of MONUSCO on the political
landscape, the security conditions and the human rights
and humanitarian situation, in addition to a briefing
with the United Nations Mine Action Service.
In addition, we had an opportunity to meet
separately with representatives of the diplomatic
community and civil society organizations, including
women’s groups.
Finally, we held a meeting with the senior official of
the monitoring mechanism on the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, who travelled to Kinshasa with one of his
technical experts.
Overall, our discussions focused on the security
conditions in the eastern part of the country, including
the activities of armed groups; the diversion of
weapons by armed groups; the use of improvised
explosive devices by suspected elements of the Allied
Democratic Forces; human rights violations committed
by all actors, including sexual violence in conflict; and
the illegal exploitation of natural resources. The effects
of the state of siege in North Kivu and Ituri were also
discussed. Preparations for the 2023 local and national
elections were also on the agenda. Many interlocutors
encouraged the 1533 Committee to consider imposing
additional sanctions on individuals and entities
engaging in acts that compromise the peace, stability
or security of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in
accordance with the designation criteria set out in the
relevant Council resolutions.
The situation in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo continues to be marked by
insecurity and human rights violations. I am particularly
concerned by the risks of inter-communal conflict in
Ituri and by reports of hate speech and violence against

S/PV. 8918

the Banyamulenge community in South Kivu. I am
equally concerned about the recruitment and use of
children by armed groups and the fact that such groups
continue to engage in the diversion of weapons and the
illicit exploitation of natural resources.
I am encouraged by the expressed will of the
Government to address the multiple challenges facing
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in particular
its commitment to tackle the issue of sexual violence
in conflict.
I am also encouraged by the diplomatic steps
taken by President Tshilombo Tshisekedi to normalize
relations with neighbouring countries. I hope that
those discussions will lead to a decrease in the illicit
trafficking in arms and natural resources along of the
borders of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to Ms. Kalala.
Ms. Kalala (spoke in French): It is once again a
privilege for me to speak to the Security Council on
the issue of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for
which I thank the Council.
I similarly briefed the Council in March 2017 (see
S/PV.7903) at a delicate stage in our history as we were
to organize presidential, legislative and senatorial
elections. In reviewing my statement then, I am
cognizant of the similarities in the two moments, given
that the issue of elections is once again on the agenda,
along with the ensuing difficulties — although that time
we were able to overcome the obstacles and achieve a
peaceful transition of power, to the great satisfaction of
the international community.
Nevertheless, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo finds itself facing the same difficulties. The
issue in connection with the appointment of the
President of the Independent National Electoral
Commission in October is one illustration of that. For
while the President has indeed been appointed, the
Commission must still be fully constituted given the
lack of consensus with the opposition. It is therefore
essential that all the stakeholders involved agree on
the proper holding of the process so that it can be
truly transparent, consensus-based and peaceful, as a
measure of the country’s stability.

21-369875/21

S/PV.8918

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Also as I reviewed my statement, I noted that
instability in the east of the country also continues to be
a scourge for the people today, who are displaced on a
daily basis — when not horrifically killed — despite the
efforts of the Government by way of the declaration of
the state of siege. And all the while there is deafeaning
silence among the major Powers as the vicious cycle
continues involving the plunder of natural resources,
with the complicity of transnational corporations,
massacres and the proliferation of armed groups, with
the ensuing phenomenon of child soldiers and the rape
of women.
As for the social situation, it has not improved
much despite the efforts of President Tshilombo
Tshisekedi, who has stated his determination to end
corruption — a scourge that erodes the business
environment and heightens the precarious living
conditions of Congolese. Unfortunately, I cannot dwell
on this issue due to time constraints. Numerous civil
society reports bear that out.
Nevertheless, as a former Minister for Human
Rights and a female mediator, I cannot but be concerned
about protecting women and human rights in my
country. Despite, certain obvious changes, all reports
point to the repeated violation of those rights. In that
connection, in paragraph 21, the Secretary-General
report issued on 1 December (S/2021/987) states:
“Documented violations related to democratic
space increased by 131 per cent owing to
increased threats against members of civil society
organizations and violations of the right to
peaceful assembly.”
In paragraph 24, the report states:
“The number of internally displaced persons in the
country surpassed 5.7 million, of whom 51 per cent
were women ... The figure represents the greatest
number of internally displaced persons on the
African continent.”
Unfortunately, the weak judicial system makes it
impossible to hold the perpetrators responsible for those
numerous violations, or to compensate the victims. It is
therefore necessary for the State to continue its efforts
to protect its citizens.
I also take this opportunity to express my support for
the call of Dr. Mukwege and civil society with regard to
the implementation of a transitional justice mechanism.
6/21

06/12/2021

With regard to the withdrawal of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
that will depend on the degree to which Congolese
women — through our national African Women
Leaders Network — participate in the development
of the Mission’s transition plan in the areas that affect
them. We believe that we should not rush the Mission
withdrawal. Instead, we must take into account all the
factors I mentioned, as the security and humanitarian
situation remain precarious.
The activist campaign we see now throughout
the country also shows the gravity and urgency of
addressing violence against women, which could hinder
their social and political participation and, as a result,
delay the country’s development.
Finally, I would be remiss if I did not mention another
scourge that looms over the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. I therefore join Special Representative
Bintou Keita in condemning the increase in tribalism
and hate speech. Regressive notions can only hamper
the development of our country, with tribalism as its
engine. We must therefore eliminate such ideologies in
order to be able to all live together.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Kalala
for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
the Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004), concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, for their briefings.
I also thank Ms. Marie-Madeleine Kalala for her
commitment to advancing women’s rights.
I will highlight three points.
First, the progress made at the regional and domestic
levels must be supported. France welcomes the positive
dynamic among the States of the region. France
supports President Tshilombo Tshisekedi’s initiatives
to strengthen engagement with neighbouring States.
The operationalization of the Contact and Coordination
Group for non-military measures will be a further step
to build trust. The forthcoming meeting of the follow-up
mechanism of the Addis Ababa Framework agreement
will contribute to promoting dialogue and stability in
the region.
21-36987

06/12/2021

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The fight against impunity is being bolstered by
the conviction of more than 200 individuals for acts of
sexual violence. France welcomes efforts to establish a
reparation fund for the victims. The conviction of MayiMayi leader Kolokolo for crimes against humanity
demonstrates that abuses committed by armed groups
will not go unpunished. Efforts to establish a national
transitional justice strategy must continue.
France calls for the holding of credible, transparent,
inclusive and peaceful elections in 2023. Safeguarding
the democratic space is therefore essential.
Secondly, all efforts must converge to protect
the people and meet their needs. France notes the
recent targeted and coordinated actions between the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Uganda against
the Allied Democratic Forces. Close coordination
between all actors on the ground, including the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and
the States of the region, is essential. France will remain
alert to potential abuse and the protection of civilian
populations. Given the increase in intercommunal
violence, the fight against hate speech and incitement
to violence must also continue.
Military measures will be insufficient without
prospects for those who have chosen peace. The
new Disarmament, Demobilization, Community
Recovery and Stabilization Programme must
continue, and a national strategy must be elaborated
for its implementation. France calls on international
partners, in particular the World Bank, to support
its implementation.
Humanitarian needs continue to grow. Humanitarian
and medical workers must be protected and their access
must be guaranteed. France condemns the abduction
on 30 November of two members of the International
Committee of the Red Cross in North Kivu.

S/PV. 8918

enhancing integration and increasing joint programmes
in order to promote stability.
The implementation of the Government’s
programme of action will be key to meeting the
benchmarks that will guide the reconfiguration of the
United Nations presence. Support from international
and regional partners will need to increase in order
to achieve the objectives set out in the MONUSCO
transition plan.
The authorities of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo know that they can count on France’s support,
particularly in strengthening Government institutions.
France is proud to contribute to the modernization of
the Congolese armed forces through the Kinshasa War
School in a partnership for peace and stability.
As the Council prepares to renew MONUSCO’s
mandate, I would like to pay tribute to its personnel,
who operate in an unstable environment in which they
are often targets. Together, let us continue to support
the Democratic Republic of the Congo on the path to
lasting peace.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I have the honour to make this
statement on behalf of the three African members of the
Security Council — Kenya, the Niger and Tunisia — as
well as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (A3+1).
The A3+1 thanks you, Mr. President, for your work
as Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004), concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Bintou Keita
for her briefing and commend her team for their
commitment to supporting peace and security in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We also thank
Ms. Marie-Madeleine Kalala for her briefing.

Health challenges also remain. That is why the
European Union has deployed humanitarian aid to help
communities affected by meningitis in Tshopo province.
France remains mobilized within the framework of the
Franco-Congolese road map to combat epidemics.

We are encouraged by His Excellency President
Tshilombo Tshisekedi’s commitment to ensuring a
timely, inclusive, transparent, credible and peaceful
electoral process in 2023, in line with the constitutional
timelines. We welcome the establishment of the
Independent National Electoral Commission, the
promotion of freedom of expression and democratic
space and the meaningful participation of women and
youth in decision-making positions.

Finally, the commitment of the United Nations
remains essential to peace, stabilization and
institution-building. MONUSCO and United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes must act together by

The A3+1 calls on the international community
and financial and technical partners to continue to
support the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo in strengthening the capacities of its

21-369877/21

S/PV.8918

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

national security, justice and economic institutions,
including by supporting the Government’s programme
of action for the period 2021 to 2023, which provides
key tools for creating safe environments conducive
to advancing lasting and sustainable peace, stability
and development.
The A3+1 remains deeply concerned over the
deteriorating humanitarian situation in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which has been
worsened by widespread insecurity, particularly the
destabilizing activities of armed groups. We recognize
the efforts being made by the Congolese Government
to pacify the region and restore State authority. We
underscore the importance of guaranteeing security by
safeguarding the freedoms and rights of the population,
promoting zero tolerance to gender-based violence and
holding perpetrators of human rights abuses accountable.
The need for humanitarian assistance is growing due
to the alarming number of refugees and internally
displaced people. We urge international partners to
scale up their assistance by contributing, with a sense
of urgency, to the 2021 humanitarian response plan,
and we encourage the United Nations and its Member
States to reinvigorate their support for refugees and
the respective host countries by strengthening our
collective international responsibility, in line with a
comprehensive refugee response framework.
The A3+1 recognizes the efforts of the armed
forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
against armed groups. We reiterate the importance of
continued support through, inter alia, enhanced joint
military operations, information-sharing, training and
capacity-building programmes, including weapons
and ammunition management, counter- improvised
explosive devices and explosive ordnance disposal. The
threat posed by armed groups in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo cannot be solved by military means alone.
The A3+1 therefore welcomes a comprehensive approach
that includes the establishment of the Disarmament,
Demobilization, Community Reintegration and
Stabilization Programme and MONUSCO’s engagement
in supporting its operationalization.
The A3+1 recognizes the linkage between the
illegal exploitation and trade of resources and the illegal
trafficking in small arms and light weapons in fuelling
armed conflict. We therefore encourage MONUSCO, in
accordance with its mandate, to support the Congolese
8/21

06/12/2021

Government in undercutting the economic lifelines of
armed groups that benefit from the illegal exploitation
of, and trade in, natural resources.
We urge for enhanced regional cooperation in
promoting the implementation of the provisions of the
Addis Ababa Framework Agreement and other regional
tools to fight the illegal exploitation and trade of natural
resources in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We further call upon the international community and
the various stakeholders to support the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo in monitoring
and curbing, as necessary, the supply chains for the
illegally exploited and traded natural resources.
The protection of civilians in the conflict-affected
regions remains crucial. In that regard, we encourage
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
redouble her efforts with regard to protection-of-civilian
activities, particularly through the neutralization of
armed groups by MONUSCO’s Intervention Brigade.
The protection of civilians is a first priority on the
ground. That is why we urge all United Nations
agencies and other partners of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to make such protection of
civilians a high priority and undertake it through their
engagement activities.
We welcome efforts undertaken by the SecretaryGeneral to mobilize all partners and stakeholders in
support of more effective United Nations peacekeeping
through his Action for Peacekeeping initiative.
We encourage the Secretary-General to undertake
regular strategic reviews of MONUSCO, including
the progressive implementation of the Comprehensive
Planning and Performance Assessment System, to
describe the Mission’s impact and effectiveness
and facilitate, as necessary, a re-evaluation of its
composition and mandate in the context of its gradual
and responsible withdrawal.
The A3+1 reiterates its commitment to the principle
of subsidiarity, as enshrined in the letter and spirit
of the Charter of the United Nations. In that regard,
we encourage the cooperation and coordination of
regional organizations, in particular the East African
Community, the Economic Community of Central
African States, the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region and the African Union, in supporting
mediation, dialogue and the restoration of trust among
Member States of the region in order to consolidate
sustainable peace, security and development.
21-36987

06/12/2021

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

In conclusion, we reiterate our steadfast support
for MONUSCO in its efforts to provide assistance for
the sustainable stabilization and development of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Our support to
facilitate its work through the renewal of its mandate in
the upcoming days can be assured.
Mr. De La Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Special Representative Keita and
Ms. Marie-Madeleine Kalala for their briefings. I also
thank you, Mr. President, for your briefing on the visit of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533
(2004) to Kinshasa, and I welcome the representative of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to this meeting.
Mexico has closely followed the political and
security developments in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo in recent months. Regarding the political and
electoral reform issues, we believe that it is essential
that the Security Council call on the various political
actors to maintain an inclusive political dialogue,
which clearly implies the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women in all aspects of political life.
However, the most urgent issue continues to be the
deteriorating security situation in the eastern provinces
of the country. In the past three months, the toll of
attacks against the civilian population is regrettable, in
terms of both the number of people killed or injured and
the increase in new displacements caused by violence.
Mexico therefore believes that the protection-ofcivilian mandate of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) is crucial, and we express our
support for those efforts.
The violence also affects humanitarian personnel
and their operations on the ground, as demonstrated by
the 215 attacks and five deaths of humanitarian workers
that were recorded between January and October this
year. We condemn those attacks. It is necessary to
protect such activities, which are essential to meeting
the needs of the civilian population.
Given the recent joint operations by the Ugandan and
Congolese armies in Ituri and North Kivu, it is crucial
that they be in full coordination with MONUSCO so that
it, in turn, can fulfil its protection-of-civilians mandate,
as well as of course protect its own Mission personnel.
While we understand the urgent need for joint
operations to restore order and security, and as was noted
by the Sanctions Committee’s mission to the country,

S/PV. 8918

it is clear that there are no purely military solutions.
We also stress that obligations under international
law, including international humanitarian law and
international human rights law, must be observed.
With regard to MONUSCO’s transition, we
recognize the active role that the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has played, and
continues to play, in developing and implementing
the transition plan. We welcome the initiatives for the
establishment of a national transitional justice strategy.
The Government’s involvement and its close
collaboration with MONUSCO make it possible to better
address the various security threats. The diversion of,
and illicit trafficking in, small arms and light weapons,
as well as the use of improvised explosive devices,
necessitate capacity-building.
In view of the upcoming renewal of MONUSCO’s
mandate, we recognize that transitions are complex
processes that require the full involvement of national
and local actors and that decisions must be based on
progress on the ground. The effective implementation
of the transition plan will undoubtedly be a key tool in
the process.
I conclude with a reference to the efforts to combat
impunity. We welcome the sentencing of Chance
Mihonya Kolokolo for crimes against humanity, the
recruitment of children and the illegal extraction of
natural resources, one of the causes of the conflict and
destabilization in the region. We urge the continuation
of investigations and prosecution of all those responsible
for committing sexual violence, including members of
the Forces armées de la République démocratique du
Congo and the Congolese National Police.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): As this is the first opportunity I have, I
want to welcome you, Mr. President, to the presidency
and wish you, Sir, all the success possible over this
coming month. I would also like to thank Mexico for its
presidency last month and the very dynamic programme
it put forward for us.
I thank you, Mr. President, for your superb leadership
of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) and your insights
from your visit to Kinshasa. I would also like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Keita
for briefing us at this critical moment for the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the

21-369879/21

S/PV.8918

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and
for the Congolese people, and I thank Ms. Kalala for her
insights. I would also like to welcome the Democratic
Republic of the Congo Permanent Representative’s
presence with us today.
Today I would like to discuss three aspects of the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo: the
changing security environment, the role of MONUSCO
and its eventual drawdown, and addressing sexual
exploitation and abuse allegations.
First, the United States is encouraged by the
improvements in the security situation in Tanganyika.
But as the briefers highlighted, the security environment
in North and South Kivu and Ituri remains dire. The
United States is closely following the situation in the
Hauts Plateaux and Moyens Plateaux of South Kivu,
including the role of hate speech in inciting violence.
We know what this kind of language can lead to, and it
must be stopped immediately.
Our expectations for today’s meeting were
overturned by the breaking news last week that
Congolese and Ugandan troops had launched joint
military operations against the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham (ISIS) in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. We will be watching that situation carefully.
The United States commends the efforts the Congolese
Government is making to face the ISIS-Democratic
Republic of the Congo threat. As we have all come
to know, combating terrorism requires international
cooperation. In that vein, I urge the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Ugandan Governments to
coordinate and include MONUSCO officials in their
planning. That is essential for success. It will ensure
military operations are coordinated with peacekeepers
and humanitarian actors and they are conducted in
compliance with international humanitarian law
and international human rights law and are clearly
communicated to civilian populations. It would also
strengthen the military operations themselves.
In addition, I urge MONUSCO to fully implement
the Mission’s robust civilian protection mandate
through the conduct of joint and offensive operations,
including through the Force Intervention Brigade. We
hope the Office of the Special Envoy for the Great
Lakes will do its part to keep the region informed
of developments in a swift and transparent manner,
lowering tensions and stopping the flow of funds and
recruits to terrorist groups.
10/21

06/12/2021

Let me be clear, though: military solutions alone
are not sufficient to solve the problem of terrorism,
and they will not address the root causes of conflict in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. One important
way of ameliorating conflict comes from ensuring
people’s voices are heard. To that end, we note that
the Democratic Republic of the Congo will next hold
elections in 2023. The United States stands ready to
support the Congolese Government and the voting
public in the holding of free, fair, transparent and
inclusive elections within constitutional timelines.
Secondly, although last week’s developments are
still fresh, we look forward to working closely with
our fellow Council members on MONUSCO’s mandate
renewal to position the Mission for positive results
and plan for its eventual drawdown. Transitioning
MONUSCO will not be easy; it will require
coordination with the United Nations country team
as the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo works to provide strong and good governance in
the years to come.
Fortunately, we have seen progress on the key
indicators laid out in the joint transition plan, guided
by an assessment of conditions on the ground. Security
conditions in Kasai enabled the Mission’s exit, and we
welcome the United Nations country team’s expanded
engagement with civilian counterparts before and after
MONUSCO’s departure. An effective MONUSCO
transition also requires the Democratic Republic of
the Congo Government to implement its communitybased Demobilization, Disarmament, Community
Reintegration and Stabilization Programme. We
urge our Government counterparts to devote all the
necessary resources to that programme. Combatants
need to see participation as a viable alternative to
armed group membership.
Thirdly, we must press for an end to sexual
exploitation and abuse in peacekeeping. MONUSCO
recorded more than 20 new allegations this year alone.
Those terrible acts erode confidence in the United
Nations. They undermine mission effectiveness. And
they endanger the very populations our peacekeepers
are deployed to protect. The Mission must continue
to promptly investigate all allegations. We urge all
countries contributing personnel to MONUSCO to
take prevention seriously and hold their personnel
accountable. The United States will remain unequivocal
in its calls for an end to sexual exploitation and abuse
21-36987

06/12/2021

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

across the United Nations system, no matter the setting
or perpetrator.
And finally, we note the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General’s call for additional support on
the humanitarian front, given the increased numbers
of displaced. As usual, she can depend on the United
States continued support for those efforts.
Mr. Pham (Viet Nam) (spoke in French): I thank
Special Representative Bintou Keita, Ambassador
Abdou Abarry and Ms. Marie-Madeleine Kalala for
their briefings.
(spoke in English)
I also especially thank Ambassador Abarry for his
dedication and leadership over the past two years as the
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004), concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. And I welcome the
participation of the representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in today’s meeting.
My delegation notes the ongoing political tensions
among political parties, including in preparation for
the 2023 elections. Therefore, we encourage efforts to
settle differences through dialogue and negotiations,
as well as ensure inclusive participation in the political
process, including by women.
Unity is vital with a view to bringing back stability
in the east and focusing on development, including
through the implementation of the Government’s
programme of action for the period 2021 to 2023.
It is greatly concerning that insecurity and its drivers
are deeply rooted in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo. It is unacceptable that civilians have always
been the main target of attacks by armed groups.
The situation in Ituri and North Kivu continues to
be extremely volatile in the face of the state of siege.
Meanwhile, the security situation in South Kivu also
gravely worsened.

S/PV. 8918

remain displaced — the highest number in Africa. At
the same time, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
and the new Ebola outbreak further exacerbate those
challenges. We call for generous and timely support for
the humanitarian response plan, which was only 34 per
cent funded, as mentioned in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2021/987). Technical and financial assistance
is needed more than ever to overcome the impacts of
COVID-19 and ensure vaccination for all.
Peace and stability will continue to elude the
people in the affected regions if the underlying causes
of instability and violence are not fully addressed.
New and advanced strategies are needed to ensure the
protection of civilians, restore State authority, deal
with illegal activities relating to natural resources,
promote reconciliation among communities and address
hate speech.
Accordingly, my delegation welcomes the continued
efforts and determination of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the countries
of the region, including in the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.
Regional cooperation is the key to addressing common
security challenges and promoting socioeconomic
development for its people. My delegation also fully
supports the Government’s efforts to implement the
Disarmament, Demobilization, Community Recovery
and Stabilization Programme and other security sector
reform projects.
The role of MONUSCO remains crucial, and we
strongly support the continuation of its presence on the
ground. We are pleased to see the close cooperation
among the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, United Nations entities and other
stakeholders with respect to the operationalization of
the transition plan.

My delegation strongly condemns all attacks against
civilians, as well as humanitarians and peacekeepers,
and calls on all parties to abide by obligations under
international humanitarian law.

While the situation in Tanganyika has been
improving, the situation in Ituri and the Kivus
continues to require special attention. We hope that
productive cooperation and critical international
support will continue in order to preserve the hard-won
achievements and attain desirable outcomes.

Insecurity, socioeconomic difficulties, epidemics,
displacement, among other factors, continue to put a
strain on the humanitarian situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, where 5.7 million people

Let me conclude by stressing the indispensable
contribution of the international community in assisting
the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Viet Nam will continue to follow closely and support

21-3698711/21

S/PV.8918

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

the path towards long term peace and stability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Keita
and Ambassador Abarry for their briefings. I also
listened attentively to Ms. Kalala’s remarks. I welcome
the participation of the representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo at today’s meeting.
For some time now, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has maintained political stability, accelerated
economic recovery and continued to improve its
relations with the countries of the region. As the rotating
Chairperson of the African Union, President Tshisekedi
Tshilombo has made important contributions to
promoting the unity and sovereignty of Africa and has
actively mediated on hotspot issues.
However, many difficulties and challenges stand
in the way of efforts to achieve lasting peace and
security in the country. It is necessary to continue
inclusive dialogue, resolve differences appropriately
and maintain stability. It is also imperative to focus
on national development and people’s livelihoods,
properly implement the Government’s three-year
programme of action, promote reforms in key areas,
improve governance capabilities and boost national
development and recovery.
The security situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo has deteriorated, with frequent incidents
of armed violence and successive instances of civilian
kidnappings and killings. The recent violence in Ituri,
for example, resulted in many civilian casualties,
including the loss of life of two Chinese citizens. China
strongly condemns such violence.
The Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has imposed a state of siege in the eastern regions
and launched a joint military operation with Uganda
in order to vigorously combat armed group violence,
thus demonstrating its firm role and determination to
maintain stability. We hope that the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) will continue to
coordinate and collaborate with the Forces armées de
la République démocratique du Congo and continue
to protect civilians through joint operations and
other measures.
However, reliance on military means alone will
not definitively resolve the problems in the eastern
12/21

06/12/2021

Democratic Republic of the Congo. In order to break
the vicious cycle of violent conflict, we must start at
the roots, promote regional cooperation, develop and
use natural resources in a sound manner, advance the
Disarmament, Demobilization, Community Recovery
and Stabilization Programme and provide the local
population with more jobs and enhanced livelihoods.
The new strategy and action plan for the Great Lakes
region provides the reasoning and implementation path
for addressing those problems. MONUSCO should step
up coordination and cooperation with the Office of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes region in order to address the causes of regional
instability through joint efforts.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo is facing a
dire humanitarian situation, with the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) and epidemics such as meningitis and
Ebola raging and a full vaccination rate for COVID-19
of only 0.1 per cent. There are new refugee flows from
Ituri, North Kivu and South Kivu. The international
community, particularly the international financial
institutions, must honour their assistance pledges and
increase inputs to help meet the current challenges.
At the opening of the eighth Ministerial Conference
of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation, held
recently, President Xi Jinping announced that China
would provide 1 billion doses of vaccines to Africa,
seek to have $300 billion of imports from Africa in the
next three years and implement nine programmes with
Africa in health, poverty reduction and agricultural
development, promote trade and investment, digital
innovation, green development, capacity-building,
cultural and people-to-people exchanges and peace and
security. That will inject new impetus into the efforts of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and other African
countries to fight the pandemic, improve humanitarian
conditions and achieve post-COVID-19 recovery.
Since taking office, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Keita has led MONUSCO in
effectively fulfilling the Security Council mandate and
making progress in all areas of its work. MONUSCO
and its Force Intervention Brigade have played an
important role in stabilizing the security situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and the contributions
made by the troop- and police contributing countries are
commendable. On principle, China supports a one-year
extension of MONUSCO’s mandate.
21-36987

06/12/2021

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

MONUSCO has withdrawn from Kasai province
and will be pulling out of Tanganyika province in June
2022. The Mission should work with the Government,
the United Nations country team and others in order
to bolster the process of transferring responsibilities
and ensure coordination and cooperation in the areas
of withdrawal, in accordance with the transition plan
and the 18 withdrawal benchmarks and risk-mitigation
measures. MONUSCO should continue its work in
the humanitarian, development and peace sectors in
an integrated manner and implement the drawdown
strategy in an orderly, responsible and sustainable way
in order to irreversibly consolidate peace gains.
As Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004)
concerning, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Ambassador Abarry visited the country and maintained
close contact with the Government and other relevant
actors. That contributed to his deep understanding of the
situation on the ground and the Government’s concern
about an adjustment of sanctions. China welcomes the
positive results of that visit and appreciates Ambassador
Abarry’s efforts in that regard. The Council should
respond positively to the Government’s concerns and
thus avoid the negative impact of sanctions on capacitybuilding and security in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
Mr. Kvalheim (Norway): I thank you, Ambassador
Abarry, for convening this meeting in your capacity
as President of the Security Council. I also thank
Special Representative Keita and Ms. Kalala for their
important briefings.
We are deeply concerned about the security situation
in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the humanitarian crisis facing the country. Despite the
state of siege, the threat from armed groups persists.
Indiscriminate attacks against civilians in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, including from
the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF), must stop. We
hope the current operations by the Forces armées de
la République démocratique du Congo and Uganda to
address cross-border threats from the ADF will succeed.
However, we are concerned that the operations
may lead to further escalation of violence and threats
against the civilian population. We urge all parties to do
their utmost to protect civilians and their livelihoods.
We also call on all parties to keep the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic

S/PV. 8918

Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) closely informed
of their activities.
We encourage the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004),
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to
review the implementation of the sanctions regime for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo in order to ensure
that it reflects the evolving situation on the ground. We
recall that designated individuals and entities should
include those involved in acts that undermine the peace,
stability or security of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. That is especially true of acts that constitute
human rights violations or abuses or violations of
international humanitarian law.
Allow me to focus on two main points: women’s
participation and the Mission’s transition.
First, the contribution of Congolese women to
peacebuilding cannot be overstated. The Democratic
Republic of the Congo has made progress regarding
women’s participation. Yet there is potential for
increased direct and meaningful participation and
stronger support for local women’s organizations.
Women must be included at all levels and in all political
and conflict-prevention processes, such as electoral
reform, the 2023 election and the further transition
of the Mission. It is vital that MONUSCO prioritize
its support to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in implementing the Joint Communiqué between the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the United Nations on the Fight Against Sexual
Violence in Conflict and action plans for the armed
forces and the national police.
Secondly, the implementation of the transition plan
requires the full attention of the Congolese authorities,
the whole United Nations system and relevant partners.
It is important that tasks be transferred from MONUSCO
to the Congolese authorities and the United Nations
country team in a sustainable manner. The Congolese
authorities and the United Nations system must be
capable of taking on those responsibilities before the
actual transfer takes place.
While MONUSCO will exit the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, we do not believe in fixed
deadlines when it comes to MONUSCO’s exit from
Ituri, North Kivu and South Kivu. The benchmarks
and the situation on the ground must guide us in a
responsible process, which will most likely take longer
than the originally envisaged transition strategy. We

21-3698713/21

S/PV.8918

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

therefore call for stronger collaboration among all
relevant actors, including civil society, to ensure the
full achievement of the joint strategy’s benchmarks.
Recent developments underscore that a sustained
focus on the protection of civilians is a prerequisite
for the transition. It is critical to ensure a phased and
gradual approach that fully considers the risk of gaps
in physical protection, which may expose conflictaffected civilians to new, or persistent, risks of harm.
The return to peace and stability will require the
commitment of all. Norway will work with all relevant
stakeholders for an inclusive and peaceful transition
that leads to sustainable peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland) (spoke in French):
I would like to thank Ms. Bintou Keita, whom it is
a pleasure to see here among us this morning, and
Ms. Kalala for their briefings. Ireland is very grateful
for the work of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO). I also thank Ms. Keita for the
information that she provided on the current situation
in the country. I would also like to thank Ambassador
Abarry of the Niger, as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004),
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for
his briefing regarding the Committee’s recent visit to
Kinshasa. I wish to highlight four points today.
First, Ireland is deeply concerned about the
deteriorating security and humanitarian situation in
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
state of siege was introduced as an extraordinary and
temporary measure, but it has been renewed 13 times.
The findings of the National Assembly’s assessment of
the state of siege raise significant concerns about the
long-term impact of the state of siege, particularly with
regard to the accountability of members of the security
forces who collaborate with armed groups. Corruption
and impunity are never acceptable. We note Uganda’s
recent engagement in eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo and stress the need to ensure the protection
of civilians during operations.
Violence and insecurity in the eastern provinces
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, including
persistent attacks on civilians, continue unabated, with
significant repercussions. Reports of gender-based
and gender-specific violence and other serious human
rights violations and abuses in the Democratic Republic
14/21

06/12/2021

of the Congo, including by State actors, are deeply
worrisome. Ireland condemns those violations and
abuses in the strongest possible terms. MONUSCO’s
work to document such acts and support survivors
is essential.
(spoke in English)
My second point is that the planned 2023 elections
can become a pivotal moment for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The appointment of 12 members
of the Independent National Electoral Commission,
including four women, is significant. The recent
tensions linked to the appointments are regrettable, and
MONUSCO should continue to engage with key actors
to promote timely, transparent, inclusive and peaceful
political processes.
My third point is that Ireland commends the
publication
of
MONUSCO’s
conditions-based
transition plan. It is crucial that there be sufficient
flexibility in the plan to allow for setbacks and
unexpected challenges. We insist that women, young
people and civil society continue to be fully included
in the planning, implementation and monitoring of the
important transition.
In particular, Ireland notes the Special
Representative’s work to include women’s voices,
for which we thank her, and their perspectives in the
transition plan and conflict-resolution processes. We
welcome the progress that continues to be made on
the women and peace and security agenda, with some
positive indications around the meaningful participation
of women in political processes. We will continue to
work for that and to monitor it.
Ireland sees transitions as a gradual process that
builds towards a reconfiguration of the strategy,
footprint and capacity of the United Nations in a way
that should enable and support long-term peacebuilding
efforts. We welcome the continued engagement by
MONUSCO and the United Nations country team with
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to that end.
We hope that resolution 2594 (2021), adopted by
consensus during our Council presidency in September,
represents an important contribution as to how we can
approach sustainable transitions. In that regard, Ireland
is particularly interested to observe how MONUSCO
and the United Nations country team, in collaboration
with national and international stakeholders, continue
21-36987

06/12/2021

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

to operationalize the humanitarian-development-peace
nexus in Tanganyika and Kasai provinces.
(spoke in French)
Fourthly, and finally, Ireland welcomes the positive
assessment of the performance of MONUSCO and its
police components. We join in the Secretary-General’s
condemnation of cases of sexual exploitation and
abuse in United Nations operations, and we welcome
the implementation by MONUSCO of preventive and
disciplinary policies to help eradicate such behaviour.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I join other speakers in
thanking the Special Representative for her briefing. I
also thank the Permanent Representative of the Niger,
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1533 (2004), concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, for his insightful overview.
I welcome the Permanent Representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Ms. Kalala
joining us today.
As this is the concluding meeting on the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) for
Estonia as a member of the Security Council, I would
like to take this opportunity to share the key messages
that would empower the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in its efforts to re-establish peace, stability and
security in the country and the region.
First, we underscore the positive results of the
Congolese Government in maintaining political
stability and further commitments in facilitating
electoral reforms ahead of the 2023 elections. It is
important that the Congolese Government maintain
that momentum in making further efforts in ensuring
credible, inclusive and peaceful elections, with the full,
equal and meaningful participation of women.
Secondly, we take note that, during our membership
of the Security Council, the level of insecurity in the
eastern provinces has not shown improvements, in spite
of the declaration and regular extension of the state of
siege in North Kivu and Ituri for the past seven months.
In that connection, we encourage the Congolese
Government to pay due attention to the flaws identified
in the assessment of the state of siege and ensure
transparent coordination of all forces on the ground
to guarantee compliance with the international human
rights and humanitarian law obligations.

S/PV. 8918

Thirdly, human rights violations and abuses,
accompanied by the conflict-related sexual and genderbased violence perpetrated by both armed groups and
State agents, have long characterized the daily life
of women and children in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. It is often said that children are our
future, but one can only imagine the future that will
be shaped by children who undergo grave violations
and forced recruitment in armed conflict. We believe
that the first trial in South Kivu involving charges of
recruitment and the use of children will give further
impetus to addressing accountability and the fight
against impunity.
In conclusion, we welcome the continued
engagement of the Special Representative with
the Congolese Government, MONUSCO and the
international stakeholders on the implementation
of the transition plan, which holds out prospects
for a sustainable transition process. We believe
that the implementation of the plan should ensure
equal opportunities for all stakeholders, including
humanitarian actors, civil society, women and youth.
Finally, I would like to thank MONUSCO
peacekeepers and United Nations personnel for their
service and sacrifices, and to express our unwavering
support to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
its people for a better future.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): At the outset, allow
me to thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Bintou Keita for her briefing on the mandate
implementation of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) and the most recent developments
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I also thank
the Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo for his report. I also thank
Ms. Kalala for her insights. I welcome the presence of
the representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in today’s meeting.
Developments over the past three months have
again demonstrated the challenges in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, particularly in the eastern
provinces. There has been an increase in the activities
of armed groups, mainly the Allied Democratic Forces
(ADF), which has gained in strength in recent months
and has committed terror attacks targeting civilians
not just within Democratic Republic of the Congo,

21-3698715/21

S/PV.8918

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

06/12/2021

but beyond. We condemn those attacks and express
condolences to the families of those who were killed.

transition and eventual exit of MONUSCO must be
gradual, responsible and orderly.

The expanding terror network in Africa is a matter
of serious concern. In that regard, the joint operations
against the ADF in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo are a welcome development. We also note
that measures taken by the Democratic Republic of the
Congo Government to address the security situation
in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo have
received broad support from all stakeholders.

The stabilization of conflict-affected provinces
will also depend on curbing the illegal exploitation
of mineral resources. In that regard, we would like to
emphasize the convergence of the Strategy for Peace
Consolidation, Conflict Prevention and Conflict
Resolution in the Great Lakes Region and the efforts of
the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
under the overall umbrella of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region.

While military action against armed groups is
important and needs to be pursued relentlessly, progress
in security sector reform and the implementation
of the Disarmament, Demobilization, Community
Reintegration and Stabilization Programme cannot
be ignored. We continue to encourage MONUSCO’s
support to the Government in both of those processes.
The formation of the two thematic working groups — one
on disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
and one on community reintegration, recovery and
stabilization — and the identification of provincial
coordination teams in Ituri, North Kivu and South Kivu
are steps in right direction. There is also a need for
greater efforts to minimize intercommunal conflicts.
There has been progress with the National
Assembly’s endorsement of members of the Independent
National Electoral Commission (CENI). We are hopeful
that the differences expressed by certain stakeholders
will be resolved peacefully and through dialogue. The
role of CENI towards consolidating the gains made so
far remains crucial and will aid in cementing the roots
of democracy through the elections of 2023. We hope
that the ongoing positive momentum will be further
encouraged and maintained as the upcoming elections
are debated and discussed in the country.
As we continue to discuss the upcoming renewal
of MONUSCO’s mandate, we acknowledge the
efforts made so far towards a steady transition and
the benchmarks agreed between MONUSCO and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo authorities.
We also emphasize that the assessment of progress
on the benchmarks should be realistic. The situation
on the ground should guide the eventual drawdown,
while ensuring that gains made in the violence-prone
provinces are firmly consolidated to avoid any reversal.
The strengthening of State authority, security
organs and justice institutions remains paramount. The
16/21

Regarding performance assessment of the
Mission, we reiterate once again the importance of
assessing all components equally and impartially
given their interlinkages. Similarly, we also call for the
implementation of resolution 2589 (2021), especially
with respect to the reporting requirements reflected in
subparagraphs (a) and (b) of paragraph 4, concerning
crimes against peacekeepers.
In conclusion, the challenges faced by the
Democratic Republic of the Congo are not
insurmountable. The faith and confidence of the people
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in democratic
institutions to address the security and development
challenges are reassuring. The Democratic Republic of
the Congo leadership has shown its resolve to address
those challenges. The support of the international
community, including the United Nations, will be
extremely important in the coming days. For its part,
India will continue to support and assist the Democratic
Republic of the Congo on the path towards lasting
peace, stability and prosperity.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
Ms. Bintou Keita, for her informative briefing. We
also thank the Permanent Representative of the Niger,
Mr. Abdou Abarry, for his briefing on the activities
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We also thank Ms. Marie-Madeleine
Kalala and welcome the participation in this meeting
of the Permanent Representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
21-36987

06/12/2021

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The situation in the eastern and north-eastern
regions of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
remains complex, and the increase in violence and
the number of civilian victims is alarming. The Allied
Democratic Forces remains a major threat to security.
We are closely following developments in the
provinces of Ituri and North Kivu, where a state of
emergency has been in effect since May. We hope
that the Government will be able to regain control
of the security situation in the area. That will make
it possible to ensure the strengthening of State
institutions on the ground, improve the humanitarian
and socioeconomic conditions, resolve intercommunal
conflicts, and implement, together with MONUSCO,
the Disarmament, Demobilization, Community
Reintegration and Stabilization Programme for
former combatants.
The illegal exploitation by the insurgents of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo’s natural resources,
which are used by illegal armed groups to finance
their activities, remains an acute problem. There is a
need to regain control of the situation and to ensure
transparency in this area.
We highly appreciate the successful interaction of
the security forces of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and MONUSCO, to which the leaders of some
other United Nations missions can refer as a role model
when building relations with host countries. In that
regard, we commend Ms. Keita’s efforts to promote the
interaction of peacekeepers with the authorities and
people on the ground, which creates a much-needed
positive environment. We welcome the launch of a joint
centre with the Congolese armed forces in October, and
the strengthening of the Intervention Brigade.
We are concerned over reports about the
humanitarian situation. The statistics indicating that
the United Nations humanitarian response plan has
been financed only by 34 per cent is particularly
worrisome, especially given the increased number of
internally displaced persons. Additional efforts are
assuredly required to address the common calamity of
the coronavirus pandemic and the sporadic outbreaks
of Ebola.
When working on the Security Council draft
resolution on the renewal of the MONUSCO mandate,
we take into account the transition plan for a step-bystep drawdown and withdrawal of the Mission that has
been elaborated jointly with Kinshasa. We believe that

S/PV. 8918

the evolving situation on the ground must be accounted
for during the implementation of that document.
We proceed from the assumption that lasting
normalization in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
cannot be achieved through military measures alone.
We need to advance our work to ensure the full-fledged
implementation of the fundamental Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework in the eastern parts of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great
Lakes region. We welcome the steps taken by President
Tshilombo Tshisekedi and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo’s neighbours aimed at normalizing the
situation in the Great Lakes region. One of the key
tracks is the extension of cooperation among the Great
Lakes States in the area of security. We underscore
that when it comes to joint action to oppose illegal
armed groups, proper coordination is fundamentally
important, including in the context of the presence of
peacekeepers on the ground.
Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): May I begin
by welcoming back Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Keita to the Chamber. It is very
good to see her here in person, and we are very grateful
for her briefing. I am also grateful to Ms. Kalala for her
briefing and to you, Mr. President, for your insights on
the visit of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and your role as
its Chair.
I will focus my intervention on three issues:
Uganda’s intervention in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the state of siege and the
mandate renewal of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO).
First, the United Kingdom is closely following
developments in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo following the launch of joint operations
by the Ugandan People’s Defence Force (UPDF) and
the Forces armées de la République démocratique du
Congo (FARDC) against the Allied Democratic Forces.
Coordination will be essential to maximize
operational impact and minimize the risk posed to
civilians, United Nations personnel and humanitarian
actors, as well as the risk of unintended action between
the forces. We therefore stress the need for effective
information-sharing and coordination between the
UPDF, the FARDC and MONUSCO on any military

21-3698717/21

S/PV.8918

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

action, including location, nature and objectives, and
also with humanitarian actors so as to enable access to
those likely to be displaced or affected. We welcome the
steps taken by the parties to begin sharing information
and the role that the Special Representative has played
in the region in facilitating that process.
The United Kingdom also underscores the
necessity of conducting all operations in full respect
of international human rights law and international
humanitarian law and, where appropriate, in strict
compliance with the human rights due diligence policy
on United Nations support to non-United Nations
security forces. In that connection, it was reassuring
to hear that the Special Representative reports human
rights compliance by all actors in her territory. While
UPDF-FARDC operations take place against the
backdrop of improved regional relations, we encourage
all Governments to use existing regional mechanisms
to share information about those operations in order to
reduce the risk of unintended harm.
Turning now to the state of siege, the United
Kingdom acknowledges FARDC and MONUSCO
efforts against armed groups in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo but remains concerned about
persistent armed group activity and consequent civilian
death, injury and displacement. We reiterate our call
for the Government to ensure that the state of siege
is transparent, time-bound — and we note today that
we are in its thirteenth extension — and implemented
with full respect for international humanitarian law
and international human rights law. It was worrying to
hear in today’s briefing about the rise in human rights
abuses across the country.
We also urge the Government to ensure that the
necessary resources reach the responsible actors in
the east. We welcome investigations into allegations
of embezzlement of funds for military operations
and encourage the Government authorities to ensure
accountability for those responsible. We encourage the
Government to follow the other recommendations of
the joint Defence and Security Standing Committee,
including the development of an exit strategy from the
state of siege.
As we approach MONUSCO’s mandate renewal, let
me briefly highlight the United Kingdom’s priorities.
We want to see progress in the implementation of the
Mission’s transition plan. Continued discussions by
the joint MONUSCO–Government of the Democratic
18/21

06/12/2021

Republic of the Congo working group will be
essential in that regard. We also wish to see further
consolidation of MONUSCO’s presence in Ituri and
North and South Kivu in order to enable the Mission
to focus on the minimum conditions required for
its eventual exit. We expect the full and effective
engagement of all protection-of-civilian components,
including MONUSCO’s Force Intervention Brigade, to
achieve that.
Advancing MONUSCO’s transition and enabling a
focus on the minimum conditions in Ituri and North
and South Kivu will also be facilitated by preparations
for the early transfer of certain tasks — those that are
not central to meeting the minimum conditions for
withdrawal and those for which the Government, the
United Nations country team and other international
partners could already reasonably assume responsibility.
In conclusion, the United Kingdom supports a
gradual, sustainable withdrawal of MONUSCO, guided
by an end state, rather than an end date. MONUSCO
and the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo continue to have our full support in their efforts
to achieve that and to ensure a more peaceful, stable
and prosperous country.
Finally, May I thank the Special Representative and
through her thank all of her staff and the peacekeepers
in MONUSCO in what we know continue to be very
difficult conditions.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
Mr. Empole (Democratic Republic of the Congo)
(spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to extend
my warmest congratulations to the Republic of the
Niger on the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of December. I also welcome the holding this
meeting on the situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
His Excellency Secretary-General António Guterres for
his commitment and support to my country’s cause. I
welcome his report (S/2021/987) on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). This report was
just now presented by his Special Representative and
Head of MONUSCO, Ms. Bintou Keita, whom I thank
21-36987

06/12/2021

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

for her sustained efforts to promote peace and security
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
I also welcome the report that you just presented,
Mr. President, in your capacity as Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533
(2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, on the activities of that Committee.
Finally, I also welcome Ms. Marie-Madeleine
Kalala to this meeting.
Allow me to add my delegation’s voice to this
discussion to make a few comments on some of the
points addressed in the report, mainly on the political,
security, humanitarian and human rights situation,
as well as on the exit strategy and the renewal of
MONUSCO’s mandate.
The political situation remains calm. At the national
level, as we heard, discussions remain focused on the
issue of organizing the 2023 elections.
In that regard, following the appointment of
the members of the Independent National Electoral
Commission on 22 October by the Head of State, His
Excellency Mr. Félix-Antoine Tshisekedi Tshilombo,
the time has come to assess the actual requirements
for the holding of good and credible elections within
the time frame provided for by law. At the end of that
process, the Government could decide on possible
needs for assistance from its partners, both bilateral
and multilateral.
In that context, the President of the Republic held
talks on 26 November with the bishops members of
the Episcopal Conference of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and exchanged with them proposals to
support the electoral process, which everyone wants to
be transparent, peaceful and efficient.
At the regional level, the Head of State is continuing
his contacts with his peers to improve good-neighbourly
relations and cooperation in various areas of common
interest. In that regard, the signing of economic and
security agreements with Rwanda, Uganda, Burundi
and Angola should be noted.
With regard to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo’s chairmanship of the African Union, the
President of the Republic invited his peers, as well as
regional and international organizations, to the first
conference of Heads of State and Government on
the elimination of violence against women and girls,

S/PV. 8918

held in hybrid format on Thursday, 25 November, in
Kinshasa under the theme “Positive masculinity” and
in which several Heads of State and Government took
part. At the end of the conference, the Heads of State
and Government committed to positive masculinity
approaches to end the scourge of violence against
women and girls in Africa.
Concerning the security situation, it must be said
that it remains under the control of the defence and
security forces of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. However, as the report under consideration
emphasizes, the destructive presence of national and
foreign armed groups continues to inflict havoc and loss
of life among the population of the eastern part of the
country. That worrisome situation remains a priority
for the President of the Republic, who is determined to
continue the fight against all armed groups until they
are completely eradicated so as to enable the population
of that part of the country to live in peace.
To that end, pursuant to his constitutional
prerogatives, the President of the Republic decreed a
state of siege, which to date is still in force. For the
same purpose, major joint offensive operations by the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Uganda were
launched to reinforce those of the Forces armées de la
République démocratique du Congo (FARDC) and the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) in
order to fully restore peace, re-establish the authority
of the State and protect the population.
On the subject of the state of siege, it should be said
that, in order to optimize its outcomes and effectiveness,
the Government dispatched an assessment mission, led
by a joint parliamentary-FARDC committee under the
supervision of the Minister for Defence and Veterans,
for any possible adjustments.
With regard to the regional understanding on
targeted joint operations of the FARDC and the Uganda
People’s Defence Force, it is focusing on the eradication
of the Allied Democratic Forces/Madina at-Tauheed
wau Mujahedeen terrorists and their affiliates. Indeed,
based on intelligence-sharing in June, the two armies
moved to the implementation phase on 30 November.
For the Head of State, that momentum should be seized
and the significant gains of the state of siege should be
built upon to put an end to those negative forces and
neutralize the armed terrorist groups that are rampant

21-3698719/21

S/PV.8918

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
As was just described, the humanitarian situation
is mainly dominated by the resurgence of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and the return of
Ebola, as well as the problem of refugees and internally
displaced persons.
With regard to COVID-19 in particular, and to
forestall a possible fourth outbreak and the discovery, a
few days ago, of the Omicron variant, the Government
adopted new measures given the current evolution of
the pandemic in order to ensure the protection of our
populations. Those measures, which are complementary
to those already in force, essentially seek to reduce
the importation of infected cases, the main source of
contamination, and increase the vaccination coverage
in the target groups so as to strengthen immunity and
reduce the impact of the pandemic in the country.
As for the issue of displaced persons and refugees,
the Secretary-General’s report estimates that there are
approximately 5.7 million displaced persons and about
500,000 refugees. As Council members can see, those
numbers are too high and do not allow for the proper
monitoring and care of those who are truly displaced
and in genuine need of humanitarian assistance. The
identification of the displaced persons and their return
to their places of origin are security measures that will
greatly help the protection of civilians. The same is true
for refugees, who are sometimes victims of suspicion
linked to the security situation, particularly those who
do not respect the instructions related to their status.
Consideration should therefore increasingly be given
to encouraging the voluntary return of those who are
willing and able to do so in accordance with the relevant
international law, as humanitarian assistance should
not be an end in itself. Appropriate measures must
therefore be taken to definitively resolve the problem of
displaced persons and refugees.
The human rights situation, particularly in the
east of the country, is mainly linked to the situation of
armed conflict and military operations there. We must
urgently restore peace in the east and steadily bring the
Democratic Republic of the Congo back towards the
building of a true State based on the rule of law, with
an effective Administration capable of better managing
and defending its borders and exercising State authority
throughout the national territory, in order to better
resolve the human rights issue.
20/21

06/12/2021

In the conditions that I just described, in accordance
with resolution 2556 (2020), MONUSCO is preparing
to leave the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Security Council to renew the MONUSCO mandate for
another year.
With regard to the gradual withdrawal of
MONUSCO, a joint working group of the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and MONUSCO
was set up. It produced a reference document for both
parties, which serves as a joint strategy and allows for
the gradual transfer of responsibility and the orderly
and definitive withdrawal of MONUSCO. That gradual
withdrawal of the MONUSCO force will take place
in parallel with a temporary reinforcement of the
police and civilian component, which will support
strengthening the sovereign functions of the rule of law
and assist the gradual transfer of the Mission’s tasks
to the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, with the support of the United Nations country
team and the other partners involved.
In that regard, it should be noted that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Bintou
Keita, whom I applaud once again, and Prime Minister
Jean-Michel Sama Lukonde Kyenge signed the
transition plan (S/2021/807, annex) for the phased
departure of MONUSCO on 15 September, which was
presented to the Council in October (see S/PV.8873).
With regard to MONUSCO’s new mandate, my
delegation believes that the two strategic priorities
previously entrusted to the force should be maintained,
namely, the protection of civilians and support for the
stabilization and strengthening of State institutions
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In order to
ensure the success of its mandate to protect civilians,
among other things MONUSCO will have to reinforce its
effectiveness with a robust and focused posture in areas
affected by armed conflict where the threat remains very
high and worrisome, particularly the three provinces
under siege. It will need to continue to strengthen the
operational capabilities of the Intervention Brigade,
the quick reaction forces and MONUSCO as a whole,
as well as to bolster its geolocation and engagement
capabilities adapted to asymmetric warfare and
complete the reconfiguration and deployment of troops
that have not yet been fully achieved in accordance with
the previous mandate, in particular the quick reaction
forces. Targeted offensive military operations, whether
unilateral or in collaboration with the FARDC, will
need to be intensified and extended to all units of the
21-36987

06/12/2021

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

force. Priority should be given to offensive deterrent
operations against armed groups. The unarmed
approach should be applied where necessary.
I will now move on to support for the ongoing state
of siege, the use of drones and sharing information
gathered with the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
On the topic of support for institutions,
MONUSCO should support the Government in the
implementation of its Disarmament, Demobilization,
Community Recovery and Stabilization Programme
as a priority action in order to enable the sustainable
demobilization and reintegration of combatants from
local armed groups and envisage a regional approach to
disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, resettlement
and reintegration in resolving the issue of foreign armed
groups through dialogue with the country of origin and
by involving the Office of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region.
The Disarmament, Demobilization, Community
Recovery and Stabilization Programme is an important
component because the dynamics of joint FARDCMONUSCO and FARDC-UPDF operations will
increasingly force armed groups to surrender. It will
also involve the transfer of capacities, including
through training and technical and logistical support to
the security forces and the justice system, which will
facilitate and accelerate the transfer of tasks.
Allow me to welcome once again the report that
you, Mr. President, have just presented, in your capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, on the Committee’s activities.
I take this opportunity to reiterate the two requests
addressed to the United Nations in general and to the
sanctions Committee in particular by the President of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo on 21 September
during the general debate of the seventy-sixth session
of the General Assembly (see A/76/PV.3), first, for the

S/PV. 8918

lifting of the requirement, imposed by paragraph 5 of
resolution 1807 (2008), that the Democratic Republic
of the Congo notify the 1533 Committee in advance
of all importation of military goods by my country’s
Government or any provision of assistance, advice
or training related to military activities of the armed
forces and security forces of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, especially since the Government has, as
our Head of State has underscored, the constitutional
mandate to ensure the security of persons and property
throughout the national territory; and secondly, for
serious and exemplary sanctions to be imposed on all
mafia networks, whether they be in countries of transit
or destination, and against multinationals that illegally
exploit my country’s minerals and, in exchange, supply
the armed groups with weapons and ammunition,
thereby perpetuating the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes region.
In conclusion, allow me to remind the Security
Council that the renewal of the MONUSCO mandate
is a very important exercise for the future of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, its sons and
daughters, and even the entire Great Lakes region.
Through the mandate resolution, thousands of lives can
be saved through measures taken within that context
and their implementation on the ground.
I thank the members of the Security Council for the
special attention they continue to give to the situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I would also
like to express the gratitude of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to the troop-contributing countries for
their support, and to pay tribute to the memory of all
those who have lost their lives for peace and stability in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

21-3698721/21
