A/77/463/Add.1

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
1 December 2022
Original: English

Seventy-seventh session
Agenda item 68 (a)

Promotion and protection of human rights: implementation
of human rights instruments
Report of the Third Committee *
Rapporteur: Ms. Shalini Gungaram (Mauritius)

I. Introduction
1.
At its 3rd plenary meeting, on 16 September 2022, the General Assembly, on
the recommendation of the General Committee, decided to include in the agenda of
its seventy-seventh session, under the item entitled “Promotion and protection of
human rights”, the sub-item entitled “Implementation of human rights instruments”
and to allocate it to the Third Committee.
2.
The Third Committee considered the sub-item jointly with sub-item 68 (b),
entitled “Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms”, sub-item 68 (c),
entitled “Human rights situations and reports of special rapporteurs and
representatives”, and sub-item 68 (d), entitled “Comprehensive implementation of and
follow-up to the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action”, heard introductory
statements, held interactive dialogues and a general discussion on item 68, entitled
“Promotion and protection of human rights”, as a whole, considered proposals and
took action on the sub-item at its 17th to 38th, 47th and 54th meetings, on 13 and 14
and from 17 to 21 and 25 to 28 October and on 10 and 17 November 2022. An account
of the Committee’s consideration is contained in the relevant summary records. 1
3.
For the documents before the Committee under this sub-item, see document
A/77/463.

__________________

* The report of the Committee on this item is being issued in five parts, under the symbols
A/77/463, A/77/463/Add.1, A/77/463/Add.2, A/77/463/Add.3 and A/77/463/Add.4.
1
A/C.3/77/SR.17, A/C.3/77/SR.18, A/C.3/77/SR.19, A/C.3/77/SR.20, A/C.3/77/SR.21,
A/C.3/77/SR.22, A/C.3/77/SR.23, A/C.3/77/SR.24, A/C.3/77/SR.25, A/C.3/77/SR.26,
A/C.3/77/SR.27, A/C.3/77/SR.28, A/C.3/77/SR.29, A/C.3/77/SR.30, A/C.3/77/SR.31,
A/C.3/77/SR.32, A/C.3/77/SR.33, A/C.3/77/SR.34, A/C.3/77/SR.35, A/C.3/77/SR.36,
A/C.3/77/SR.37, A/C.3/77/SR.38, A/C.3/77/SR.47 and A/C.3/77/SR.54.

22-27298 (E)

061222

*2227298*

A/77/463/Add.1

II. Consideration of proposals
A.

Draft resolution A/C.3/77/L.45
4.
At the 47th meeting, on 10 November 2022, the Committee had before it a draft
resolution entitled “Torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatmen t or
punishment” (A/C.3/77/L.45), submitted by Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia,
Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Ecuador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, the Marshall Islands, Mexico,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, the Netherlands, North Macedonia, Norway,
Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Tunisia, Ukraine and the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. Subsequently, Australia ,
Bangladesh, Belize, Benin, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Cabo Verde, the Congo, Djibouti, the Dominican Republic, Ghana, Guinea -Bissau,
Haiti, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kiribati, Lebanon, Liberia, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Myanmar, Nepal, New Zealand, Panama, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia,
Seychelles, South Africa, Türki̇ ye, the United States of America and Uruguay joined
in sponsoring the draft resolution.
5.
At the same meeting, Angola, the Gambia, Malawi, the Niger, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Timor-Leste and Vanuatu joined in sponsoring the draft resolution.
6.

Also at the same meeting, the representative of Denmark made a statement.

7.
Also at the 47th meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.3/77/L.45
(see para. 14, draft resolution I).
8.
After the adoption of the draft resolution, statements were made by the
representatives of the Philippines, Nicaragua, the Russian Federation and Argentina.

B.

Draft resolution A/C.3/77/L.40
9.
At the 54th meeting, on 17 November 2022, the Committee had before it a draft
resolution entitled “Human rights treaty body system” (A/C.3/77/L.40), submitted by
Armenia, Austria, Belgium, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bulgaria, Canada, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Georgia, Germany,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco, the Netherlands, North Macedonia, Norway,
Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Ukraine, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of America and
Uruguay. Subsequently, Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Chile, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, the Dominican Republic, El Salvador,
France, Greece, Honduras, Israel, Japan, Lebanon, the Marshall Islands, Mexico, New
Zealand, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, the Republic of Korea, the Republic of
Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Thailand, Tunisia and Türki̇ ye joined in
sponsoring the draft resolution.
10. At the same meeting, Bhutan, Guinea and Timor-Leste joined in sponsoring the
draft resolution.
11. Also at the same meeting, the representative of Iceland made a statement (also
on behalf of Belgium, Slovenia and the Nordic countries).

2/16

22-27298

A/77/463/Add.1

12. Also at the 54th meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolution A/C.3/77/L.40
(see para. 14, draft resolution II).
13. After the adoption of the draft resolution, a statement was made by the
representative of El Salvador.

22-27298

3/16

A/77/463/Add.1

III. Recommendations of the Third Committee
14. The Third Committee recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the
following draft resolutions:

Draft resolution I
Torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
or punishment
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its previous resolutions on torture and other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment,
Reaffirming also that no one shall be subjected to torture or other cruel, inhuman
or degrading treatment or punishment,
Recalling that freedom from torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment is a non-derogable right under international law, including
international human rights law and international humanitarian law, which must be
respected and protected under all circumstances, including in times of international
and non-international armed conflict or internal disturbances and tensions or any
other public emergency, that the absolute prohibition of torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment is affirmed in relevant international
instruments and that legal and procedural safeguards against such acts must not be
subject to measures that would circumvent this right,
Recalling also that the prohibition of torture is a peremptory norm of
international law without territorial limitation and that international, regional and
domestic courts have recognized the prohibition of cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment as customary international law,
Recalling further the definition of torture contained in article 1 of the
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment 1 and the obligation of States to abide strictly by the definition of torture
contained in article 1, without prejudice to any international instrument or national
legislation which contains or may contain provisions of wider application, and
emphasizing the importance of properly interpreting and implementing the
obligations of States with respect to torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment,
Recognizing that States must protect the rights of those facing criminal
sentences, including the death penalty and life imprisonment without the possibility
of parole, and of other affected persons in accordance with their international
obligations,
Noting that, under the Geneva Conventions of 1949, 2 torture or inhuman
treatment are a grave breach and that, under the statute of the International Tribunal
for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991,
the statute of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian
Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring
__________________
1
2

4/16

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1465, No. 24841.
Ibid., vol. 75, Nos. 970–973.
22-27298

A/77/463/Add.1

States between 1 January and 31 December 1994 and the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court, 3 acts of torture can constitute crimes against humanity
and, when committed in a situation of armed conflict, constitute war crimes,
Recognizing the importance of the implementation of the International
Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, 4 which
makes a significant contribution to the prevention and prohibition of torture,
including by prohibiting secret places of detention and by ensuring legal and
procedural safeguards for persons deprived of their liberty, and encouraging all States
that have not done so to consider signing, ratifying or acceding to the Convention,
Recognizing also that the prevalence of corruption, including in law
enforcement and justice systems, can have a negative impact on the fight against
torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, including by
eroding fundamental safeguards and preventing victims of torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment from effectively seeking justice,
redress and compensation through the justice system,
Recognizing further that police and other law enforcement officials play a vital
role in the protection of the right to life, liberty and security of persons, and in serving
the community and protecting all persons against acts of torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, and that, in the performance of their
duties, law enforcement officials are obligated to respect and protect the human rights
of all persons, and in this regard, recognizing the importance of promptly and
impartially investigating as well as employing non-coercive interviewing techniques
and implementing associated legal safeguards to prevent torture and to effectively
obtain accurate and reliable information,
Recognizing that the effective implementation of the absolute prohibition of
torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment promotes, inter
alia, peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development, contribu tes to
access to justice for all, builds effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all
levels and contributes to achieving the Sustainable Development Goals, 5
Commending the persistent efforts of civil society organizations, including
non-governmental organizations, as well as national human rights institutions and
national preventive mechanisms, and the considerable network of centres for the
rehabilitation of victims of torture, to prevent and combat torture and to alleviate the
suffering of victims of torture,
Deeply concerned about all acts which can amount to torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment committed against persons exercising
their rights to freedom of peaceful assembly and of association and freedom of
expression in all regions of the world,
1.
Condemns all forms of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment, including through intimidation, which are and shall remain
prohibited at any time and in any place whatsoever and can thus never be justified,
and calls upon all States to implement fully the absolute and non -derogable
prohibition of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;
2.
Also condemns any action or attempt by States or public officials to
legalize, instigate, authorize, consent to or acquiesce in torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment under any circumstances, including
__________________

Ibid., vol. 2187, No. 38544.
Ibid., vol. 2716, No. 48088.
5
See resolution 70/1.
3
4

22-27298

5/16

A/77/463/Add.1

on grounds of national security and counter-terrorism or through judicial decisions,
and urges States to ensure the accountability of those responsible for all such acts;
3.
Stresses that States must neither punish personnel for not obeying orders
to commit or conceal acts amounting to torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment nor allow pleas of respondeat superior as a criminal defence
in cases in which such orders were obeyed;
4.
Emphasizes that acts of torture or inhuman treatment are grave breaches
of the Geneva Conventions of 1949, that acts of torture and cruel treatment in armed
conflict are serious violations of international humanitarian law and in this regard
constitute war crimes, that acts of torture can constitute crimes against humanity and
that the perpetrators of all acts of torture must be prosecu ted and punished, and in this
regard notes the efforts of the International Criminal Court to end impunity by seeking
to ensure accountability and punishment of perpetrators of such acts, in accordance
with the Rome Statute, bearing in mind its principle of complementarity, and
encourages States that have not yet done so to consider ratifying or acceding to the
Rome Statute;
5.
Also emphasizes that States must take persistent, determined and effective
measures to prevent and combat all acts of torture and other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment, stresses that all acts of torture must be made
offences under national criminal law punishable by appropriate penalties that take
into account their grave nature, and calls upon States to prohibit under national law
acts constituting cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;
6.
Stresses that States must ensure that no statement or evidence that is
established to have been obtained as a result of torture is invoked as evidence in any
proceedings, except against a person accused of torture as evidence that the statement
or evidence was obtained, urges States to extend that prohibition to statements or
evidence obtained as a result of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
and recognizes that adequate corroboration of statements, including confessions, used
as evidence in any proceedings constitutes one safeguard for the prevention of torture
and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;
7.
Urges States not to expel, return (“refouler”), extradite or in any other way
transfer a person to another State where there are substantial grounds for believing
that the person would be in danger of being subjected to torture, stresses the
importance of effective legal and procedural safeguards in this regard, and recognizes
that diplomatic assurances, where given, do not release States from their obligations
under international human rights, humanitarian and refugee law, in particular the
principle of non-refoulement;
8.
Recalls that, for the purpose of determining whether there are substantial
grounds for believing that a person would be in danger of being subjected to torture,
the competent authorities shall take into account all relevant considerations,
including, where applicable, the existence in the State concerned of a consistent
pattern of gross, flagrant or mass violations of human rights;
9.
Urges States to ensure that border control operations and reception centres
fully comply with international human rights obligations and commitments, including
the prohibition of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment;
10. Calls upon all States to adopt and implement effective measures to prevent
torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, in particular
in the context of the use of force by law enforcement officials and in places of
detention and other places where persons are deprived of their liberty, including legal
and procedural safeguards, as well as to ensure that the competent judicial or
6/16

22-27298

A/77/463/Add.1

disciplinary authorities and, where relevant, the prosecution can effectively ensure
compliance with such safeguards;
11. Also calls upon all States to take effective measures to ensure that the use
of force by police and other law enforcement officials, including the use of less-lethal
weapons, is in conformity with international obligations and the principles of legality,
necessity, proportionality, accountability and non-discrimination, and that those using
force account for each use of force, bearing in mind that lethal force may only be used
as a last resort to protect against an imminent threat to life or grievous bodily harm,
and recalls in this regard Human Rights Council resolution 46/15 of 23 March 2021; 6
12. Recalls its resolution 43/173 of 9 December 1988 on the Body of
Principles for the Protection of All Persons under Any Form of Detention or
Imprisonment, and in this context stresses that ensuring that any individual arrested
or detained is promptly brought before a judge or other independent judicial officer
in person, facilitating access to legal counsel without delay, and permitting prompt
and regular medical care including, where necessary, an age, disability- and genderresponsive medical and psychological examination that respects the inherent dignity
of the person and upholds their full human rights throughout all stages of detention,
as well as visits by family members and independent monitoring mechanisms, are
effective measures for the prevention of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment;
13. Stresses the obligation of States to ensure that all persons who are arrested
or detained are informed at the time of arrest or detention of the reasons for the arrest
or detention and are promptly informed of any charges against them, in accessible
forms of communication, including in a language that they understand, and are
provided with information about, and an explanation of, their rights and are provided
with consular notification and access, as appropriate, and calls upon States to take
steps to notify the fact of the detention to a relative or another third party;
14. Calls upon States to include education and information regarding the
absolute prohibition of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment in the training of law enforcement personnel and other personnel
authorized to resort to force or who may be involved in the custody, interrogation or
treatment of any individual subjected to any form of arrest, detention or
imprisonment, which may include training on the use of force, all available modern
scientific methods for the investigation of crimes and the critical importance of
reporting instances of torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment to superior authorities;
15. Emphasizes that States shall keep under systematic review interrogation
rules, instructions, methods and practices, as well as arrangements for the custody
and treatment of persons subjected to any form of arrest, detention or imprisonment
in any territory under their jurisdiction, and stresses the importance of the
development of domestic guidelines on the conduct of interrogations, with a view to
preventing any cases of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment;
16. Takes note with appreciation of the Principles on Effective Interviewing
for Investigations and Information Gathering (the Méndez Principles), and
encourages States to use them as appropriate through the implementation of national
measures, including non-coercive interviewing methods and procedural safeguards,
thereby operationalizing the presumption of innocence, ensuring that no person is
subjected to torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment
__________________
6

22-27298

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53
(A/76/53), chap. V., sect. A.
7/16

A/77/463/Add.1

during questioning, as well as improving effective policing, criminal justice
investigations, prosecutions, convictions and other forms of information-gathering
processes;
17. Encourages all States to take appropriate effective legislative,
administrative, judicial and other measures to apply the United Nations Standard
Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (the Nelson Mandela Rules); 7
18. Reminds all States that prolonged incommunicado detention or detention
in secret places can facilitate the perpetration of torture and other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment and can in itself constitute a form of such
treatment, and urges all States to respect the safeguards concerning the liberty,
security and dignity of the person and to ensure that prolonged incommunicado
detention and secret places of detention and interrogation are abolished;
19. Emphasizes that conditions of detention must respect the dignity and
human rights of persons deprived of their liberty, highlights the importance of
reflecting on this in efforts to promote respect for and protection of the rights of
persons deprived of their liberty, calls upon States to address and prevent detention
conditions amounting to torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment, notes in this regard concerns about solitary confinement, and encourages
States to take effective measures to address overcrowding in detention facilities,
which may have an impact on the dignity and human rights of persons deprived of
their liberty;
20. Welcomes the establishment of national preventive mechanisms to prevent
torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, urges States
to consider establishing, appointing, maintaining or enhancing independent and
effective mechanisms that have experts with the required capabilities and professional
knowledge to undertake monitoring visits to places of detention and other places
under State jurisdiction and control where persons are or may be deprived of their
liberty, inter alia, with a view to preventing acts of torture or other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment, and calls upon States parties to the Optional
Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment 8 to fulfil their obligation to designate or establish national
preventive mechanisms at the latest one year after the entry into force of the Protocol
or of its ratification or accession, that are truly independent, composed of experts with
the required capabilities and professional knowledge, properly resourced and further,
to consider the recommendations of such mechanisms, to encourage public debate
and to engage in constructive dialogue with such mechanisms on possible
implementation measures;
21. Calls upon all States to take appropriate effective legislative,
administrative, judicial and other measures to prevent and prohibit the production,
trade, export, import and use of equipment that has no practical use other than for the
purpose of torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, and
in this regard takes note of the report of the Group of Governmental Experts, pursuant
to resolution 73/304 of 28 June 2019;
22. Urges States, as an important element in preventing and combating torture
and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, to ensure that no
authority or official orders, applies, permits or tolerates any sanction, reprisal,
intimidation or other prejudice against any person, group or association, including
persons deprived of their liberty, for contacting, seeking to contact or having been in
contact with any national or international monitoring or preventive body or other
__________________
7
8

8/16

Resolution 70/175, annex.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2375, No. 24841.
22-27298

A/77/463/Add.1

relevant stakeholders active in the prevention and combating of torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;
23. Also urges States to ensure accountability for any act of sanction, reprisal,
intimidation or other form of unlawful prejudicial conduct against any person, group
or association, including persons deprived of their liberty, for cooperating, seeking to
cooperate or having cooperated with any national or international monitoring or
preventive body active in the prevention and combating of torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, by ensuring impartial, prompt,
independent and thorough investigations of any alleged act of sanction, reprisal,
intimidation or other form of unlawful prejudicial conduct; to bring the perpetrators
to justice; to provide access to effective remedies for victims, in accordance with their
international human rights obligations and commitments; and to prevent any
recurrence;
24. Calls upon States parties to the Convention against Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Puni shment to fulfil their obligation to
submit for prosecution or extradite those alleged to have committed acts of torture,
regardless of where such acts were committed, if the alleged offender is present in
any territory under their jurisdiction, and encourages other States also to do so,
bearing in mind the need to fight impunity;
25. Encourages States to consider establishing or maintaining appropriate
national processes to record allegations and cases of torture and other cruel, inhuman
or degrading treatment or punishment, including through efficient and secure data
collection, processing and management systems, and to ensure that such information
is accessible in accordance with applicable law;
26. Stresses that an independent, competent domestic authority must promptly,
effectively and impartially investigate all allegations of torture or other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, as well as wherever there is
reasonable ground to believe that such an act has been committed, and that t hose who
encourage, instigate, order, tolerate, acquiesce in, consent to or perpetrate such acts
must be held responsible, brought to justice and punished in a manner commensurate
with the severity of the offence, including the officials in charge of any place of
detention or other place where persons are deprived of their liberty where the
prohibited act is found to have been committed;
27. Recalls, in this respect, the Principles on the Effective Investigation and
Documentation of Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment (the Istanbul Principles) 9 as a valuable tool in efforts to prevent and
combat torture and the updated set of principles for the protection and promotion of
human rights through action to combat impunity; 10
28. Takes note with appreciation, in this respect, of the updated Manual on the
Effective Investigation and Documentation of Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Istanbul Protocol) as a valuable tool to address
impunity for torture and ill-treatment by setting out international standards for the
conduct of effective legal and medico-legal investigations into allegations of torture
or ill-treatment;
29. Emphasizes that it is important for law enforcement officials to be able to
play their role in safeguarding the right not to be subjected to torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, and for States to ensure the proper
functioning of the criminal justice system, in particular by taking effective m easures
__________________
9
10

22-27298

Resolution 55/89, annex.
E/CN.4/2005/102/Add.1.
9/16

A/77/463/Add.1

to combat corruption, establish proper legal aid programmes and to provide for the
adequate selection, training and remuneration of law enforcement officials while fully
respecting the principles of non-discrimination, and taking measures to improve the
representation of women and persons belonging to minorities within law enforcement
ranks whenever possible;
30. Encourages all States to ensure that persons charged with torture or other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment have no involvement in the
custody, interrogation or treatment of any person under arrest, detention,
imprisonment or other deprivation of liberty while such charges are pending and, if
such persons are convicted, after the conviction;
31. Calls upon all States to adopt a victim-oriented approach 11 in the fight
against torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, paying
special attention to the views and needs of victims in policy development and other
activities relating to rehabilitation, prevention and accountability for torture;
32. Also calls upon all States to adopt a gender-responsive approach in the
fight against torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
including by taking into consideration the United Nations Rules for the Treatment of
Women Prisoners and Non-custodial Measures for Women Offenders (the Bangkok
Rules), 12 and to pay special attention to sexual and gender-based violence;
33. Calls upon States to ensure that the rights of persons who are marginalized
and in vulnerable situations, including persons with disabilities, bearing in mind the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, 13 are fully integrated into
torture prevention and protection, and welcomes the efforts of the Special Rapporteur
of the Human Rights Council on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment in this regard;
34. Stresses that national legal systems must ensure that victims of torture or
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment have effective access to
justice and obtain redress, and that the complainants and witnesses are protected
against all ill-treatment or intimidation as a consequence of making a complaint or
giving evidence;
35. Calls upon States to provide redress for victims of torture or other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, encompassing effective remedy and
adequate, effective and prompt reparation, which should include restitution, fair and
adequate compensation, rehabilitation, satisfaction and guarantees of non-repetition,
taking into full account the specific needs of the victim;
36. Urges States to ensure that appropriate rehabilitation services are promptly
available to all victims without discrimination of any kind and without limitation in
time, until the fullest rehabilitation possible has been achieved, and are provided
either directly by the public health system or through the funding of private
rehabilitation facilities, including those administered by civil society organizations,
and to consider making rehabilitation services available to the immediate families or
dependants of the victims and to persons who have suffered harm while intervening
to assist victims in distress or to prevent victimization;
37. Also urges States to establish, maintain, facilitate or support rehabilitation
centres or facilities where victims can receive such treatment and where effective
measures for ensuring the safety of their staff and patients are taken;
__________________

See A/HRC/16/52.
Resolution 65/229, annex.
13
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2515, No. 44910.
11
12

10/16

22-27298

A/77/463/Add.1

38. Urges all States that have not yet done so to become parties to the
Convention against Torture and the Optional Protocol thereto as a matter of priority;
39. Urges all States parties to the Convention that have not yet done so to
make the declarations provided for in articles 21 and 22 of the Convention concerning
inter-State and individual communications, to consider the possibility of withdrawing
their reservations to article 20, to notify the Secretary-General of their acceptance of
the amendments to articles 17 and 18, with a view to enhancing the effectiveness of
the Committee against Torture as soon as possible, and to comply strictly with their
obligations under the Convention, including, in view of the high number of reports
not submitted in time, their obligation to submit reports in accordance with article 19
of the Convention, and invites States parties to incorporate a gender perspective and
information concerning persons who are marginalized and in vulnerable situations,
including children and juveniles and persons with disabilities, when submitting
reports to the Committee;
40. Welcomes the work and the reports of the Committee and of the
Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment, recommends that their reports continue to include
information on the follow-up by States parties to their recommendations, invites
States to make the Subcommittee’s reports public, and supports the Committee and
the Subcommittee in their efforts to further improve the effectiveness of their working
methods;
41. Emphasizes the importance of the Committee and the Subcommittee
having due regard to the principle of non-discrimination, paying particular attention
to the rights of those who are marginalized or in vulnerable situations, including
through a victim-oriented and gender-responsive approach in the fight against torture
and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;
42. Calls upon the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, in
conformity with his mandate established by the General Assembly in its resolution
48/141 of 20 December 1993, and other relevant United Nations entities, in
accordance with their mandates and existing resources, to continue to provide, at the
request of States, advisory services for the prevention of torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, including for the preparation of
national reports to the Committee, for the implementation of recommendations of the
Committee, and for the establishment and operation of national preventive
mechanisms, as well as technical assistance, including for the development,
production and distribution of teaching materials for this purpose, and further calls
upon the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to continue to provide
the support necessary to enable the Subcommittee to provide advice and assistance to
States parties to the Optional Protocol;
43. Emphasizes the importance of States ensuring proper follow-up to the
recommendations and conclusions of the relevant treaty bodies and mechanisms,
including the Committee, the Subcommittee, national preventive mechanisms and the
Special Rapporteur, while recognizing the important role of the universal periodic
review, national human rights institutions and other relevant national or regional
bodies in preventing torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment;
44. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the newly-appointed Special
Rapporteur, presenting her priorities with respect to eradicating torture and other ill treatment, encourages her to include, in her recommendations, proposals on the
prevention and investigation of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment, including its gender-based manifestations, requests her to
consider including in her reports information on the follow-up by States to her
22-27298

11/16

A/77/463/Add.1

recommendations, visits and communications, including progress made and problems
encountered, and on other official contacts, and further encourages future
collaboration between practitioners, experts and other relevant stakeholders towards
these goals;
45. Calls upon all States to cooperate with and assist the Special Rapporteur
in the performance of her tasks, to supply all necessary information requested by her,
to fully and expeditiously respond to and follow up on her urgent appeals, to give
serious consideration to responding favourably to requests by her to visit their
countries and to enter into a constructive dialogue with her on requested visits to their
countries as well as with respect to the follow-up to her recommendations;
46. Stresses the need for the continued regular exchange of views among the
Committee, the Subcommittee, the Special Rapporteur and other relevant United
Nations mechanisms and bodies, as well as for the pursuit of cooperation with
relevant United Nations programmes, notably the United Nations crime prevention
and criminal justice programme, with regional organizations and mechanisms, as
appropriate, and with civil society organizations, including non-governmental
organizations, with a view to enhancing further their effectiveness and cooperation
on issues relating to the prevention and eradication of torture by, inter alia, improving
coordination;
47. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure, within the overall budgetary
framework of the United Nations, the provision of adequate staff and facilities for the
bodies and mechanisms involved in preventing and combating torture and assisting
victims of torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
including, in particular, the Committee, the Subcommittee and the Special
Rapporteur, commensurate with the strong support expressed by Member States for
preventing and combating torture and assisting victims of torture, in order to enable
them to discharge their mandates in a comprehensive, sustained and effective manner,
and taking fully into account the specific nature of their mandates;
48. Recognizes the global need for international assistance to victims of
torture, stresses the importance of the work of the Board of Trustees of the United
Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture, appeals to all States and organizations
to contribute annually to the Fund, preferably with a substantial increase in the level
of contributions, and welcomes the establishment of and encourages contributions to
the Special Fund established by the Optional Protocol to support the implementation
of the recommendations made by the Subcommittee and of educational programmes
by the national preventive mechanisms;
49. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to transmit to all States the
appeals of the General Assembly for contributions to the Funds, to include the Funds,
on an annual basis, among the programmes for which funds are pledged at the United
Nations Pledging Conference for Development Activities, and to submit to the Human
Rights Council, and to the General Assembly at its seventy-eighth, seventy-ninth and
eightieth sessions, a report on the operations of the Funds, and encourages the Chair
of the Board of Trustees of the United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture
to continuously raise awareness among States and relevant stakeholders about the
overall trends and developments in its operations;
50. Welcomes and acknowledges the work of the Convention against Torture
Initiative, launched in March 2014 on the thirtieth anniversary of the adoption of the
Convention, to achieve the universal ratification and improved implementation of the
Convention by 2024, as well as related regional initiatives on the prevention and
eradication of torture;

12/16

22-27298

A/77/463/Add.1

51. Calls upon all States, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights and other United Nations bodies and agencies, as well as relevant
intergovernmental and civil society organizations, including non-governmental
organizations, to commemorate, on 26 June, the United Nations International Day in
Support of Victims of Torture;
52. Decides to consider at its seventy-eighth, seventy-ninth and eightieth
sessions the reports of the Secretary-General, including the report on the United
Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture and the Special Fund established by
the Optional Protocol, the report of the Committee, the report of the Subcommittee
and the interim report of the Special Rapporteur;
53. Also decides to give its full consideration to the subject matter at its
eightieth session.

22-27298

13/16

A/77/463/Add.1

Draft resolution II
Human rights treaty body system
The General Assembly,
Recalling the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 1 the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 2 the Convention on
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, 3 the International Convention for the
Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, 4 the International
Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of
Their Families, 5 the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women, 6 the Convention on the Rights of the Child, 7 the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, 8 the
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment 9 and the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, 10
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 1985/17 of 28 May
1985,
Recalling further its resolution 68/268 of 9 April 2014 on strengthening and
enhancing the effective functioning of the human rights treaty body system,
Recalling its resolution 75/174 of 16 December 2020 on the human rights treaty
body system,
Reaffirming that the full and effective implementation of international human
rights instruments by States parties is of major importance to the efforts of the United
Nations to promote universal respect for and observance of human rights and
fundamental freedoms, and that the effective functioning of the human rights treaty
body system is indispensable for the full and effective implementation of such
instruments,
Recognizing the important, valuable and unique role and contribution of each of
the human rights treaty bodies in the promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms, including through their examination of the progress made by
States parties to the respective human rights treaties in fulfilling their relevant
obligations and their provision of recommendations to States parties on the
implementation of such treaties,
Expressing concern over the effect that the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic and COVID-19-related restrictions had on the work of the treaty bodies and
efforts to address the backlog of State party reports pending review, including full
suspension or postponement of sessions between 13 March 2020 and 6 September
2021,
Emphasizing the importance of multilingualism in the activities of the United
Nations, including those linked to the promotion and protection of human rights, and
__________________

See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
Ibid.
3
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2515, No. 44910.
4
Ibid., vol. 2716, No. 48088.
5
Ibid., vol. 2220, No. 39481.
6
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
7
Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
8
Ibid., vol. 660, No. 9464.
9
Ibid., vol. 1465, No. 24841.
10
Ibid., vol. 2375, No. 24841.
1
2

14/16

22-27298

A/77/463/Add.1

reaffirming the paramount importance of the equality of the six official languages of
the United Nations for the effective functioning of the human rights treaty bodies,
Welcoming the ongoing process of the consideration of the state of the human
rights treaty body system and taking note of the 2020 report of the co-facilitators, the
Permanent Representatives of Morocco and Switzerland, to the President of the
General Assembly, 11
Noting the human rights treaty bodies’ continuing efforts, within their respective
mandates, towards achieving greater efficiency, transparency, effectiveness,
predictability, coordination and harmonization through their working methods,
outlined in the report of the chairs of the human rights treaty bodies on their thirty fourth annual meeting, 12
1.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the status of the human
rights treaty body system; 13
2.
Welcomes the annual reports of the human rights treaty bodies submitted
to the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth 14 and seventy-seventh 15 sessions and to
the Economic and Social Council at its 2021 16 and 2022 sessions; 17
3.
Invites the Chairs of the human rights treaty bodies to address and engage
in an interactive dialogue with the General Assembly at its seventy-eighth and
seventy-ninth sessions under the item relevant to the work of the treaty body;
4.
Encourages all stakeholders to continue their efforts for the full
implementation of resolution 68/268;
5.
Reaffirms paragraphs 26 to 28 of its resolution 68/268, in which it set out
how the allocation of meeting time to the treaty bodies would be identified and
requested the Secretary-General to provide the corresponding financial and hu man
resources, decided that the meeting time allocated would be reviewed biennially and
amended on that basis at the request of the Secretary-General in line with established
budgetary procedures, and requested the Secretary-General accordingly to take into
account the meeting time needed by the human rights treaty body system in his future
biennial programme budget;
6.
Notes that the COVID-19 pandemic showed the need to strengthen the
capacity of the treaty bodies to engage and interact online, also notes the considerable
potential of digitalization for improved efficiency, transparency and accessibility of
the treaty bodies and the interaction with all relevant stakeholders, and encourages
the treaty bodies to continue their efforts to further the use of digital technologies in
their work, while stressing that in-person interaction remains a crucial component of
the work of the treaty bodies;
7.
Expresses appreciation for the organization of discussions on matters
related to the implementation of each human rights treaty at meetings of the States
__________________

A/75/601, annex.
A/77/228.
13
A/77/279.
14
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-sixth Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/76/18);
ibid., Supplement No. 38 (A/76/38); ibid., Supplement No. 40 (A/76/40); ibid., Supplement
No. 44 (A/76/44); ibid., Supplement No. 48 (A/76/48); ibid., Supplement No. 55 (A/76/55); and
ibid., Supplement No. 56 (A/76/56); see also A/76/254.
15
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-seventh Session, Supplement No. 18
(A/77/18); ibid., Supplement No. 38 (A/77/38); ibid., Supplement No. 40 (A/77/40); ibid.,
Supplement No. 41 (A/77/41); ibid., Supplement No. 44 (A/77/44); ibid., Supplement No. 48
(A/77/48); and ibid., Supplement No. 56 (A/77/56).
16
Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2021, Supplement No. 2 (E/2021/22).
17
Ibid., 2022, Supplement No. 2 (E/2022/22).
11
12

22-27298

15/16

A/77/463/Add.1

parties thereto, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to support such
practices;
8.
Also expresses appreciation for the opportunity to interact with the Chairs
of the treaty bodies during their annual meetings, and requests the Secretary-General
to continue to support such opportunities;
9.
Further expresses appreciation for the advisory services, capacitybuilding and technical assistance provided by the Secretary-General to support States
parties in building their capacity to implement their treaty obligations, and requests
the Secretary-General to continue his efforts in this regard;
10. Reiterates its request, made in paragraph 40 of its resolution 68/268, that
the Secretary-General submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-ninth session a
report on the status of the human rights treaty body system.

16/16

22-27298
