VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Tlúrd Comnúttce

3187 (XXVIII) of 18 December 1973 and 3391 (XXX)
of 19 November 1975,
Taking note of resolutions 17 and 24 adopted by the
Fifth Conference of Heads of State or Government of
Non-Aligned Countries, held at Colombo from 16 to
19 August 1976,19
Convinced that the promotion of national culture
enhances a people's ability to understand the culture
and civilization of other peoples and thus has a most
favourable impact on international co-operation,
Convinced also that the protection by all means of
national culture and heritage is an integral part of the
process of preservation and future development of cultural values,
l. Invites all Member States to sign and ratify the
Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing
the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership
of Cultural Property,20 adopted by the General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization on 14 November 1970;
2. Calls upon all Member States to take all necessary steps to prevent, on their territories, any illicit
traffic in works of art coming from any other country,
especially from territories which were or are under colonial or foreign domination and occupation;
3. Afjirms that the restitution to a country of its
objets d'art, monuments, museum pieces, manuscripts,
documents and any other cultural or artistic treasures
constitutes a step forward towards the strengthening of
international co-operation and the preservation and
future development of cultural values.
83rd plenary meeting
30 November 1976
31/41.

Second World Black ami African Festival
of Arts and Culture

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3148 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973,
Referring to the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, 21 in particular to article 15,
which reaffirms the right of everyone to participate in
the preservation and development of culture,
Conscious of the need for agreement on a system
of values based on justice, equality, freedom and fellowship and on the recognition of the unity of mankind
with all its diverse peoples, races and cultures,
Convinced that contacts and exchanges between
different cultures on the basis of the cquality and the
sovereignty of States can make a genuine contribution
to the enrichment of cultural values on a national,
regional and world-wide scale,
Conscious that the recognition of cultural identity
as an integral part of the mobilization of society is an
essential factor in the achievement and preservation
of independence, national sovereignty and development,
Convinced that the forthcoming Second World Black
and African Festival of Arts and Culture will contribute
19 See A/31/197, annex

IV.

. 2? United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organ-

JZahon, Records of the General Conference, Sixteenth Session,
vol. I, Reso/utions, pp. 135-141.
21 Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

97

immensely to the promotion of international co-operation and understanding,
l. Commends the efforts made thus far by the international community, including international organizations and the International Festival Committee, in
the preparations for the Second World Black and African Festival of Arts and Culture;
2. Notes with appreciation the efforts made by
Nigeria in its capacity as host country for the Festival;
3. Appeals to all interested and concerncd countries
to make all possible efforts at the national and international levels towards ensuring the success of the
Festival.
83rd plenary meeting
30 November 1976
31/77.

lmplcmcntation of the Programme for
the Decade for Action to Combat Racism
ancl Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3057 (XXVIII) of 2 November 1973, in which it reaffirmed its resolve to
achieve the total and unconditional elimination of racism, racial discrimination and apartheid,
Reaffirming that the policies of racism, racial discrimination and apartheid are flagrant violations of the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
constitute serious violations of the obligations of Member States under the Charter,
Hearing in mind the vital importance of establishing
a new international economic arder based on justice
and equality,
Noting that the realization of the national independence of the People's Republic of Angola and the
courageous action of the People's Republic of Mozambique in applying fully the United Nations system
of sanctions against the racist régime in Southern Rhodesia have contributed to the growing isolation of the
racist régime in South Africa,
Realizing the serious threat to international peace
and security rcsulting from the continued defiance by
the racist régimes in South Africa and Southern Rhodesia of the resolutions and the will of the international
community in relation to the abhorrent policies of apartheid and racial discrimination, the continued illegal
occupation of Namibia and the denial of the right of
peoples to self-determination,
Convinced that the Programme for the Decade for
Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination22
is a majar undertaking in the fight against racial discrimination which deserves the full support of all Governments and intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations,
l. Condemns the intolerable conditions which continue to prevail in southern Africa and elsewhere, including the denial of the right to self-determination and
the inhumane and odious application of apartheid and
racial discrimination;
2. Reaffirms its recognition of the legitimacy of the
struggle of oppressed peoples to liberate themselves
from racism, racial discrimination, apartheid, colonialism and alíen domination;
22 Resolution

3057 (XXVIII), annex.

General Assemhly-Thirty-first Session

98

3. Calls upon all States and intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations to offer all possible assistance to the People's Republic of Angola, the People's Republi~ of Moza~biq1;e_ and _the African co_untries surroundmg the rac1st reg1mes m southern Af~1ca,
so that they may continue to apply fully the sanctions
against these régirnes;
4. Urges all States to co-operate loyally and fully
in achieving the goals a1:1d objectives _of th~ D~c~de ~or
Action to Combat Rac1sm and Racial D1scnmmat10n
by taking actions and measures called for by the Programme for the Decade at the national, regional and
international levels and, in particular:
(a) To ensure the immediate termination of all
measures and policies, as well as military, nuclear, economic and other activities, which enable racist régimes
in southern Africa to continue the repression of the
African people;
( b) To pro vide full support and assistance, morally
and materially, to the peoples which are victims of
apartheid and racial discrimination and to the liberation movements;
(e) To cease emigration to South Africa;
(d) To ensure the release of political prisoners in
South Africa and of those subjected to restrictions for
their opposition to apartheid;
(e) To formulate and execute plans to realize the
policy measures and goals contained in the Programme
for the Decade, and to consider the advisability of establishing national arrangcmcnts to follow up the implementation of the Programme;
(f) To review interna! laws and regulations with
a view to identifying and rescinding those which provide for, give rise to, or inspire racial discrimination
or apartheid;
(g) To ensure the cessation of all discriminatory
measures against migrant workers and extend to them
treatment equal to that provided for nationals of the
host country with regard to human rights and the provisions of their labour legislation;
(h) To sign and ratify the International Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,23 the International Convention on the Suppression
and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid24 and all
other relevant instruments;
5. Also urges Member States which are parties to
the International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination to comply fully with
their obligations under the Convention and, in particular, to submit their reports in accordance with the
time-table laid down in article 9 thereof;
6. Further urges United Nations bodies, the specialized agencies and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to ensure the continuation of
their activities related to the Decade with emphasis on,
inter alia:
(a) Providing moral and material support to the
national liberation movements and the victims of apartheid and racial discrimination;
(b) Assisting and conducting vigorous educational
and information campaigns to dispel racial prejudice
and to involve public opinion in the struggle against
racism and racial discrimination;
23 Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.
24 Resolution 3068

(XXVIII), annex.

(e) Examining the socio-econ01:nic ~nd_ c?lo~ial
roots of racism, apartheid and racial d1scnmmation
with a view to eliminating them;
7. Appeals to Member States which have not yet
done so to forward the reports called for under paragraph 18 (e) of the Programme for the Decade;
8. W elcomes any contributions and suggestions related to the Programme for the Decade by the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, the
Special Committee against Apartheid, the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples, the Commission on
Human Rights, its Ad Hoc Working Group of Expefts
and its Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, especially with regard
to the preparations for the World Conference to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to draw on the
expertise of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination and the Sub-Commission on Prevention
of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities while
undertaking the relevant activities of the Decade;
1O. Reiterates the oall in paragraph 18 (g) of the
Programme for the Decade to make adequate resources
available to the Secretary-General to enable him to undertake the activities entrusted to him under the Programme;
11. Appeals to Governments and private organizations to make voluntary contributions which would
make it possible to carry out all of the activities provided for in the Programme for the Decade;
12. Decides to consider at its thirty-second session,
as a matter of high priority, the question cntitled "Dccadc for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination".
97 th plenary meetin&
13 December 1976
31/78.

World Conference to Comhat Racism and
Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3057 (XXVIII) of 2 November 1973, in which it reaffirmed its resolve to
achievc the total and unconditional elimination of racism, racial discrimination and apartheid,
Recalling also its resolution 3378 (XXX) of 10 November 1975,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution 1990 (LX) of 11 May 1976,
Having considered the request of the Government
of Ghana that the United Nations defray half of the
additional cost involved in holding the World Conference to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination
at Acera, and the recommendation of the Economic
and Social Council in this regard,
Recognizing that Ghana is one of the countries most
seriously affected by the current world economic crisis
and that, despite this, the Government of Ghana is
making a substantial financia! contribution towards the
Conference,
l. W elcomes again with appreciation the offer of
the Government of Ghana to act as host to the World
