so

General Assembly -

evolves in each Trust Territory, it will be brought
effectively to bear on the examination by the Council
of conditions in that Territory,
1. Recommends to the Trusteeship Council that, in
order to develop further the participation of the indigenous inhabitants in its work through the medium of
visiting missions, it instruct each mission:
(a) Not only to consider such expressions of public
opinion as may be spontaneously brought before it by
all sections of the population, but also to take the
initiative in seeking out public opinion on all important
problems and to undertake popular consultations in
whatever forms it may deem appropriate;
( b) To report fully on the development of the free
expression of the wishes of the people and on the main
trends of their opinions and to make recommendations
concerning the further development of a free public
opinion;
2. Recommends to the Council that, in order to
develop further the participation of the indigenous
inhabitants in its work through the medium of their
right of petition, it should:
(a) Examine and propose concrete action upon, a~
part of its examination of conditions in each Trust
Territory, petitions which may reflect public opinion
on questions of general concern to the development of
the Territory;
( b) Request the Administration Authorities to make
copies of their annual reports promptly available to the
peoples of the Territories;
(c) Instruct each visiting mission to encourage in
the Trust Territories public discussion of and expression of views on the annual reports, and to report
on the extent to which facilities have been made
available to the population for the purpose;
3. Recommends to the Council that, as a means of
ensuring, in cases which it deems urgent, that a given
situation in a Trust Territory meets with the freely expressed wishes of the people, it should immediately
grant a hearing to those qualified representatives of
public opinion who apply for one, or in the case of
representatives who are unable to travel, the Council
should examine all communications, letters or telegrams
expressing their points of view;
4. Reiterates the views and recommendations put
forward in its resolutions 554 (VI) of 18 January 1952
and 653 (VII) of 21 December 1952.
512th plenary meeting,
14 December 1954.
854 (IX). Question of the frontier between the
Trust Territory of Somaliland under Italian
administration and Ethiopia

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, in its resolution 392 (V) of 15 December 1950, it recommended that the boundary between the Trust Territory of Somaliland under Italian
administration and Ethiopia should be delimited by
bilateral negotiations between the Administering Authority of the Trust Territory and the Government of
Ethiopia and that, in order to resolve any and all
differences arising in the course of such negotiations,
the parties to such bilateral negotiations should agree,
on the request of either party, to a procedure of me-

Ninth Session

diation by a United Nations Mediator to be appointed
by the Secretary-General and, further, in the event of
the inability of the parties to accept the recommendations of the Mediator, to a procedure of arbitration,
Recalling further that, in its resolution 755 (VIII)
of 9 December 1953, it recommended to the two Governments that they should intensify their efforts to
achieve a final, just, equitable and friendly settlement
of the question,
Having taken note of the conclusion of the Trusteeship Council, contained in its resolution 1000
(XIV) of 6 July 1954, that the delimitation of the
frontier is a matter of the utmost urgency in view
both of the approach of the date of the attainment
of independence by the Trust Territory and of the
continuing political, economic and social difficulties
in the area of the present provisional frontier,
Having taken note of the information12 submitted
by the Governments of Ethiopia and Italy concerning
the progress of the direct negotiations between them
on the delimitation of the frontier between the Trust
Territory of Somaliland under Italian administration
and Ethiopia,
Having further taken note of the information13
submitted by the United Nations Advisory Council for
the Trust Territory of Somaliland under Italian administration concerning the situation in the frontier area,
1. N ates with concern that no progress has been
made to date in the direct negotiations between the
Governments of Ethiopia and Italy on the delimitation
of the frontier between the Trust Territory of Somaliland under Italian administration and Ethiopia;
2. Urges the Governments of Ethiopia and Italy to
exert their utmost efforts to achieve a final settlement
of the frontier question by direct negotiations ;
3. Recommends that, should direct negotiations fail
to achieve any results by July 1955, the two Governments agree to the procedure outlined in General Assembly resolution 392 (V) of 15 December 1950.
512th plenary meeting,
14 December 1954.
855 (IX). Financing of the economic development plans of the Trust Territory of Somaliland under Italian administration

The General Assembly,
Having considered Trusteeship Council resolution
1001 (XIV) of 7 July 1954 on the financing of the
economic development plans of the Trust Territory of
Somaliland under Italian administration,
Bearing in mind the fact that a United Nations
Visiting Mission has just travelled through the Territory and will have to submit to the Trusteeshio Council a full report on the general situation there, including reference to the economic development plans prepared by the Administering Authority,
1. Takes sympathetic note of Trusteeship Council
resolution 1001 (XIV) of 7 July 1954;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to consider in
agreement with the Italian Government the advisability
12 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Ninth Session, Annexes, agenda item 13, document A/C.4/277.
13 Ibid.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

of asking the International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development to send a mission of experts to study
the situation and the possibilities of economic development in the Trust Territory of Somaliland under
Italian administration;
3. Requests the Trusteeship Council to continue its
study of the question and on the basis of the conclusions of the 1954 Visiting Mission to Trust Territories
in East Africa and the report of the Bank, if the plan
for the mission referred to in the preceding paragraph
is carried out, to endeavour to decide on practical
measures for financing the economic development plans
for Somaliland and to report to the General Assembly
at its next session;
4. Expresses the hope that, in the meantime, the
Administering Authority will continue unremittingly in
its efforts to further the economic development of the
Trust Territory.
512th plenary meeting,
14 December 1954.

856 (IX). Form of the annual report of the
Trusteeship Council to the General Assembly
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 433 (V) of 2 December 1950
on the annual reports of the Trusteeship Council,
Recalling its resolution 789 (VIII) of 9 December
1953 on the control and limitation of documentation,
Having taken note of the conclusions of the Council
on this question as contained in its report 14 covering
the period from 22 July 1953 to 16 July 1954,
1. Approves, on a trial basis, the proposals of the
Trusteeship Council concerning the form of its report
to the General Assembly to the effect that a comprehensive report on a given Trust Territory should
be presented by the Council only every third year
coinciding with the Council's examination of the report
on the Territory by a visiting mission, and that the
Council should submit a shorter report in the intervening years, giving only an account of the developments
and progress made during the year under review but
including such background materials as would enable
the Assembly to appreciate the significance of important developments, the comments and observations of
Member States and the conclusions and recommendations of the Council ;
2. Requests, however, that in view of the time-limit
set for the attainment by 1960 of independence by the
Trust Territory of Somaliland under Italian administration, the Council annually submit a comprehensive
report on that Trust Territory.
512th plenary meeting,
14 December 1954.
857 (IX). Report of the Trusteeship Council
covering the period from 22 July 1953 to
16 July 1954
The General Assembly
1. Takes note of the report15 of the Trusteeship
Council covering the period from 22 July 1953 to
16 July 1954;
14

15

Ibid., Supplement No. 4.
Ibid.

2. Recommends that the Council, in its future deliberations, take into account the comments and suggestions made in the course of the discussions of its report
at the ninth session of the General Assembly.
512th plenary meeting,
14 Decimber 1954.

858 (IX). Attainment by the Trust Territories
of the objective of self-government or independence
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 558 (VI) of 18 January 1952
by which it invited the Administering Authority of
each Trust Territory, other than Somaliland under
Italian administration, to include in each annual report
information concerning measures taken or contemplated
towards self-government or independence and, inter
alia, the estimated period of time required for such
measures and for the attainment of the ultimate objective,
Recalling further its resolution 752 (VIII) of 9
December 1953 by which it requested the Trusteeship
Council to include in its next and succeeding reports
to the General Assembly a separate section dealing
with the implementation of resoluticns 558 (VI) and
752 (VIII), specifying the various measures taken or
contemplated towards self-government or independence
and stating in each case its conclusions and recommendations in the light of these resolutions,
Considering that one of the most effective means of
assisting the peoples of the Trust Territories to achieve
the objectives set forth in Article 76 b of the Charter
is to provide them with an opportunity to obtain
experience in the work of government and administration by participation in representative bodies with
adequate powers to carry out such work,
1. N ates with satisfaction that, in response to the
request of the General Assembly, the Trusteeship Council has included in its report covering the period from
22 July 1953 to 16 July 1954 a separate section 16 dealing with the attainmerit by the Trust Territories of the
objective of self-government or independence;
2. N ates, however, that the Council has not formulated in this report any conclusions or recommendations on the measures taken or contemplated towards
self-government or independence ;
3. Expresses the hope that the Council will include its conclusions and recommendations on this
question in its next and succeeding reports to the
General Assembly ;
4. Recommends that the Council instruct its visiting missions to give special attention in their reports
to the Council to the question of attainment by the
Trust Territories of self-government or independence
in the light of resolutions 558 (VI) and 752 (VIII)
and of the present resolution;
5. Recommends to the Administering Authorities
that, as a means to facilitate an approximate determination of the date on which the populations of the Trust
Territories would be prepared for self-government or
independence, they should intensify their efforts to the
utmost to bring about the establishment of new
representative organs of government and administration
1s Ibid., p. 279 et seqq.
