United Nations

A/RES/65/130

General Assembly

Distr.: General
24 February 2011

Sixty-fifth session
Agenda item 122 (h)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 13 December 2010
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/65/L.41 and Add.1)]

65/130. Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Council of Europe
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Agreement between the Council of Europe and the Secretariat of
the United Nations signed on 15 December 1951 and the Arrangement on
Cooperation and Liaison between the Secretariats of the United Nations and the
Council of Europe of 19 November 1971,
Recalling also its resolution 44/6 of 17 October 1989, in which it granted the
Council of Europe a standing invitation to participate as an observer in its sessions
and work, as well as its previous resolutions on cooperation between the United
Nations and the Council of Europe, 1
0F

Noting the sixtieth anniversary of the European Convention for the Protection
of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, 2 in 2010, and the entry into force of
Protocol No. 14 thereto, 3 on 1 June 2010,
1F

2F

Acknowledging the contribution of the Council of Europe, at the European
level, to the protection and strengthening of human rights and fundamental
freedoms, democracy and the rule of law through its standards, principles and
monitoring mechanisms, as well as to the effective implementation of relevant
international legal instruments of the United Nations,
Acknowledging also the contribution of the Council of Europe to the
development of international law, and noting the openness of the Council of Europe
to the participation of States of other regions in its legal instruments,
Noting the contribution of the Council of Europe to the report submitted by the
Secretary-General to the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session on the support

_______________
1

Resolutions 55/3, 56/43, 57/156, 59/139, 61/13 and 63/14.
Council of Europe, European Treaty Series, No. 5.
3
Ibid., No. 194.
2

10-52034

*1052034*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/65/130

by the United Nations system of the efforts of Governments to promote and
consolidate new or restored democracies, 4
3F

Noting also the contribution of the Council of Europe to the universal periodic
review by the Human Rights Council of the situation of human rights in States
members of the Council of Europe,
Noting further the continued attention of the Parliamentary Assembly of the
Council of Europe to the ongoing reform process of the United Nations, and
following with interest the reform process within the Council of Europe initiated by
its present Secretary-General,
Welcoming the increasingly close relations between the United Nations and the
Council of Europe and the opening of the Council of Europe Office in Geneva,
which acts as the Permanent Delegation of the Council of Europe to the United
Nations Office at Geneva and other international organizations in Geneva, as well as
the decision of the Council of Europe to open an Office in Vienna,
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General on
cooperation between the United Nations and the Council of Europe, 5
4F

1.
Reiterates its call for the reinforcement of cooperation between the
United Nations and the Council of Europe regarding the protection of human rights
and fundamental freedoms, inter alia, the promotion of democracy and the rule of
law, the prevention of torture, the fight against trafficking in human beings, the fight
against racism, discrimination, xenophobia and intolerance, the fight against
impunity for human rights violations, the promotion of gender equality and the
protection of the rights of persons belonging to minorities;
Confirms its recognition of the important role of the European Court of
2.
Human Rights in ensuring effective human rights protection under the European
Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms2 for the
eight hundred million individuals in the forty-seven States members of the Council
of Europe, and notes with interest the February 2010 Council of Europe Interlaken
Declaration and Action Plan to reform the European Court of Human Rights aimed
at ensuring the longer-term effectiveness of this judicial mechanism and the ongoing
work aiming at accession of the European Union to the Convention;
Encourages further cooperation between the United Nations, including
3.
the Human Rights Council and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, as well as the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human
rights defenders, and the Council of Europe, including its Commissioner for Human
Rights, regarding promoting respect for human rights, and in this context, welcomes
the holding of the regional consultation organized in Strasbourg, France, on 16 and
17 December 2009 by the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in
cooperation with the Council of Europe on enhancing cooperation between the
international human rights system and the European human rights mechanisms;
Also encourages further cooperation, where appropriate, between the
4.
United Nations and the Council of Europe through their mechanisms regarding the
prevention of torture and inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;

_______________
4
5

2

A/64/372.
See A/65/382-S/2010/490, sect. II.

A/RES/65/130

5.
Follows the monitoring activities of the Group of Experts on Action
against Trafficking in Human Beings, established under the Council of Europe
Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings, 6 and recalls that the
Convention is open for accession by all States;
5F

6.
Encourages the Council of Europe to continue cooperation with the
United Nations in the fight against trafficking in persons, and in this context
welcomes the adoption of the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons, 7 stressing the need for its full and effective implementation,
and expressing the view that it will, inter alia, enhance cooperation and improve
coordination of efforts in fighting trafficking in persons and promote increased
ratification and full implementation of the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime 8 and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime; 9
6F

7F

8F

7.
Welcomes the joint Council of Europe/United Nations study entitled
Trafficking in organs, tissues and cells and trafficking in human beings for the
purpose of the removal of organs, 10 launched at the sixty-fourth session of the
General Assembly, and encourages further joint endeavours on following up the
study;
9F

Welcomes and encourages the close collaboration between the United
8.
Nations Children’s Fund, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
violence against children, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the Council of Europe to protect and promote the rights of the
child, takes note of the Council of Europe Policy Guidelines on National Integrated
Strategies for the Protection of Children from Violence, 11 which constitute a
practical follow-up to the study of the Secretary-General on violence against
children, 12 and notes the intention of the Council of Europe to launch a panEuropean campaign to stop sexual violence against children;
10F

1F

9.
Welcomes the establishment of the new United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), and looks forward to the
development of cooperation between the Council of Europe and the new entity;
10. Recognizes that 2010 marks the tenth anniversary of the International
Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women, welcomes the increased
commitment of the Council of Europe to gender equality, the empowerment of
women and the elimination of violence against women, including domestic violence,
and its effective contribution within the framework of the global campaign of the
Secretary-General to end violence against women, as well as its commitment to the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) of 31 October 2000, and
also welcomes the drafting of a Council of Europe convention on preventing and
combating violence against women and domestic violence;

_______________
6

Council of Europe, European Treaty Series, No. 197.
Resolution 64/293.
8
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2225, No. 39574.
9
Ibid., vol. 2237, No. 39574.
10
Available from www.coe.int/trafficking.
11
Available from www.coe.int/children.
12
See A/61/299 and A/62/209.
7

3

A/RES/65/130

11. Encourages continuing cooperation between the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the Council of Europe, in particular
in the protection and promotion of the rights of refugees, asylum-seekers and
internally displaced persons, and in the prevention and reduction of statelessness,
and recognizes the importance of the interface offered by the presence at the
Council of Europe of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
Representation to the European Institutions in Strasbourg;
12. Recognizes the continuing close liaison and fruitful cooperation between
United Nations missions and the field offices of the Council of Europe;
13. Encourages further cooperation between the United Nations and the
Council of Europe in the area of democracy and good governance, including
through their engagement with civil society, as appropriate, and the strengthening of
the links between the United Nations Decade of Education for Sustainable
Development and the Council of Europe Project on Education for Democratic
Citizenship and Human Rights;
14. Notes the important role of the United Nations Development Programme
and the Council of Europe in supporting good local democratic governance, and
encourages a deepening of the cooperation following the signature in February 2010
of the memorandum of understanding between the United Nations Development
Programme Regional Bureau for Europe and the Commonwealth of Independent
States and the Council of Europe in this field;
15. Acknowledges the importance of fostering the development of the
information society and the Internet in line with the Tunis Commitment and Tunis
Agenda for the Information Society, 13 encourages continued cooperation between
the United Nations and the Council of Europe in this area, and notes that the
information society and the Internet can, inter alia, promote awareness and
understanding of the exercise and enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms;
12F

16. Welcomes and encourages the close cooperation between the two
organizations in the fight against transnational organized crime, cybercrime,
corruption and money-laundering, as well as regarding the protection of the rights of
victims of such crimes, and recalls that the Council of Europe Convention on
Cybercrime 14 and the Additional Protocol thereto 15 are open for accession by all
States;
13 F

14F

17. Welcomes the collaboration between the respective mechanisms of the
United Nations and the Council of Europe regarding the fight against terrorism in
full respect of human rights and the rule of law, encourages the further contribution
of the Council of Europe to the implementation of Security Council resolutions
1373 (2001) of 28 September 2001 and 1624 (2005) of 14 September 2005, and
welcomes the commitment of the Council of Europe to the promotion of the
implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy; 16
15F

18. Supports the development of cooperation, where appropriate, between
the United Nations Peacebuilding Commission and the Council of Europe, with a
_______________
13

See A/60/687.
Council of Europe, European Treaty Series, No. 185.
15
Ibid., No. 189.
16
Resolution 60/288.
14

4

A/RES/65/130

view to promoting post-conflict reconstruction and development, as well as the
consolidation of peace, with full respect for human rights and the rule of law;
19. Welcomes the contribution of the Council of Europe to the Sixth
Committee of the General Assembly and the International Law Commission;
20. Recognizes the role of the revised European Social Charter and of the
European Committee of Social Rights in protecting economic and social rights,
notes the complementarities of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities 17 and the Council of Europe Disability Action Plan 2006–2015,
and confirms its support for cooperation between the two organizations in the social
and cultural fields, in particular with respect to the eradication of poverty, the
protection and promotion of the rights and dignity of persons with disabilities,
encouraging the integration of migrants and refugees, strengthening social cohesion,
the fight against maternal and child mortality, and ensuring protection of economic,
social and cultural rights for all;
16F

21. Notes the cooperation established between the Alliance of Civilizations
and the Council of Europe following their signature of a memorandum of
understanding on 29 September 2008 and the accession of the Alliance of
Civilizations to the Faro Platform, and encourages the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization and the Alliance of Civilizations on the one
hand, and the Council of Europe and its North-South Centre on the other, to pursue
their developing and fruitful collaboration in the field of intercultural dialogue;
22. Also notes the cooperation between the Council of Europe and the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization in the field of education,
and encourages the extension of this cooperation, which should continue to focus on
the role of education in developing just and humane societies characterized by the
participation of individuals and the ability of individuals and societies to conduct
intercultural dialogue, as well as on the encouragement of the diversity of cultural
expressions;
23. Requests the Secretaries-General of the United Nations and the Council
of Europe to combine their efforts in seeking answers to global challenges, within
their respective mandates, and calls upon all relevant United Nations bodies to
support the enhancement of cooperation with the Council of Europe, as appropriate,
in the areas mentioned above as well as in other fields such as youth, sport,
biodiversity, health and disaster risk reduction, with regard to which fruitful
cooperation is already taking place;
24. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-seventh session
the sub-item entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and the Council of
Europe”, and requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at
its sixty-seventh session a report on cooperation between the United Nations and the
Council of Europe in implementation of the present resolution.
64th plenary meeting
13 December 2010

_______________
17

Resolution 61/106, annex I.

5
