S/2018/912

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 October 2018
Original: English

African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2429
(2018), by which the Council extended the mandate of the African Union -United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) until 30 June 2019 and requested me
to report every 90 days on its implementation. The report provides an update on and
analysis of the conflict, the political situation and the operational environment in
Darfur for the period from 11 June until 3 October 2018. It proposes benchmarks and
indicators for the eventual exit of the mission, outlines the main challenges to the
effective implementation of the mandate and provides an update on the progress made
by UNAMID in implementing the recommendations contained in the special report
of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission and the Secretary -General of
the United Nations on the strategic review of UNAMID (S/2018/530).

II. Conflict analysis
2.
The security situation in Darfur remained relatively stable, with the exception
of intermittent clashes that continued between Government forces and the Sudan
Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid (SLA-AW) mainly in the western and southern Jebel
Marra area. While incidents of intercommunal conflict remained low, there was a
marginal increase in the number of fatalities from the clashes, as compared with the
previous reporting period. Disputes between herders and farmers, in particular
internally displaced persons and returnees, over land and resources persisted. The
Darfur peace process remained stalled, and the implementation of the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur continued to be slow, despite ongoing efforts to revitalize the
process.
Fighting between forces of the Government of the Sudan and armed groups
3.
Sporadic clashes continued during the reporting period as Government forces
kept up pressure on SLA-AW in an effort to eliminate its remaining elements in the
Jebel Marra. At the same time, the onset of the rainy season slowed the advance of
Government forces, with SLA-AW using this to conduct some counter-attacks. The
Sudan Liberation Army-Minni Minawi (SLA-MM) and the Gibril Ibrahim faction of
the Justice and Equality Movement (JEM-Gibril) remained inactive in Darfur. On
12 July the Government extended its unilateral ceasefire until 31 December 2018,

18-16496 (E)

151018

*1816496*

S/2018/912

with SLA-MM, JEM-Gibril and the Sudan Liberation Movement-Transitional
Council (SLM-TC) extending their ceasefire on 8 August until 7 Nove mber 2018.
SLA-AW also declared a three-month unilateral ceasefire from 20 September to
18 December 2018 to allow unhindered humanitarian access to the areas affected by
landslides in the Jebel Marra.
4.
Clashes were recorded along the Tarantara-Gur Lumbung axis in southern Jebel
Marra, where fighting has occurred since March. From 13 to 16 June, Government
forces resumed attacks on SLA-AW positions in the area, with clashes lasting for
several days and leaving 16 soldiers and three SLA-AW fighters dead. Reports were
received of villages being burned, civilians being injured and killed, as well as people
being displaced to nearby areas, which could be only partially verified.
5.
Another set of clashes took place in the areas around Golo, Central Darfur,
where the continuing presence of SLA-AW elements prompted the Government to
deploy additional troops on 9 July. On 19 July, SLA-AW ambushed government forces
near Deba Nyra, north of Golo, killing 4 soldiers and injuring 10. On 26 July, the
Sudanese Armed Forces attacked a SLA-AW position in Komi village, east of Golo,
arresting suspected SLA-AW informants and subsequently firing artillery south and
south-east of Golo on 30 July and 2 August. On 30 July, SLA -AW attacked
government forces in Wadi Toro, Karo and Mara villages, south-east of Golo, as well
as the Sudanese Armed Forces checkpoint at Sabanga on 7 August.
6.
Elsewhere in the Jebel Marra, on 28 June, Government forces attacked Boulay,
the main SLA-AW stronghold in northern Jebel Marra, taking control of the area by
early July. Unconfirmed reports were received of Rapid Support Forces attacking and
looting Kebe, South Darfur, on 27 July, allegedly targeting local support for the
rebels. Five Fur civilians were reportedly killed, among them one woman, and four
were injured, including one woman and two children, and an unknown number of
civilians were displaced into the surrounding villages. In western Jebel Marra on 29
and 30 July, SLA-AW attacked Golol, which had recently been captured by
Government forces, but was unable to regain this strategic location. On 1 August,
unverified reports were received of Sudanese Armed Forces and Rapid Support
Forces soldiers targeting local support for SLA-AW by assaulting residents of
Tarantara, Kawara, Kaiya and Kuilla villages in southern Jebel Marra, which were
taken by Government forces in May and June. On 26 August, the Government clashed
once again with SLA-AW, in the Gubbo area of southern Jebel Marra, leaving one
soldier and two SLA-AW fighters dead and one civilian injured. From 16 to
18 September, another encounter in Gubbo reportedly left 16 Rapid Support Forces
soldiers and 6 SLA-AW dead, as well as 37 Rapid Support Forces and 5 SLA-AW
injured. Civilians displaced to Kass reported that 10 civilians had been killed in the
incident. From 20 to 21 September, Sudanese Armed Forces reportedly attacked
SLA-AW positions in Sabun Fag, Gur Lumbung, Kuilla and Amrain South Darfur,
with three SLA-AW members killed and one injured.
Militias
7.
Attacks against civilians by nomad militiamen in and around Jebel Marra
continued alongside the fighting between government forces and SLA -AW. The
Northern Rizeigat nomads reportedly continued to harass internally displaced persons
and farmers in the Thur area of western Jebel Marra. Incidents were reported of a
group of farmers being assaulted and robbed by nomads on horseback south -east of
Nertiti on 27 August and of militiamen and Rapid Support Forces personnel assaulting
an internally displaced person in Thur on 5 September for alleged support for
SLA-AW. At the same time, militias were accused of having participated in attacks
by government forces targeting local villagers perceived to be SLA-AW supporters.

2/19

18-16496

S/2018/912

Intercommunal conflicts
8.
The number of incidents of intercommunal violence remained low, with fewer
occurrences as compared with the previous reporting period. There were six reported
intercommunal clashes over land and livestock theft, which resulted in 18 fatalities,
compared with eight clashes and 20 fatalities from 16 February to 10 June 2018, as
covered in S/2018/389 and S/2018/612. The concerted engagement of State
authorities, local leaders and security apparatus contributed to minimizing the
escalation of potential security situations.
9.
Despite the reported marginal decrease in the number of clashes and fatalities,
the reporting period saw an increase in tensions between herders and farmers over
land and resources, especially in West Darfur, affecting internally displaced persons
and returnees in particular, and deterring further returns. On 17 June, a group of Beni
Halba clashed with Zaghawa returnees over a land dispute in the Kurti farming area,
north-west of El Geneina, leaving at least 10 people wounded. Government forces
intervened to restore calm. On 25 July, Fallata and Salamat armed men clashed near
Nadeif and Dangol villages, west of Buram, leading to the death of two Fallata and
three Salamat men. Government forces were deployed to Nadeif to prevent an
escalation of violence but another Salamat man was killed two days later. On
9 August, a group of nomads clashed with Fur farmers at Hebry village, near Feina
in eastern Jebel Marra. Four people were killed, an unconfirmed number were injured
and over 100 head of livestock were stolen. Villagers fled to the mountains , with a
number seeking refuge at the Hashaba internally displaced persons camp.
Communities expressed concern that incidents of harassment could increase during
the harvest season if appropriate measures were not taken to mitigate them, and there
were reports of internally displaced persons being prevented from returning to their
villages of origin to prepare for the farming season in West, South and East Darfur.
Violence against civilians and human rights violations
10. The security situation continued to improve across Darfur outside the Jebel
Marra area during the reporting period, aided by the deployment of Government
security forces associated with the arms collection campaign, as well as efforts by the
Government and UNAMID to promote the peaceful resolution of intercommunal
disputes. Nevertheless, there were mounting concerns over farm destructions, land
occupation, livestock theft and, generally, over harassment, attacks against internally
displaced persons and criminality. Displaced persons in c amps in Central, East and
South Darfur expressed concerns for their security and reported being intimidated by
the presence of armed persons in the camps. Weaknesses in the rule of law institutions
in Darfur continue to be exploited by criminals, posing a significant challenge to the
security of persons and property.
11. The overall human rights situation in Darfur remained fragile. Attacks against
civilians, in particular against internally displaced persons, including women and
children, continued, albeit on a slightly lesser scale, in an environment of impunity.
There has been a reported decrease in human rights incidents during the reporting
period. There were 134 cases of human rights violations and abuses involving 304
victims, including 35 minors, documented during the period, as compared with 169
cases involving 508 victims, including 66 minors, during the period from 16 February
to 10 June 2018, the period covered by S/2018/389 and S/2018/612. Violations of the
right to life accounted for 31 cases involving 72 victims; violations of the right to
physical integrity (assault) accounted for 48 cases involving 120 victims; arbitrary
arrests and illegal detention accounted for 9 cases involving 13 victims; and
abductions accounted for 8 cases involving 11 victims. UNAMID confirmed the
occurrence of 55 cases of human rights violations and abuses involving 115 victims,
18-16496

3/19

S/2018/912

while the remaining 79 cases, involving 189 victi ms, are yet to be verified. Of the
134 cases received, 39, involving 100 victims, were reportedly perpetrated by the
Sudanese Armed Forces, Military Intelligence, National Intelligence and Security
Services and the Rapid Support Forces. Furthermor e, 23 cases involving 26 victims
were reportedly perpetrated by male civilians, while 70 cases, accounting for 173
victims, were allegedly perpetrated by armed men, often described as Arabs. Two
cases involving five victims were attributed to SLA-AW. The authorities arrested 15
suspects in 48 reported cases, but none had been prosecuted at the time of writing.
Documented cases do not necessarily reflect actual numbers of violations, owing to
access restrictions, as well as low and delayed reporting of cases for fear of reprisal.
12. Sexual and gender-based violence remained a serious concern and restricted
women’s freedom of movement in areas of return, as well as around internally
displaced persons camps, where venturing outside the camps for farming, firew ood
or water exposes them to risk. There were 38 cases of sexual and gender-based
violence documented by UNAMID, including conflict-related sexual violence in the
form of rape involving 88 victims, including 24 minors. Incidents of sexual violence
generally remain underreported.
13. There were 44 incidents of grave violations affecting 80 children (34 boys; 46
girls) documented by UNAMID during the reporting period, as verified by the country
task force on monitoring and reporting. A total of 29 children were killed (13 girls;
16 boys); 20 children were maimed (6 girls; 14 boys); 4 boys were abducted; 22 girls
were raped; and 13 schools were affected in Jebel Marra, including 7 schools that
were looted and 6 others destroyed.
14. The reporting period witnessed a moderate decrease in crime against internally
displaced persons as compared with the previous. They were targeted in 181 crime related incidents, which led to 27 fatalities. Other civilians were affected by 376
crime-related incidents, resulting in 61 fatalities, including cases of murder (46),
armed robbery (41), attempted robbery (10), assault/harassment (124), burglary/
break-in (25), looting (1), abduction (8), arson (2), shooting (73), attack/ambush (7),
threat (7), others (14), and livestock theft (18). In the previous three-month period,
internally displaced persons and other civilians were affected by 180 and 325 crime related incidents, respectively, resulting in the deaths of 34 internally displaced
persons and 91 other civilians.

III. Political situation
15. Following its approval of a new draft electoral law on 11 June, the Council of
Ministers of the Sudan submitted the draft to the parliament for further deliberations
in October. While the ruling National Congress Party and its aff iliates welcomed the
draft, stressing its criticality for the conduct of free and fair elections in 2020, many
opposition political parties rejected the amendments contained in the document,
arguing that the process was not inclusive and lacked the consent of various political
interests. On 11 August, the President, Omer al-Bashir, accepted the nomination of
his party’s high consultative body, the Shura Council, to be its candidate in the 2020
elections. Prior to this, the Council had amended the party’s statutes by removing
presidential term limits. Opposition parties and some critics within the National
Congress Party opposed the move, pointing out that it violates the constitutional
provision for only two five-year presidential terms. On 19 August, the opposition
coalition, Sudan Call, concluded a meeting in Paris by issuing a statement pledging
to carry out an international campaign against the re -election of President al-Bashir
in 2020.

4/19

18-16496

S/2018/912

16. On 13 September, a new cabinet of 20 ministers was announced. T he Ministers
of Foreign Affairs, Defence and Presidency Affairs retained their positions, while,
notably, Mutaz Musa Abdalla Salim, the former Minister for Water Resources,
Irrigation and Electricity, was appointed Prime Minister and Finance Minister. Second
Vice-President Hassabo Mohamed Abdul-Rahman, a member of the Rizeigat ethnic
group from Darfur, was replaced by Osman Mohamed Yousif Kibir, former Wali of
North Darfur and a member of the Berti ethnic group. At the regional level, President
al-Bashir, on behalf of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, convened
peace talks between the President of South Sudan, Salva Kiir, and opposition leader
Riek Machar in Khartoum. Following negotiations, on 12 September the parties
signed the final text of the revitalized peace agreement in Addis Ababa.
17. On 19 September, the African Union Peace and Security Council met to discuss
Darfur. In a communiqué issued following the meeting, the Council decided to
seriously consider taking action against those who continued to obstruct efforts
towards lasting peace and security. It also demanded that SLA -AW and its leader,
Abdul Wahid, together with other non-signatory movements, “finalize their ongoing
negotiations and join the peace process by December 2018”, warning that “failure to
do so will lead to strict measures being taken by the Council ”.

IV. Humanitarian situation
18. Food insecurity continued to be of concern, with the economic crisis and
government austerity measures leading to basic food items such as bread being in
limited supply in Darfur. This was compounded by the impact of severe dry weather
that began at the end of 2017 in North Darfur, and parts of East, West and South
Darfur. People living in these states were classified as being in “crisis” (Integrated
Food Security Phase Classification phase 3) until September 2018. Initial results of
the mid-season assessment indicate that average to above-average rainfall will likely
improve the harvest. High inflation has also affected the capacity o f service providers
and impacted coping mechanisms for internally displaced persons.
19. The onset of heavy rains in other parts of West, South, Central and North Darfur
resulted in civilian displacement and destruction of homes and assets. In August
alone, heavy rains destroyed many structures in North Darfur, including in Zam camp,
where about 2,300 people in one school and the local market were affected. The
Government-led Flood Task Force was activated and coordinated a response.
Humanitarian partners and the State Ministry of Health provided non-food items. In
anticipation of a potential increase in water-borne diseases, partners worked with the
Ministry of Health to preposition medicines and medical supplies and undertook
capacity-building of medical personnel.
20. The International Organization for Migration registered 11,026 internally
displaced persons in South Darfur who had fled fighting between government forces
and SLA-AW in eastern Jebel Marra, while 3,010 internally displaced persons were
registered in Central Darfur. Verification is ongoing for approximately 5,600 people
who reportedly arrived in Golo, (central Jebel Marra), Nertiti, Karo and Thur (western
Jebel Marra) and Deribat (eastern Jebel Marra), due to the fighting in the area. This
includes some 1,100 people displaced in mid-June into the Golo area, where local
authorities have since identified land for relocation. Since January, approximately
14,026 people verified by humanitarian actors have been displaced into various camps
and settlements in and around Jebel Marra in South and Central Darfur. In Leiba,
eastern Jebel Marra, verification was ongoing for 1,600 newly arrived people.
Accessing some areas in Jebel Marra remained a challenge owing to insecurity,
compounded by heavy rains which made most roads impassable.
18-16496

5/19

S/2018/912

V. Operating environment
Attacks and threats of attacks targeting African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur, United Nations and humanitarian personnel
21. A total of 60 criminal incidents targeting the United Nations and humanitarian
personnel were recorded during the reporting period, 46 of which were incidents of
intrusion, break-in and theft inside United Nations premises. On 16 July, a UNAMID
military personnel was shot and injured by an unidentifie d armed perpetrator
attempting to enter the UNAMID Community Policing Centre in the Salam internally
displaced persons camp in South Darfur. On 19 July, Sudanese Armed Forces
personnel reportedly assaulted and injured three national staff of the I nternational
Medical Corps at Golo Hospital in Central Darfur over an alleged delay in attending
to injured Sudanese Armed Forces soldiers. On 5 August, six unidentified perpetrators
attempted to stab a member of UNAMID police personnel on patrol at Otash
internally displaced persons camp in South Darfur. On 14 September, eight
perpetrators fired shots at an observation tower at Nyala “super camp” after
attempting to enter the premises. On 12 September, a national staff member of the
international non-governmental organization Triangle Generation Humanitarian was
abducted, assaulted, robbed and later released by SLA-AW elements in Golo in
Central Darfur.
Access restrictions
22. The Government of the Sudan denied access for UNAMID patrols on 18
occasions, mostly citing security reasons. In most cases, the patrols were prevented
from verifying reports of conflict in the Jebel Marra area. Access denials were mostly
confined to conflict areas in eastern and southern Jebel Marra, with UNAMID
verification patrols denied access to the Feina, Gur Lumbung, Kebe, Leiba and
Narglah areas. Verification patrols to Golol in western Jebel Marra were repeatedly
denied access, on 6, 19 and 29 July.
23. UNAMID did not record any flight denials during the reporting period. The
Government has not yet approved the mission’s request for direct flights between
team sites in different sectors.
24. The mission leadership engaged the Government of the Sudan and local
authorities during the reporting period to address the is sue of access denials.
UNAMID sent a series of notes verbales to the Government requesting its
intervention, and the African Union-Joint Special Representative for Darfur held
meetings with local and national authorities.
Visas and customs clearance issues
25. Since 11 June 2018, the Government granted 462 visas, including 28 for military
personnel, 136 for police personnel, 87 for official visitors, 190 for contractors, 19
for civilian staff and 2 for dependants. A total of 82 visa requests are still b eing
processed, while 121 visa requests have been pending beyond the normal approval
period of 15 days, some since April 2017. The Government continues to release food
ration containers from Port Sudan. While progress has been recorded in clearing other
shipments, nine shipments of contingent and United Nations -owned equipment
remain pending. In June 2018, the Government communicated the new tax exemption
procedures, according to which the Government will grant Sudan Sea Ports
Corporation letters of exemption on a case-by-case basis.
26. UNAMID held technical meetings every month with the Government in
Khartoum to tackle pending issues related to visas and clearance of containers. The

6/19

18-16496

S/2018/912

Government of the Sudan pledged to cooperate with the mission in addressi ng these
matters and requested to be kept abreast of new developments, both on a case -by-case
basis and through periodic review meetings. These issues were also reiterated on
29 September in New York at the 26th meeting of the Tripartite Mechanism
comprising representatives of the Government of the Sudan, the African Union, the
United Nations and UNAMID. The Tripartite members undertook to continue
cooperation in the issuance of visas and facilitation of movement in Darfur to enable
UNAMID to effectively discharge its mandate.

VI. Progress towards the achievement of the strategic priorities
of the mission
Protection of civilians
27. UNAMID integrated field protection teams conducted a total of 120 patrols in
North, West, Central and South Darfur. In North Darfur, the main protection issues
identified included harassment of farmers and land occupation reportedly attributed
to armed nomads or other unidentified armed men. Community leaders expressed
concerns over increased tensions between farmers and herders during the harvest
season due to crop destruction by livestock. UNAMID continued to urge community
elders to engage constructively with nomad leaders on ways to address the issue of
crop destruction and to work together towards the promotion of dialogue and peaceful
coexistence. Access restrictions continued to hamper UNAMID monitoring and
reporting efforts, making it difficult to independently verify incidents in the conflict
areas of the Jebel Marra, including human rights-related incidents and allegations by
internally displaced persons against Government security forces.
28. In West Darfur, teams were informed of similar protectio n challenges. In Nuri
village area, the community reported an increased presence of armed settlers
harassing and intimidating internally displaced persons from Sisi camp. UNAMID
has raised the issue with authorities.
29. In South Darfur, the team visited Digrais return village on 16 July, following
reports of an attack, which had caused the death of the Umda (traditional chief) and
his wife. Returnees reported seven incidents during the previous four months,
including cases of assault, intimidation, land occupancy and vandalism. The mission
continued to advocate with them to create conditions for effective returns and
peaceful coexistence between communities.
30. UNAMID uniformed personnel provided 255 round-trip escorts for
humanitarian partners in support of the delivery and monitoring of humanitarian
assistance, as well as inter-agency verification assessments and operational activities.
In addition, UNAMID continued to provide daily escorts to partners for water trucking from Kube to the Sortony internally displaced persons gathering site, as well
as regular armed escorts for humanitarian supplies between Sortony and Kabkabiyah
in North Darfur. UNAMID also provided security for the warehouses and assets of
humanitarian agencies. Escorts were provided for humanitarian partners in July to
undertake needs assessments in Belle el-Sereif, Leiba, and Mershing, eastern Jebel
Marra, where the most critical needs were identified as health, protection and the
provision of water, sanitation and hygiene services. Addit ionally, an inter-agency
assessment undertaken in Thur, in western Jebel Marra, suggested that food, shelter
and non-food items were the most urgent needs. In Belle el-Sereif, medical services
were insufficient, and water and sanitation conditions were poo r. In Leiba and
Mershing, in eastern Jebel Marra, health facilities and equipment were found to be
lacking. While humanitarian partners were able to undertake inter-agency
18-16496

7/19

S/2018/912

assessments in some areas, insecurity prevented visits to others affected by ongoing
armed clashes.
31. On 22 September, after being delayed for several days due to security concerns,
road conditions and mechanical problems, a joint team comprising UNAMID and the
United Nations country team completed an assessment of the Tagulei area of S outh
Darfur, where civilians were affected by landslides resulting from heavy rains on
7 September. Humanitarian assistance was provided, and the team confirmed that 16
people had been killed and 4 remained unaccounted for.
32. The UNAMID military component conducted a total of 13,554 patrols, of which
5,283 were for the protection of civilians (3,452 short -range patrols, 299 long-range
patrols and 1,532 night patrols). Protection of UNAMID personnel and equipment
patrols totalled 7,834 (6,810 routine patrols and 1,024 logistics and administrative
escorts). A total of 3,067 visits to villages and 1,768 visits to internally displaced
persons camps were conducted during the reporting period. UNAMID police
conducted 4,496 patrols, including 1,449 for confidence -building to internally
displaced persons camps and 530 for firewood and grass collection, 309 to markets,
1,317 to villages, 714 to towns, 119 to areas of return and 58 to migration routes to
respond to the security needs of internally displaced persons, in particular women and
children engaged in livelihood activities outside the camps. Formed police units also
provided 27 humanitarian escorts to Kalma, Dereige and Otash internally displaced
persons camps in South Darfur and Zalingei in Central Darfur.
33. UNAMID continued to engage State authorities on the necessity of ensuring a
protective environment and access to justice for vulnerable groups, especially
displaced communities, returnees, women and children. The mission undertook 54
monitoring visits to internally displaced persons camps, 15 field missions, 21 visits
to places of detention, including trial observation on fair trial standards in 10 cases
and 36 follow-up exercises on previously reported cases. The mission also
participated in 103 external advocacy meetings with government authorities, local
communities and civil society partners, conducted four workshops for prosecutors,
including the Special Prosecutor for Crimes in Darfur, on conflict -related sexual
violence, and conducted three human rights promotional and outreach activities in
local communities.
34. Explosive ordnance remained a concern in Darfur, with four incidents reported
in which one person was killed and four were injured. UNAMID continued to address
the threats posed by explosive remnants of war through surveys, clearance and
disposal tasks. Such operations were conducted in 164 villages across Darfur where
mine action teams cleared 48 hazardous areas, located and safely destroyed 1,835
items of unexploded ordnance and disposed of 598,160 rounds of small arms
ammunition. In addition, the mission conducted explosive remnants of war risk awareness training for 34,942 persons, comprising 6,777 men, 6,469 women, 12,354
boys and 9,342 girls, focusing on internally displaced persons in Korma, Golo and
Kass, as well as those recently displaced during the fighting in Jebel Marra. Income generating resources were provided to 30 victims of explosive remnants of war.
35. The mission welcomed the Government’s willingness to adopt a framework of
cooperation with the United Nations on conflict-related sexual violence under
Security Council resolution 2429 (2018) and to discuss the issue, as well as human
rights in general, with the United Nations to guide future support for n ational
authorities to enhance prevention and response measures. In a positive development
for accountability, a member of the Sudanese Armed Forces personnel who was on
trial in El Geneina, West Darfur, for the rape of a 15 -year-old girl in January 2018,
was convicted on 6 September and sentenced to 20 years’ imprisonment.

8/19

18-16496

S/2018/912

36. From 4 July to 2 August, UNAMID, in collaboration with the Sudan
Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Commission and the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), supported the demobilization of 1,190
ex-combatants, including 336 women, in El Geneina. The Darfur Ceasefire
Commission verified former combatants from West and Central Darfur from
movements that had signed the Darfur Peace Agreement and those that had acceded
to the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur.
37. Following the Government’s completion of the March 2016 action plan to end
and prevent the recruitment and use of children, its security forces were delisted from
the annexes of the Secretary-General’s annual report on children and armed conflict.
This important achievement reflects the commitment made by the Government of the
Sudan to prevent and end violations against children by its security forces and to build
national protection systems for children. However, three non-signatory movements,
JEM-Gibril, SLA-AW and SLA-MM, remain listed in the report of the SecretaryGeneral. During the reporting period, UNAMID conducted child protection capacity building and training sessions benefiting 769 targeted ho st community members.
38. Pursuant to its mandate to strengthen rule of law in Darfur, the mission trained
30 rural court judges in North Darfur to enhance their capacity to mediate and resolve
intercommunal conflicts, including land disputes, resolve a g reater number of
disputes and produce higher quality decisions. The mission also organized five
training sessions on trial monitoring for non-governmental organizations and civil
society to enhance their capacity to monitor trials at the Special Court for Darfur
Crimes. The mission handed over 12 vehicles, which were distributed to the state
prosecution offices and to the Special Prosecutor in Darfur to enable them to service
remote areas. In collaboration with the State Directorate of Prisons and Reform,
UNAMID provided two six-week training programmes for 180 prison officers on
prison operations and a human rights approach to prison management with a focus on
the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (the
Nelson Mandela Rules). UNAMID, in collaboration with the General Directorate of
Prisons and Reform and El Fasher University, provided a one-month train-the-trainers
course on teaching methodology for 20 prison officers, including 6 women. The
mission also hosted a meeting of the United Nations Rule of Law Coordination Group
for Darfur to enhance coordination between UNAMID and the United Nations
country team in Darfur in line with the transition concept.
39. In collaboration with the Sudanese Ministry of Social Affairs, the mi ssion also
organized five workshops to revive the state committees for combating gender -based
violence. In West Darfur, UNAMID sensitized 10 members of the Sudan ese Armed
Forces, the Sudan Police Force and community leaders on the role of the mili tary and
police in preventing sexual and gender-based violence. The mission reiterated the
need for exempting rape survivors from the need to complete a form at police stations,
in order to facilitate speedy medical attention and legal redress.
Support for the Darfur peace process and the implementation of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur
40. The stalemate persisted in the Darfur peace process, with little progress
reported. The Joint Special Representative continued to engage with the Government
of the Sudan and the non-signatory movements in support of the African Union Highlevel Implementation Panel, focusing on achieving a pre -negotiation framework
which would facilitate the signing of a cessation of hostilities agreement and the
resumption of political negotiations. On 9 July, the Joint Special Representative held
a meeting with the Envoy of the Presidency for Negotiation and Diplomatic
Communication on Darfur File, Amin Hassan Omer, at which it was recommended
18-16496

9/19

S/2018/912

that the Joint Special Representative develop a reformulated text for the framework,
after an earlier text was not accepted by the movements in May. In conveying the new
text to the parties, the Joint Special Representative stressed the urgent need to
complete the pre-negotiation stage and begin earnest discussions on substantive
issues in line with the road map. From 13 to 14 August, the Joint Special
Representative participated in a meeting of the African Union High -level
Implementation Panel in Addis Ababa, to assess the state of the me diation process
and develop a way forward regarding the engagements with the movements in the
light of the African Union Peace and Security Council deliberations on the peace
process.
41. On 31 August to 1 September, the Joint Special Representative atten ded a
meeting organized by the Berghof Foundation in an effort to overcome the difficulties
in the pre-negotiation agreement, after which the Joint Special Representative
proposed another text to the movements. In their response, the movements stated that
the current text watered down their demands for the creation of new and independent
implementation mechanisms and therefore suggested reverting the text suggested by
the Joint Special Representative in June 2018.
42. The implementation of the Doha Document continued at a slow pace. The
Voluntary Return and Resettlement Commission in Central Darfur visited all
localities in the state except for Golo and Rockero, assessing the situation, including
needs. In South Darfur, the Commission conducted field surveys in 180 out of 232
villages to verify areas of voluntary return and identified 17 villages requiring
immediate response. The Darfur Land Commission is in the process of establishing
information and data centres in the five Darfur states and Khartoum, equip ped with
information on land use and suitability, water resources and socioeconomic
conditions, among other things. The Commission has already received some of the
database equipment for these centres through funding from UNDP, with the
expectation that the rest of the equipment will be installed and its staff trained by
December 2018.
43. At its thirteenth session in Doha, Qatar, on 11 July, the Implementation
Follow-Up Commission of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur concluded that
there was a need to reinvigorate the implementation of the outstanding issues of the
Document. It recommended that, in addition to convening regular meetings,
UNAMID coordinate a meeting of all Follow-Up Commission partners for a review
of the implementation modalities of the Doha Document before the next meeting,
scheduled for November 2018. The meeting participants also made a strong appeal to
the international community for support for stabilization and development in Darfur.
In that regard, they urged UNAMID, the United Nations country team, the European
Union and the Department for International Development of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland to undertake a review of the Darfur Development
Strategy with the goal of aligning its objectives with residual issues in the Doha
Document. The review is under way.
Mediation of intercommunal conflict
44. UNAMID pursued mediation initiatives focused on early warning, preventive
measures, capacity-building and efforts to address the root causes of conflict in
collaboration with government authorities, the United Nations country team,
community leaders and other relevant institutions. In support of efforts to prevent
seasonal communal conflicts and to ensure a successful farming season, UNAMID
held 13 meetings in North, Central and West Darfur with the native administrations,
peaceful coexistence and agricultural protection committees, farmers and nomadic
herders, local authorities and community leaders.

10/19

18-16496

S/2018/912

45. The mission provided support and monitored several local peace initiatives. In
South Darfur on 9 July, the Masalit and the Fallata signed a peace agreement in Bulbul
Tembisco in the presence of the Wali of South Darfur, with logistical and technical
support from UNAMID. However, the land issue was not addressed. The communities
agreed to allow the resolution of land issues to be led by the state authorities.
46. In East Darfur, the Deputy Nazir of the Ma’aliya informed UNAMID of a
meeting between the Vice-President of the Sudan, Hassabo Mohammed Abdul
Rahman, and Ma’aliya and Rizeigat leaders in Ed Daein on 24 July to discuss the
resumption of the reconciliation process. Leaders expressed their willingness to
resolve ongoing land issues. UNAMID continued to engage the leadership of both
groups to encourage a peaceful resolution.
47. The mission provided technical support to human rights and transitional justice
mechanisms aimed at strengthening local institutions and enhancing the capacity of
state governments to protect civilians and promote human rights. On 3 September,
UNAMID, UNDP and the Truth, Justice and Reconciliation Commission jointly
organized a stakeholders’ meeting on the transitional justice programme, which
provided an opportunity to strengthen the mandate of the Transitional Justice Wo rking
Group, created in January 2016 to provide technical support to the Truth, Justice and
Reconciliation Commission. A workshop in El Fasher on understanding conflict related sexual violence and the related legal framework gathered prosecutors from all
five Darfur states, including the Special Prosecutor for Crimes in Darfur.
48. In collaboration with the Ministry of Social Welfare, UNAMID trained 135
women leaders on mediation and negotiation. UNAMID continued to advocate for
the inclusion of women in native administrations, peaceful co-existence committees
and other decision-making bodies, in line with Security Council resolution 1325
(2000).
49. UNAMID also conducted workshops and dialogue forums in West, North and
South Darfur. In West Darfur, the mission conducted four workshops, including one
on conflict resolution and reconciliation on 8 and 9 July and three on good governance
on 11, 17 and 30 July. The workshops were attended by 200 representative s, including
37 women, and were aimed at enhancing the capacity of community leaders to resolve
conflicts, promoting peaceful coexistence, encouraging the participation of women
and teaching good governance principles. UNAMID also organized a community
dialogue forum on 8 August in Aish Bara return area, West Darfur, which was attended
by 70 participants, including 40 women. Recommendations included the
rehabilitation of migratory routes and water dams, dialogue and workshops on
conflict resolution and the empowerment of peace and reconciliation committees.
50. UNAMID conducted five peace forums in North Darfur on 25 June, 27 June and
2 July and in South Darfur on 4 and 9 July, which were attended by 514 participants,
including 35 women. It was agreed that priority should be placed on mitigating
tensions and conflicts, including through outreach and dialogue forums, an inclusive
arms collection campaign, the demarcation of livestock migratory routes and the
implementation of community stabilization projects. Participants emphasized the
need for the Government to comprehensively address land issues and enforce the rules
governing the farming and migratory seasons.

18-16496

11/19

S/2018/912

VII. Implementation of the reconfiguration of the mission
Peacekeeping concept
51. A new mission concept was finalized to guide the mission’s efforts under the
new mandate and will inform the revision of the military concept of operations, the
police concept and the support concept. Integrated planning to implement the closure
and handover of team sites, redeployments and troop repatriations directed in the new
mandate are under way, in consultation with the Government of the Sudan, the
affected troop-contributing countries and other stakeholders. An integrated plan for
the units identified for repatriation or relocation has been finalized and orders have
been issued to meet the mandated timelines.
52. Based on the authorized strength of 2,500 personnel, an analysis undertaken by
the police division determined the breakdown of the police compone nt into 760
individual police officers and 1,740 officers serving in 11 formed police units
operating out of mission headquarters, in State Liaison Functions in four Darfur state
capitals, in the Khartoum office and the team sites. Adjustments were made to the
distribution of individual police officers in order to allow for an increased number at
each team site. Those adjustments will come into effect once team sites outside of the
new area of deployment are closed. The deployment of individual police offic ers to
Golo has already been undertaken. As part of the analysis, the numbers for each
formed police unit were adjusted based on the deployment plan. Communication in
that regard was initiated with respective police-contributing countries through the
Police Division. The reinforcement of the units will be realized through regular
rotations.
53. Following approval by the Fifth Committee of commitment authority for the
UNAMID budget until 31 December 2018, a revised budget submission is currently
being prepared for the first six months of 2019. The budget submission will reflect,
among other changes, planned staffing reductions and the closure of super camps and
team sites outside of the greater Jebel Marra area, which are to take effect on 1 January
2019. In line with the new mandate, a reduction of more than one third of the current
civilian personnel positions has been proposed in the revised UNAMID budget for
2018/19 and is awaiting approval.
Transition concept
54. As part of the transition concept endorsed by the Security Council in its
resolution 2429 (2018) and the African Union Peace and Security Council in its
communiqué of 11 June 2018, UNAMID staff members are to be co-located in the
offices of the agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations country team in
the capitals of North, South, East and West Darfur states. Discussions have been held
with the United Nations country team on these state liaison functions, and staffing
arrangements have been made in order to boost the capacity of the country team in
line with the needs they have expressed in the four jointly identified priority areas
laid out in the mandate.
55. The transition concept endorsed in the new mandate highlights the critical role
of resources for the successful transition of UNAMID, as well as for supporting the
role of the Government in maintaining security gains. The mission and its partners
have the challenge of overcoming the chronic funding and personnel shortfall that the
United Nations country team has increasingly faced as Darfur has moved out of the
global spotlight. With that in mind, the United Nations and the African Union are
pursuing a strategy to increase the visibility of the transition and highlight the crucial
importance of funding for preventing relapse into conflict. On 28 September, a high level event was held during the seventy-third session of the United Nations General
12/19

18-16496

S/2018/912

Assembly, co-chaired by the Deputy Secretary-General and the African Union Peace
and Security Commissioner. The event brought together representatives of existing
and potential donors, the Government of the Sudan, the mission and the United
Nations country team, with participants expressing support for the transition concept,
underscoring the critical need for appropriate funding, and considering the creation
of a “Group of Friends of the Transition in Darfur”. The high-level event is to be
followed up with a pledging conference to give donors the opportunity to commit to
financial support.
Benchmarks and indicators for the exit of the mission
56. Following the recommendation contained in the special report of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission and the Secretary-General of the
United Nations on the strategic review of UNAMID (S/2018/530) for an exit of
the mission on 30 June 2020 and its liquidation by December 2020, the Security
Council, in paragraph 53 of its resolution 2429 (2018) requested that a detailed and
clearly benchmarked exit strategy be included in the present report. In line with the
Council’s request, provisions of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur could serve
as the basis for indicators of achievement for the exit of UNAMID, as well as existing
mission benchmarks, as adjusted and presented in annex I to my report of 15 April
2014 (S/2014/279). Additionally, the Council requested a particular focus on those
benchmarks and indicators for which the Government of the Sudan has responsibility,
with specific attention to the areas of protection of civilians, security sector reform,
rule of law, durable solutions and human rights. In the meantime, the mission’s
strategic priorities, as redefined in paragraph 11 of Council resolution 2429 (2018),
constitute the overall framework against which progress will be measured.
57. The new set of indicators reflects the positive changes in the security situation
in Darfur and political developments in Sudan since 2014, when UNAMID
benchmarks and indicators were most recently adjusted. While the Government of the
Sudan is in control of most of the territory, and the reach of the State institutions is
extended across Darfur, the role and footprint of UNAMID have decreased
considerably. Against this background, while the mission is drawing down and
preparing for its exit in the next two years, the proposed indicators of achievement
are intended to be (a) Government of the Sudan-centred, (b) measurable and
(c) realistic in terms of time frame.
58. As underlined in my letter dated 30 August 2017 addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2017/747), the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur laid the
ground for a number of institutional and legislative reforms, and political and security
arrangements, which, if implemented in a sustainable way, may address the main root
causes of the Darfur rebellion. This forward-looking approach is underpinning the
proposed set of exit indicators of achievement in the two year s ahead, leading to the
withdrawal of UNAMID. In this context, I would recommend that the joint African
Union-United Nations strategic review of UNAMID, to be submitted to the Security
Council by 1 May 2019, should also include an assessment on the impleme ntation of
the indicators of achievement set out in the present report. In addition, UNAMID
should report every 90 days, as part of its periodic reporting to the Security Council,
on the implementation progress.

VIII. Observations
59. It is encouraging to note that the security situation in Darfur has continued to
improve as intercommunal violence and criminality decreases. This positive trend
reinforces the transition concept endorsed in the new mandate for UNAMID and the
18-16496

13/19

S/2018/912

United Nations country team, to focus on peacebuilding and development activities
outside the Jebel Marra area and to concentrate on addressing the drivers of conflict.
Much work remains to be done in this area, in particular with regard to the land issue,
where the lack of a comprehensive solution continues to result in disputes over land
ownership between internally displaced persons and herders who have occupied
vacated lands. The issue remains a barrier to the return of internally displaced persons
to their places of origin and an obstacle to peace. In order to successfully address this
and other issues at the root of the conflict, it is critical to ensure that funding is
available for Darfur both during the transition and in the longer term. In that regard,
I urge the donor community to contribute generously towards lasting peace and
sustainable development in Darfur.
60. While I am concerned that the Government of the Sudan and the non -signatory
movements have yet to agree on a pre-negotiation framework, I wish to commend the
mediators for their concerted efforts towards bringing the parties to the negotiation
table. I call upon the parties to demonstrate commitment in reaching a final agreement
on substantive issues. We must recognize that only a political settlemen t to the
conflict will bring the people of Darfur closer to durable peace.
61. Comprehensive implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, in
particular in areas relating to compensation and the return of internally displaced
persons and refugees, land and other natural resources, remains crucial. It is
regrettable, however, that the residual Darfur Regional Authority commissions are yet
to become fully functional. The progress of their deployment has been constrained by
lack of resources, both human and financial. In this regard, I urge the international
community to provide adequate funding and technical support to these commissions
to enable them to move forward on the critical work of the implementation of the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur.
62. I remain deeply concerned about the humanitarian situation in the Jebel Marra
area, resulting from the clashes between Government forces and SLA -AW. I am
encouraged by the Government’s decision to allow humanitarian access to rebel-held
areas in the Blue Nile and South Kordofan, and I continue to urge the parties to cease
hostilities and allow unhindered access to UNAMID and humanitarian actors to
protect and provide assistance to the affected populations in Darfur.
63. Even as the security situation improves and UNAMID continues to draw down,
we must recognize that work remains to be done with regard to the mission ’s
peacekeeping efforts in the Jebel Marra and its transition activities focused on the
drivers of conflict across Darfur. I would like to take this opportunity to call upon
the Government of the Sudan to extend to the mission all the support necessary for
the successful implementation of its mandate, including facilitating access for the
mission and humanitarian partners to those pockets of the Jebel Marra still affected
by armed conflict. I would also like to highlight the importance of the Government,
the mission and other stakeholders working together in pursuit of the shared goal of
ensuring a smooth and dignified return, reintegration and resettlement of internally
displaced persons and refugees.
64. In conclusion, I should like to thank the Joint Special Representative, Jeremiah
Nyamane Mamabolo, and all UNAMID personnel, the United Nations country team
and the humanitarian community, who continue to work diligently to improve the
lives of the people of Darfur. I commend my Special Envoy for the Sudan and South
Sudan, Nicholas Haysom, and the former Presidents of South Africa and Nigeria,
Thabo Mbeki and Abdulsalami Abubakar, of the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel, for their steadfast commitment to sustainable peace and
stability in the Sudan.

14/19

18-16496

S/2018/912

Annex I
Proposed benchmarks and indicators of achievement
I. The protection of civilians; monitoring and reporting on human rights,
sexual and gender-based violence and grave violations against children; the
facilitation of humanitarian assistance; and the safety and security of
humanitarian personnel
Protection of civilians
• Sustained security for internally displaced persons in camps, temporary
settlements and in areas adjacent to camps, including during livelihood
activities.
• Reduction in physical attacks on civilians and internally displaced persons,
especially women and girls.
• No increase in conflict-related displacement.
• Cessation of conflict-related sexual violence and grave violations against
children by all parties to the conflict, including the Sudanese Armed Forces,
the Sudan Police Force, Rapid Support Forces and other government-affiliated
forces.

90-day
update

• The Government, in coordination with relevant United Nations entities, to
adopt specific measures and implement time-bound commitments to prevent
and respond to conflict-related sexual violence.
• Survivors of sexual violence are able to access medical, psychological, legal
and socioeconomic services.
• Directives of the Humanitarian Aid Commission on safe and unhindered
humanitarian access are in place and implemented in a timely manner.
• The Government of the Sudan to ensure that the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) has unfettered access throughout
Darfur, including to the areas from which it has withdrawn.
• The Government to provide a suitable environment for the return of internally
displaced persons and refugees.

January 2019

90-day
update

Durable solutions
• Internally displaced persons are ensured freedom of movement, including for
market, farming and livelihood activities, in a safe and secure environment.

90-day
update

• Mechanisms are established for compensation relating to the loss, damage and
arbitrary or unlawful deprivation of land.

June 2019

• An adequate number of rural courts, district courts, prisons, prosecution
offices and police stations in areas key to returnees and/or internally displaced
person resettlement are performing at least basic functions.

June 2019

• Crimes committed against internally displaced persons are routinely reported
to the police and, where applicable, prosecuted.
• Basic services are available in areas of return and in selected host communities
to encourage more returnees.
18-16496

90-day
update

15/19

S/2018/912

• Voluntary Return and Resettlement Commission established and functional
with adequate funding and staffing.
• Mechanisms are established for internally displaced persons and refugees to
contribute to the planning and management of their return, resettle ment or
reintegration, in line with provisions of the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur.
Human rights
• The Darfur office of the National Human Rights Commission is functional.
• The recommendations of the universal periodic review, which were accepted
by Sudan, are implemented.
• At least 50 per cent of cases of human rights violations reported to the
Government are addressed by law enforcement in accordance with national
laws and international human rights standards.
• The Government is engaged with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights on the establishment of a country office with
a full mandate for human rights protection and promotion.

90-day
update

• The Government to sustain preventive efforts with regard to grave violations
against children.
• Mechanisms are in place to identify, verify, release and reintegrate children
associated with armed forces and groups (including the establishment of local
child protection committees and networks) in a timely manner.
• Grave violations against children are systematically investigated and
perpetrators are held accountable in accordance with Sudanese legislation.
Rule of law
• A Truth, Justice and Reconciliation Commission is established and functional.

January 2019

• A Sudan Police Force presence is established in all localities, also ensuring
access to policing in rural areas through mobile units or through the
establishment of substations.

June 2019

• The Sudan Police Force is trained to provide human rights -based policing
services without the assistance of UNAMID in all areas of Darfur, with a
special focus on community-oriented policing, as well as the handling of
sexual and gender-based violence and child protection-related cases, including
in internally displaced person camps and along migration routes.
• The Sudan judicial system investigates and prosecutes serious offences,
including conflict-related sexual violence and sexual and gender-based
violence.

90-day
update

• The Government to ensure transparency for the cases prosecuted by the
Special Prosecutor for Crimes in Darfur.

16/19

18-16496

S/2018/912

Security sector reform
• Legal framework in place for the disarmament of militias.

June 2019

• Voluntary civilian arms control programme fully operational in all states.

June 2019

• The Government comprehensive plan for the disarmament and demobilization
of signatory and non-signatory armed groups operating in Darfur is fully
operational.
• The Government to make efforts towards lifting the state of emergency in
Darfur, in particular in areas where there is no active fighting.

90-day
update

II. Support for the mediation of intercommunal or other local conflict that
could undermine the security situation, including through measures to address
its root causes, in conjunction with the Government of the Sudan, the United
Nations country team and civil society
• Joint coordination committees established and functioning in all five Darfur
states.

January 2019

• Native administration proactively engages communities to defuse tensions,
mediate conflicts and promote reconciliation.
• Local authorities support the return of internally displaced persons and their
reintegration into the community.
• Seasonal transhumance is consensually regulated by local authorities and the
communities concerned.

90-day
update

• Reduction in the number of incidents, casualties and new displacement
resulting from intercommunal conflict.
• Establish legal provisions in all Darfur states on the rights to land and its use
(hawakeer).

June 2019

• Demarcation of migratory routes and rehabilitation of rihoods (natural water
points) and haffirs.

June 2019

• Rural courts are established and functioning across Darfur.

18-16496

• Transitional justice mechanisms, including the Special Court for Darfur
Crimes and the Truth, Justice and Reconciliation Commission, are fully
functional and operating in accordance with international human rights
standards and best practice.

90-day
update

• Land use mapping database is deployed and operational across Darfur states.

June 2019

• Darfur Land Commission is established and functional.

June 2019

• Darfur states are represented in the National Petroleum Commission.

90-day
update

• A legal framework is in place for oil-producing states in Darfur to benefit from
2 per cent of oil revenue.

December
2019

17/19

S/2018/912

III. Mediation between the Government of the Sudan and non-signatory
armed movements on the basis of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur
• The Government demonstrates commitment to participate in direct
negotiations on the basis of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur.
• The Government demonstrates commitment to conclude a comprehensive
ceasefire and inclusive cessation of hostilities.
• Ceasefire Commission established and meeting on a regular basis.
• Joint Commission established and functioning.
• Darfur Security Arrangements Implementation Commission is established and
operational.

90-day
update

• Remaining phases of the Darfur Internal Dialogue and Consultation process
are completed and its outcomes widely disseminated and considered in the
constitutional review process.
• The post-Darfur Regional Authority institutions, including the Darfur Peace
Follow-up Office, are functional.
• The Doha Document for Peace in Darfur Commissions and the Fund are
staffed and operational in all Darfur states.

18/19

18-16496

S/2018/912

Annex II
Map

18-16496

19/19
