UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1996/4
24 January 1996
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3620th meeting of the Security Council, held on 24 January 1996 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Somalia", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in Somalia dated 19 January 1996 (S/1996/42) and
is deeply concerned about the absence of any credible progress towards
national reconciliation. It calls upon all Somali political leaders and
parties to return to an inclusive process of consultation and negotiation
aimed at national reconciliation leading to the establishment of a broadbased national government.
"The Security Council welcomes with appreciation the efforts of the
Organization of African Unity, the Organization of the Islamic Conference,
the League of Arab States, the European Union and neighbouring States in
promoting national dialogue in the search for a solution to the Somali
crisis. These efforts demonstrate the commitment of the international
community not to abandon the people of Somalia. It reaffirms that the
people of Somalia bear ultimate responsibility for achieving national
reconciliation and restoring peace. In this respect, the Council urges the
leaders of Somali factions to reject violence and place the interests of
the country and people above their personal differences and political
ambitions.
"The Security Council also welcomes and supports the SecretaryGeneral’s intention to maintain the United Nations Political Office for
Somalia (UNPOS). It stresses the importance of its maintaining close
cooperation with the regional organizations, monitoring developments in
Somalia and continuing contacts with Somali factions. It looks forward to
the return of UNPOS to Somalia as soon as circumstances permit.
"The Security Council expresses deep concern at the continuing
conflict. The resulting insecurity, banditry and general lawlessness
increase the suffering of the civilian population. The Council condemns

96-01446 (E)

240196

/...

S/PRST/1996/4
English
Page 2

the harassment, beatings, abduction and killings of personnel of
international humanitarian organizations, and underlines the responsibility
of all parties in Somalia for ensuring the safety and security of
humanitarian and other international personnel. This atmosphere of
insecurity has regrettably forced the United Nations agencies to relocate
international personnel thus hindering the smooth delivery of much needed
humanitarian assistance.
"The Security Council commends the valiant efforts of United Nations
and international humanitarian agencies and their Somali personnel for the
courage and determination to render assistance to the people of Somalia.
The Council encourages Member States to continue to provide humanitarian
assistance in order to avoid a further deterioration of the current
situation.
"The Security Council considers the uninterrupted delivery of
humanitarian assistance to be a crucial factor in the overall security and
stability of Somalia. In this respect, the closure of Mogadishu main
seaport and other transportation facilities severely aggravates the present
situation and poses a potential major impediment to future emergency
deliveries. The Council calls upon the Somali parties and factions to open
those facilities unconditionally.
"The Security Council reminds all States of their obligation to
implement fully the general and complete embargo imposed by paragraph 5 of
resolution 733 (1992) on all deliveries of weapons and military equipment
to Somalia. In this respect it calls on all States to refrain from any
actions which might exacerbate the situation in Somalia.
"The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to continue to
keep it informed about developments in Somalia. The Council remains seized
of the matter."

-----
