VII.

32/38.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committec

Offers by Member States of study and
training facilities for inhabitants of NonSelf-Governing Territories

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31/32 of 29 November 1976,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
on offers by Member States of study and training facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories, 63
prepared under General Assembly resolution 845 (IX)
of 22 November 1954,
Bearing in mind the continued need to provide educational and training facilities at all levels for the inhabitants of Non-Self-Goveming Territories,
I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member
States which have made scholarships available to the
inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories;
3. Invites ali States to make or continue to make
generous offers of study and training facilities to the
inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories, particularly those in southern Africa, and, whenever possible,
to provide travel funds to prospective students;
4. Requests the administering Powers to ensure the
widespread and continuous dissemination in the Territories under their administration of information relating to offers of study and training facilities made by
States and to pwvide all the necessary facilities to
enable students to avail themselves of such offers;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-third session on the
implementation of the present resolution;
6. Draws the attention of the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples to the present resolution.
83rd plenary meeting
28 November 1977
32/116.

Question of Southern Rhodesia
A

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Southern Rhodesia
(Zimbabwe),
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,64
Taking into account the Maputo Dcclaration in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia and
the Programme of Action for the Liberation of Zimbabwe and Namibia,u" adoptcd by the International
63 A/32/277.
64 Official Records

o/ the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/32/23/Rev.l), vol. I, chaps. I,
11 and IV-VI, and vol. II, chap. VII.
65 A/32/109/Rev.1-S/12344/Rev.1, annex V. For the printed
text, see Official Records o/ the Security Council, Thirtysecond Year, Supplement for July, August and September 1977.

175

Conference in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabw~
and Namibia, held at Maputo from 16 to 21 May 1977,
as wcll as the Lagos Declaration for Action against
Apartheid,n 6 adopted by the World Conference for
Action against Apanheid, held at Lagos from 22 to
26 August 1977,
Having heard the statemcnt of the representative of
the administering Power, n7
Having heard thc statements of the representatives
of the national libcration movement who participated in
an observer capacity in the consideration of the item, 08
Rccalling its resoiutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independcnce to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
and 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, containing the
programme of action for the full implernentation of
the Declaration, as well as all othcr resolutions relating
to the question of Southern Rhodesia adopted by the
General Assembly, the Security Council and the Special
Committee,
Bearing in mind that the Government of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern lreland, as thc
administering Power, has the primary responsibility
for putting an end to the critica! situation in Southern
Rhodesia (Zimbabwe) which, as repeatedly affirmed
by the Security Council, constitutes a threat to intcrnational peace and security,
Reaffirming that any attempts to negotiate the future
of Zimbabwe with the illegal régime on the basis of
independence befare majority rule would be in contravention of the inalienable rights of the people of the
Territory and contrary to the provisions of the Charter
of the United N ations and of resolution 1514 (XV),
Condemning the deliberate sabotage by the illegal
racist minority régime of the numerous, intensive efforts
being made to secure a negotiated settlement in Zimbabwe on the basis of majority rule,
Bearing in mind the resolutions on Zimbabwe adopted
by the Asscmbly of Heads of State and Government of
the Organization of African Unity at its fourteenth
ordinary session, hcld at Libreville from 2 to 5 July
1977,(i!)

Stressing the grave responsibility of the international
community to take all possible measures in support of
the people of Zimbabwe in tl1eir liberation struggle and
in minimizing the hardship and suffering of Zimbabweans in that regard,
lndignant at the arbitrary imprisonment and detcntion
of política! lcadcrs and others, the massacre of frccdom
fightcrs and thc continued denial of fundamental human
rights, including in particular the wanton beating, tor~ure and murdcr of innocent villagers, arbitrary crimmal measurcs of collcctive punishment and measurcs
designcd to crcate an apartheid State in Zimbabwe,
Commending the firm detcrmination of the people
of Zimbabwe, under the leadcrship of their national
liberation movement, to achieve freedom and independcnce, and convinced that their unity and solidarity
are fundamental to the rapid attainment of that objecti vc,
66 A/CONF.91/9 (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.77.XIV.2 and corrigendum), sect. X.
67 See Official Records o/ the General Assembly, Thirtysecond .Session, Fourth Committee, 27th meeting.
68 /bid., 27th to 29th and 35th meetings.
69 See A/32/3 1O.

General Assembly-Thirty-seeond Session

176

Outraged and deeply concerned by the continuing
acts of aggression against neighbouring independent African States, including the most recent aggression aga_inst
Mozambique7º which resulted in loss of human hves
and destruction of property,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Zimbabwe to self-determination, freedom and independence and the legitimacy of their struggle to secure
by all means at their disposal the enjoyment of that
right as set forth in the Charter of the United Nations
and in conformity with the objectives of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
2. Reaffirms the principle that there should be no
independence before majority rule in Zimbabwe and
that any settlement relating to the future of the Territory must be worked out with the full participation of
the people of Zimbabwe and in accordancc with their
true aspirations;
3. Condemns the continued war of repression and
the intensified oppressive measures against the people
of Zimbabwe by the illegal racist minority régime;
4. Strongly condemns thc illegal racist minority
régime for its continuing, brutal acts of aggression and
threats against Mozambique, Zambia and Botswana;
5. Strongly condemns South Africa for its continued
support of the illegal racist minority régime in contravention of the provisions of all the resolutions and decisions of the United Nations on the question of southern
Rhodesia;
6. Calls upan the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. in the discharge of its primary responsibility as the administering
Power, to take all effcctive measures to enable Zimbabwe to accede to independence in accordance with
the aspirations of the majority of the population and
not under any circumstances to accord to the illegal
régime any of thc powers or attributes of sovereignty;
7. Firmly supports the people of Zimbabwe in their
struggle to exercise their inalienable right to self-determination and independenoe by all means at their disposal;
8. Reaffirms the relevant provisions of the Maputo
Declaration in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and
Namibia and the Programme of Action for the Liberation of Zimbabwe and Namibia, in particular the provisions calling for assistance to those front-line States
which are victims of repeated acts of aggression by the
racist minority régime; 71
9.

Demands:

The termination forthwith of all repressive
measures perpetrated by the illegal racist minority régime against the people of Zimbabwe, in particular the
wanton killings and executions of Africans and their
freedom fighters carried out by that régime, the brutality
committed in the "operational area", the arbitrary
closure of African areas, the eviction, transfer and
res,ettlement of Africans and the creation of concentration camps;
(a)

70 See Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-second
Year, Supp/ement for October, November and December 1977
document S/12466.
'
71 A/32/109/Rev.l-S/12344/Rev.L annex V, paras. 21 and
39. For the printed text, see Official Records of the Security
Counci/, Thirty-second Year, Supplement for Ju/y, August and
September 1977.

(b) The unconditional and immediate release of
all political prisoners, detainees and restrictees, the
removal of all restrictions on political activity and the
establishment of full democratic freedom and equality
of political rights, as well as the restoration to the population of fundamental human rights;
(e) The cessation of the influx of foreign immigrnnts into the Territory and the immediate withdrawal
of all mercenaries therefrom;
(d)
The immediate cessation of all acts of aggression and threats against neighbouring African States;
10. Calls upan all States to take all necessary and
cffective measures to prevent advertisement for, and
rccruitment of, merccnaries for Southem Rhodesia;
11. Requests all States to give immediate and substantial material assistance to enable the Governmcnts of
Mozambique and Botswana to strengthen their defence
capability in order to safeguard effectively their sovercignty and territorial integrity;
12. Requests all States, directly and through their
action in the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system of which they
are members, as well as the non-govcrnmental organizations concerned and the various programmes within the
Unitcd Nations system, to extend, in consultation and
co-operation with the Organization of African Unity,
to the people of Zimbabwe and their national liberation movement al! the moral, material, political and
humanitarian assistance necessary in their struggle for
the restoration of their inalienable rights;
13. Invites all Governments, the specialized agencies and other organizations within thc United Nations
system, the United Nations bodies concerned and nongovcrnmental organizations having a special interest in
the ficld of decolonization, as wcll as the SecretaryGcneral, to take steps, as appropriate, to give widespread and continuous publicity through all the media
at their disposal to information on the situation in
Zimbabwe and on the relevant decisions and actions
of the United Nations, with particular referencc to the
application of sanctions against the illegal régime;
14. Requests the Government of the United Kingdom to continue to co-operate with the Special Com1:1ittee on the Situatic:m with regard to the Implementat1on of the Dec_Iarat10n on the Grnnting of Independencc to Colomal Countries and Peoples in the dischargc of the mandatc entrusted to the latter by the
Gener~l Assembly. and to report thereon to the Special
CoIT,1m1ttec and to the Assembly at its thirty-third
sess1on;

. 15.. R~quests the _Special Committee to kecp the
s1tuat10n m the Terr1tory under review as a matter
of priority and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-third session.

104th plenary meeting
I 6 December I 977

B
The General Assembly,
Having adopted resolution A above on the question
of Southern Rhodesia (Zimbabwe),
. Str?ngly depl.oring the increasing collaboration, in
v10lation of Art1cle 2, paragraph 5, and Article 25 of
the Charter of the United Nations and of the relevant
decisions of the United Nations which certain States
'
'

VII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committec

particularly South Africa, maintain wit~ the. illegal
racist minority régime, thereby seriously 1mpedmg the
effective application of sanctions and other measures
taken thus far against the illegal régime,
Deeply disturbed at widespread violations of United
Nations sanctions, including the ~peration of Southem Rhodesian aircraft for intemat10nal passenger and
cargo traffic, as well as the continu~d funcJic;ming of
information and airline offices of the 11legal reg1me outside Southem Rhodesia and the resultant influx of
foreign tourists into the Territory,
Considering that developments ~n the ~rea call. in
particular for po_sitive,. ooncert~d mt~mat1~:mal action
with a view to 1mposmg max1mum 1solat1on on the
illegal régime,
Deeply concerned that the me~sures approvcd by
the Security Council have so far fa1led to bnng an end
to the illegal régime and convinced that sanctions cannot put an end to that régim_e unless th~y are comprehensive, mandatory and stnctly superv1s~d an<;I unless measures are taken against Stat,es wh1ch v1olate
them,
Reaffirming the relevant provisions of the Maputo
Declarntion in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and
Namibia and the Programme of Action for the Liberation of Zimbabwe and Namibia, 72 adopted by the International Conference in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia, held at Maputo from 16 to 21
May 1977, in particular those provisions relating to
sanctions against the illegal régimc,
Conscious of the urgent and special economic needs
of Mozambique and Zambia arising from thc:ir full
implementation of the relevant decisions of thc Security Council,
1. Strongly condemns those Governments, particularly the Govemment of South Africa, which, in
violation of the relevant resolutions of the United Nations and in open contravention of their specific obligations under Article 2, paragraph 5, and Articlc 25 of
the Charter of the United Nations, continuc to collaborate with the illegal racist minority régimc, and
calls upon those Govemments to cease forthwith all
such collaboration;
2. Condemns all violations of the mandatory sanctions imposed by the Security Council, as well as the
continued failure of certain Member States to enforce
the sanctions strictly, as being contrary to the obligations assumed by them undcr Article 2, paragraph 5,
and Article 25 of the Charter;
3. Condemns South Africa for its continued support of the illegal racist minority régime in Southem
Rhodesia in contravention of the resolutions of the
Security Council on sanctions against that régimc;
4. Calls upan all Governments which thus far havc
not done so:
(a) To take stringient enforcement measures to
ensure strict compliance by all individuals, associations
72 A/32/ 109/Rev.1-S/12344/Rev. l, annex V. For the printed
text, see Official Records of the Security Council, Thirtysecond Year, Supplement for Ju/y, August and Septemba 1977.

177

and bodies corporate under their jurisdiction with thc
sanctions imposed by the Security Council and to
prohibir any form of collaboration by them with the
illegal régime;
( b)
To take effective steps to prevent or discourage the emigration to Southern Rhodesia (Zimbabwe)
of any individuals or groups of individuals under their
jurisdiction;
(e)
To discontinue any action which might confer
a semblance of legitimacy on the illegal régimc, inter
alia, by forbidding the operation and activities of "Air
Rhodesia", the "Rhodesi:a National Tourist Board" and
thc "Rhodesian Information Officc", or any otheir activities which contravenc the aims and purposes of the
sanctions;
( d) To invalidate passports and other documents
for travcl to the Territory;
(e) To take all effective measures against international companies and agencies which supply petroleum and petroleum products to the illegal régime of
Southern Rhodesia;
5. Requests ali Sta tes, directly and through their
action in the specializ.ed agencies and other organizations within the Unired Nations system of which they
are members, and thc various programmes within thc
United Nations system to extend to the Govcmments
of Mozambique and Zambia all forms of financia!,
technical and material assistance in order to enablc
those Governments to overcome economic difficulties
in conncxion with thcir application of economic sanctions imposed against the illegal régime and the scvere
economic loss and destruction of property brought
about by the acts of aggression committed by thc régime, and requcsts the Security Council to undertake
a periodic rcvicw of thc question of cconomic assistance
to the two Governments;
6. Deems it imperative that the scope of sanctions
against the illcgal régimc must be widencd to include
ali thc measures envisaged under Articlc 41 of the
Chartcr and reiterates its rcquest that thc Security
Council consider taking thc ncccssary mcasurcs in that
regard as a matter of urgency;
7. Requests the Security Council to imposc a mandatory embargo on the supply of petroleum and petroleum products to South Africa in view of the fact that
petrolcum and petrolcum products are transported from
South Africa into Southcrn Rhodesia;
8. Requests the Spccial Committee on the Situation
with rcgard to the lmplementation of the Declaration
on the Ciranting of Independence to Colonial Countrics and Peoples to follow the implementation of the
prcscnt resolution and invites the Security Council Committee establishcd in pursuance of resolution 253
( 1968) concerning thc qucstion of Southern Rhodesia
to continue to co-operatc in the rclated work of the
Special Committee.
104th plenary meeting
16 December 1977
