38/92.

United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims
of Torture

The General As.1·e111/,/y,
Recalling article 5 of the llniversal Declaration ol'
Human Rights, 91 which states that no one shall be subjected to torture or to cruel. inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
Recalling a/so the Declaration on the Protection of Ali
Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Trcatment or Punishment, 92
Recallingfurther its resolution 36/151 of 16 Deccmber
1981, in which it noted with deep concern that acts of torture took place in various countries, recognized the need to
provide assistance to the victims of torture in a purel)
humanitarian spirit and established thc Unitcd Nations
Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture,
Convinced that the struggle to climinatc torturl' includcs
the provision ofassistance in a humanitarian sp1rit to tlw
victims and their family rnembers.
Taking note of the report of the SecretaJ')-General on
the United Nations Voluntarv Fund for Victirns of Torture, 93
l. Expresses it.1 gralitude and apprnwlton to thosc
Governments and individuals that have already contributed to the United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of
Torture;
2. Calls upon ali Governments. organizations and
individuals in a position to do so to respond favourably to
requests for contributions to thc Fund;
3. Expresses its appreciatio11 to the Board of Trustccs
of the Fund for the work it has carried out:
4. Expresses its appreciation to the Secrctary-Gcneral
for the support given to the Board of Trustees;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to make use of ali
existing possibilities to assist the Board of Trustees of the
Fund, inter afia through the preparation. production and
dissemination of information materials. in its elforts to
make the Fund and its humanitarian work bctter known
and in its appeal for contributions.
100th p/enary meeting
/ 6 Dcce111/wr I 983

38/93.

Measures to improve co-ordination and cooperation in the international struggle
against illegal production of drugs, illicit drug
traffic and drug abuse

The General Assemh/y,
Reca/ling its resolutions 361168 of 16 December 1981,
37/168 of 17 Deccmher 1982 and 371198 of 18 Decemher
1982.
Recalling a/so that in paragraph 6 of its resolution 341
177 of 17 December 1979 it urged greater action by thc
specialized agencies and programmes of thc United
Nations system, especially the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the Food and
Agriculture Organization ofthe Unitcd Nations, the International Labour Organisation, the World Health Organization and the United Nations Dcvelopment Programme,
in developing and implementing, within their mandatcs.
programmes aimed at thc rcduction of illicit production of'
and demand for drugs, and ~pcrifirnlly requcsted thosc
91 Resolution 21 7 A (111 J
92 Resolution .145~ (XX\• ,mnn

93 ,\; 38,221.

agencies to make that activity a regular item on the agendas of their governing hodies.
( ·onsidcring that thc scourge of drug abuse continut·s to
sprcad and has reachcd cpidemic proportions, both in
developed and in some developing countries,
Co11s1dcring .fúrthcr that transit States. which havc no
control o ver the productíon of or demand for illicit drugs,
a1c incrcasingly afkcted by the illicit drug trame.
Rccogni::111g that illegal production of drugs, illicit drug
traflic and drug abuse are political. security, cconomic,
social and medical problems. in hoth producing and consuming countrics, which must be met with a comprehensive. elkctive and co-ordinated strategy on the national.
regional and international lcvcls.
.. lcknow/edging that rnnstraints of an economic and
technical nature are obstacles to many developing countrics in their light against illcgal drug cultivation and produl'lion, as well as illicit drug trame and drug abuse.
. 1nwc that the illegal production of drugs must be
stopped and that integrated rural development programmes, including crop substitution, combined with control
activitics are dfcctivc mcasurcs to curh thc productíon of
íllicit drugs.
Notmg w1th apprecia//011 the generous contributions
madc so far and recently pledged to the United Nations
Fund for Drug Abuse Control, which should continue,
considering the great nccds in this lield,
.hvarc ofthe need to improve regional, interregional and
international co-operation and co-ordination in ordcr to
intensify thc struggle against illegal production of drugs,
illicit drug traffic and drug abuse,
l\11nd/ii/ ofthe dccision takcn by the Committce for Programme and Co-ordination at its twenty-third session to
undertake at its twcnty-fifth session, in 1985, an intergovernmcntal review of drug control on the basis of an indepth evaluation study to he preparcd by thc SccrctaryCieneral. 94
1. ( ·a/Is upon Mcmber States that have not yet done so
to ratify thc international drug control treaties and, until
such time, to endeavour to abide by the provisions
thereol:
2. Invites Member States to make generous contributions to the United Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control
to enable the Fund further to improve and strengthen its
activities to reduce thc illicit supply oí, traffic in and
demand for narcotic drugs:
3. Ca/Is upon donor countries to allocate an appropriatc portian of thcir devclopment aid rcsources to programmcs aimed at the reduction of illegal production of drugs
and to the devclopmcnt of programmes to control drug
abuse and drug traffic in thc developing countries;
4. ( 'a/Is upo11 producing countries to identify suitable
projects for possiblc presentation to the Fund, to the specialized agencies and other organizations and programmcs
of the lJnited Nations system and to international and
regional financing institutions;
5. l'rges thc specialized agencies and other organizations and programmes of the United Nations system and
other international organizations concerned with assistance to developing countries to initiate and continue, as a
mattcr of priority, within thcir respective fields and within
existing budgetary resources or through voluntarily contrihuted funds, activitics to hclp developing countries to
take thc necessary steps to stop the illcgal cultivation and
l),.¡ St'e

Otf,cwl Rt'(11rdY nf r 111' (lcncra/ h\f'mb/r. f'l11rtr"oghth ,\'n\·1011.
38 (A -18 181. part one. para. 195.

S111111/1·1111·111 \',,
