S/PV.9396

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9396th meeting

Wednesday, 16 August 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. França Danese
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault
Mr. Biang
Mr. Issahaku
Mr. Ishikane
Ms. Gatt
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Hauri
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Dame Barbara Woodward

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-24203 (E)
*2324203*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9396

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Saudi Arabia and Yemen to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Hans
Grundberg, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen, Ms. Edem Wosornu, Director of Operations and
Advocacy, Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, and Ms. Amat Al-Salam Abdullah Abdo
Al-Hajj, Founder and President of the Abductees’
Mothers Association.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Grundberg.
Mr. Grundberg: I would like to thank you,
Madam President, for the opportunity to update the
Security Council on recent developments in Yemen
and my efforts to mediate an agreement between the
Government of Yemen and Ansar Allah that will set
Yemen on a path to sustainably ending the conflict.
Allow me to start by reiterating my condemnation
of the murder in Taiz governorate on 21 July of a World
Food Programme staff member, Moayad Hameidi. I
offer my heartfelt condolences to his family, friends
and colleagues. Let me make it clear that humanitarian
workers should never be a target. Any loss of life in
humanitarian service is an unacceptable tragedy for the
United Nations and for the people who benefit from the
humanitarian community’s life-saving assistance.
While the United Nations family mourns the loss
of Moayad, I am greatly relieved about the recent
release of our five United Nations colleagues who were
kidnapped in Abyan governorate in February 2022. I
would like to express my gratitude to everyone who
contributed to securing their release, as well as my
solidarity with the other United Nations staff members
who are still being held without due process in Yemen.
In that regard, let us not forget the plight of conflict2/20

16/08/2023

related detainees, who continue to face the unbearable
sorrow of separation from their loved ones. I encourage
both parties to continue to work closely with my Office
to achieve the unconditional release of detainees on the
basis of the all-for-all principle. In that regard, I look
forward to today’s briefing by Ms. Amat Al-Hajj of the
Abductees’ Mothers Association.
Turning to my mediation efforts, I have continued
my engagement with the Yemeni parties and the Member
States in the region. Last week I visited Riyadh, where
I held meetings with the President of the Presidential
Leadership Council, Rashad Al-Alimi, and other senior
Yemeni officials, as well as senior Saudi officials.
This week I travelled to Muscat, where I held meetings
with Ansar Allah representatives and senior Omani
officials. Additionally, my Office has held meetings
over the past two weeks with Government officials
in Aden and Ansar Allah representatives in Sana’a.
The sides continue to express a general willingness
to seek solutions, but that still needs to be translated
into concrete steps, specifically a clear agreement on
the way forward that includes restarting an inclusive
Yemeni political process.
Despite the expiration of the truce last October,
the hostilities on the front lines have not returned to
pre-truce levels and the civilian casualty numbers have
significantly declined. However, intermittent fighting
and exchanges of fire have continued in some areas,
particularly Taiz, Marib, Al-Dhale’e, Al-Hudaydah,
Shabwah and Saada. Against that backdrop, there have
been public threats to return to war. That rhetoric is
not conducive to maintaining a fruitful mediation
environment. I call on the parties to refrain from
escalatory rhetoric and to continue to use and build
on the dialogue channels established under the truce
through the Military Coordination Committee to
de-escalate incidents.
Allow me to now turn to the increasingly dire
economic situation. The parties continue to resort
to antagonistic economic measures to weaken the
other side, but those tactics primarily hurt civilians
while intensifying the atmosphere of mistrust.
The Government is still being prevented from
exporting petroleum products — its major source
of revenue — and intra-Yemeni trade in goods and
services remains curtailed due to restrictions and the
imposition of exorbitant fees and taxes. The provision
of basic services is deteriorating further, power stations
are shutting down due to a lack of fuel and electricity
23-24203

16/08/2023

The situation in the Middle East

cuts in Aden are reaching 18 hours per day amid the
stifling summer weather. As always, Yemeni citizens,
including women and girls, continue to bear the brunt
of those measures and their consequences. Amid those
terrible conditions, the support of $1.2 billion pledged
earlier this month by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is a
welcome step. But there will be no lasting improvement
in the situation until the parties come together to
discuss and agree on sustainable solutions to Yemen’s
economic and fiscal challenges.
The expansion of flights to and from Sana’a airport
also remains a pressing concern in view of the need
to relieve some of the pressure on Yemeni civilians
seeking to travel for medical care, educational and
business opportunities or to reunite with loved ones.
That also means protecting the operational continuity
of Yemenia Airways. Moreover, last month Yemenis in
Taiz marked eight years of conflict-related road closures
in and around their governorate. That grim milestone
is another reminder of the dire need for opening roads
in Taiz and other governorates in order to facilitate
the freedom of movement of Yemenis who have been
facing restrictions on their access to basic needs and
engagement in economic opportunities. Political and
economic instability are fertile grounds for violent
extremist groups. I am concerned about the reports
that the activities of violent extremists have recently
increased in Abyan and Shabwah governorates, in yet
another reminder of the consequences of the long-term
absence of a political settlement of the conflict. The
fragility of the situation and its impact on Yemeni
women and men highlight the urgent need to reach a
consensus on the way forward. My Office is working to
convene the parties to address some of their immediate
priorities in order to build confidence and move towards
an inclusive and sustainable political settlement.
The levels of trust are low and partial solutions risk
being perceived as reversible and providing only
temporary relief. For that reason, I continue to pursue
a more comprehensive approach that addresses both
the immediate and longer-term political, economic,
military and security issues.
On the economic front, my Office continues to
explore options with the parties on how best to respond
to the needs of all Yemenis, including with regard to
regular public-sector salary payments nationwide,
the improved provision of services, affordable basic
commodities, a functional banking system and the
facilitation of commercial activity. The issue of salary

S/PV.9396

payments, including the question of revenue sources,
remains a central concern for which the parties need to
find a mutually agreeable solution. Economic resources
must not be perceived as a zero-sum game. Rather than
competing, the parties should cooperate to broaden
and expand economic opportunities for the welfare of
all Yemenis.
In addition, building on the achievements of the
truce, my Office continues to engage all sides on the
technical elements required for a sustainable nationwide
ceasefire. Over the past few weeks, we have held
meetings in Sana’a and Aden with military officials
and local security actors. They included meetings
with Ansar Allah’s representatives to the Military
Coordination Committee, following earlier work with
the Government representatives. I commend all sides
for continuing internal preparations for a ceasefire,
and I encourage them to make progress towards a more
formalized arrangement.
A resumption of an inclusive, Yemeni-owned
political process under the auspices of the United
Nations remains at the heart of my mediation efforts.
The political process should provide a platform for
a plurality of Yemenis from across the country to
collectively discuss and determine their own future. It
should also pave the way for reconciliation and efforts
to address grievances. The recent intensification of the
voices of civil society, women and young people on the
challenging issues of reconciliation, grievances and
injustices once again underlines the importance of the
inclusion of a range of Yemenis in the political process.
On the occasion of International Youth Day, which
is observed on 12 August, I would like to celebrate
Yemeni youth for their critical contributions to
peace. Young people make up a majority of Yemen’s
population. After years of war, many Yemeni women
and men have lost their entire adolescence to the
conflict. In consultations organized by my Office,
Yemeni youth often highlight challenges related to their
limited access to employment and education, as well as
political inclusion and particular restrictions on young
women’s participation in public life. Yet despite the
challenges, young Yemeni women and men continue to
lay the foundations for peace with their determination,
resourcefulness and strong belief in a better tomorrow
for their country. My Office will continue its efforts to
create space for the perspectives and voices of young
people, along with other segments of Yemeni society.

23-242033/20

S/PV.9396

The situation in the Middle East

The continued unity and steadfast support of the
Council and the international community more broadly
have been a pivotal asset in my mediation efforts.
Similarly, the recent progress on the FSO SAFER
has shown how concerted international support and
multilateral cooperation can bring tangible results. The
removal of the oil from the FSO SAFER to a new vessel
has prevented an environmental and humanitarian
catastrophe. I would like to congratulate the United
Nations Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator,
Mr. David Gressly, and the United Nations Development
Programme and its partners on reaching that great
milestone. I also want to commend the role of the
Government of Yemen and Ansar Allah in facilitating
the operation. Looking ahead, the Council’s support
will continue to be vital to encouraging the parties
to maintain an environment conducive to discussions
on the way forward and to move towards a just and
sustainable peace that meets the aspirations of Yemeni
women, men and young people.
The President: I thank Mr. Grundberg for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Wosornu.
Ms. Wosornu: I welcome the update from
Mr. Grundberg on recent political developments in
Yemen. Before I proceed, I also want to express my
deep sadness at the terrible loss of one of our World
Food Programme colleagues, Mr. Moayad Hameidi,
who was brutally killed in an attack in Turbah, in Taiz
governorate, on 21 July. Another colleague was injured
in the attack. Mr. Hameidi’s death is an immense
tragedy for his family, friends and colleagues and the
entire humanitarian community. We send our sincerest
condolences to all who knew him and call for a
comprehensive investigation into the attack and for those
behind it to be held accountable. Mere days from World
Humanitarian Day, we pay tribute to Mr. Hameidi’s
dedication to his work and to the communities he
served in Yemen and many other countries — a
dedication espoused by so many humanitarians around
the world. The attack and others like it show just how
real the threats to the safety and security of aid workers
are, from violence to kidnapping, harassment and misand disinformation. Humanitarians stand with people
in need in their darkest hour. They are not and should
never be a target.
I want to take the opportunity today to discuss two
of the most critical components of our humanitarian
4/20

16/08/2023

response — access and funding. I will turn to
those momentarily.
First, one issue on which we have seen extraordinary
progress recently, as the Special Envoy said, is the
United Nations efforts to address the catastrophic
environmental threat posed by the FSO SAFER. On
1 August, the SMIT Salvage team completed the shipto-ship transfer of more than one million barrels of
oil from the FSO SAFER to the replacement vessel,
the Yemen. That is the culmination of years of tireless
advocacy, collaboration and innovative problemsolving. It is a significant milestone, and again, I also
commend the Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator,
David Gressly, and the United Nations Development
Programme for stepping up and taking on this colossal
task. However, the work does not stop there. We must
now complete the second phase of the operation, in
accordance with our agreements with the relevant
authorities. To do so, the United Nations urgently needs
to close the $22 million funding gap. I encourage the
international community to help us to complete that
important work.
In another piece of good news, we are delighted to
have finally seen the release last week of five United
Nations staff members who were kidnapped in Abyan
governorate 18 months ago. Our colleagues are receiving
support. We are very grateful to all Member States and
other interlocutors who were engaged in those efforts,
including some who are in this Chamber, such as the
Government of Yemen and the United Arab Emirates.
However, other United Nations staff remain in detention
in Sana’a, and we demand their immediate release.
Over the course of this year, the humanitarian
community has pushed to increase its presence in
previously underserved areas across the country. Just
this month, the United Nations undertook an assessment
mission to Raymah governorate with a view to increasing
our operational capacity in that area. However, I am
sorry to report that the broader access picture remains
bleak. Misinformation and disinformation against
humanitarians are on the rise across Yemen, making our
work more dangerous and more difficult than it already
is. And despite the collective and concerted efforts of
the humanitarian community, we have seen limited
progress in efforts to expand our operating space this
year. Aid workers continue to experience attempted
interference in all stages of humanitarian activities
and extensive movement restrictions, which have a
particular impact on our women national staff and all
23-24203

16/08/2023

S/PV.9396

The situation in the Middle East

those they serve. We continue to engage with both the
de facto authorities and the Government of Yemen to
chart a path forward to resolve those issues. I renew our
call to the parties to fulfil their obligations to facilitate
the rapid and unimpeded passage of humanitarian relief
efforts for all people in need.
In 2023, humanitarians aim to provide support to
more than 17 million people in need across the country.
However, that important work is being severely
hampered by critical funding shortages. Nearly
eight months into the year, Yemen’s humanitarian
response plan has received $1.34 billion out of the
$4.34 billion — it has received only 31 per cent of what
is needed. While we are grateful for the generosity
of our donors, major shortfalls across all sectors in
Yemen mean programmes and services are having to
be cut or scaled back. The World Food Programme
recently announced the suspension of its malnutrition
prevention activities across Yemen, starting from
August, with more cuts expected in the coming months
if funds are not urgently received. In July, we received
reports from humanitarian partners that only one in five
children targeted for severe acute malnutrition support
in Al-Jawf governorate were getting the assistance they
needed. The cost of inaction for those children, and for
many other people across the country, is steep. I urge
the international community not to lose sight of the
progress made in improving humanitarian outcomes
across Yemen and how easily that could be reversed.
While access and funding are necessary areas of
focus in the short term, we must also work to address the
long-term drivers of humanitarian needs. Of particular
concern is the country’s failing economy. Public
services remain fractured and unreliable. Protests in
Aden and surrounding governorates over recent weeks
have intensified in the wake of extensive power outages
and a currency that continues to decline. Economic
hostilities continue to have devastating consequences
for millions of people across Yemen already struggling
to make ends meet. In the absence of a resumption of
oil exports, blocked owing to threats by the de facto
authorities, government revenue will continue to
dwindle, and service provision will falter. Ongoing
trade obstructions will continue to drive the cost of
basic goods even farther out of reach. We condemn
those actions by the de facto authorities, which serve
to compound the misery of so many people in Yemen.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia recently announced
$1.2 billion in budget support for the Government of

Yemen, which will help to keep the power supply on
and salaries paid. The disbursement of that generous
support cannot come too soon. That alone, however,
will not be enough to bring Yemen’s economy back
from the brink of collapse.
It is vital to make progress on a political resolution
of this conflict, as the Special Envoy has said, but let
me be clear also: a political resolution alone will not
solve the humanitarian crisis. Only when such progress
is pursued together with improved economic conditions
and the re-establishment of essential services will
we see humanitarian needs begin to decrease. In the
light of donor projections that there will be much less
humanitarian funding available next year, collective
action is needed to address those drivers now — or we
may see needs increase at a time when we will not be
able to respond to them. The humanitarian community
stands ready to play its part in that work. In the
meantime, we will continue to do everything we can to
support those most in need in Yemen — no matter who,
no matter where, no matter what.
The President:
her briefing.

I

thank

Ms.

Wosornu

for

I give the floor to Ms. Al-Hajj.
Ms. Al-Hajj (spoke in Arabic): I am grateful for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on behalf of
the Abductees’ Mothers Association. The Association
is a Yemeni human rights organization made up of the
mothers, wives and relatives of abductees and forcibly
disappeared persons, and of women activists advocating
for freedoms and human rights. The Association
deals with issues affecting abductees, the arbitrarily
detained and the forcibly disappeared. I thank you,
Madam President, for your interest in listening to the
voice of the victims, who are calling for peace, justice
and fairness.
I address the Council today from Taiz, a city
that has been under Houthi siege for more than 3,000
days. The war has been going on for far too long, with
consequences that have undermined our peace, security
and a decent life.
Tragic stories caused by the war in Yemen abound.
However, pain and tragedy weigh more heavily upon us
when we consider one of the worst consequences of the
war, namely, the abductees, forcibly displaced persons
and others who are suffering deprivation and pain with
their families, in particular the mothers who have lost

23-242035/20

S/PV.9396

The situation in the Middle East

their abducted and forcibly disappeared children. We
are speaking of civilians who have not participated in
the conflict in any way, who have been taken from their
homes, newly established checkpoints, and their places
of employment, their universities or elsewhere.
Since 2016, we have documented the abductions
of 9,568 civilians by different parties to the conflict
in Yemen. The Houthis are responsible for most of
them — for 9,130 cases of abduction, including 130
women. Thousands have been released, but they are
saddled with trauma and permanent physical injury as a
result of the systematic torture they faced in the Houthi
prisons. Worse, some 140 people were killed as a result
of torture or medical negligence inside the prisons.
Some 420 civilians remain detained, and 73 are still
forcibly disappeared, 13 of whom are followers of the
Baha’i faith, including politician Mohammed Qahtan.
Some 50 abductees and three women are being tried
by the Houthis in politicized courts. They have been
subjected to systematic torture. It is difficult to give
Council members a detailed account in the brief time
allotted to me.
Some 97 civilians remain in the prisons of the
Southern Transitional Council, including 61 forcibly
disappeared persons, and 26 detainees are being held
by the legitimate Government, including three forcibly
disappeared persons. That is what our association has
documented. Those numbers are very high for all parties,
and abductions persist despite the declared truce.
For decades, the Security Council has instilled in
us a humanitarian culture which made us believe that
freedom is non-negotiable, a right that cannot be used
as a bargaining chip. We commend the role played by
the Special Envoy, Mr. Hans Grunberg, in the exchange
of prisoners among the parties to the conflict, which
has led to the release of hundreds, and only 200 civilian
abductees remain outstanding. Many of those have
suffered psychological trauma and poor health, as they
were subjected to different kinds of abuse, including
living in conditions where they became sick due to
exposure to the infectious diseases that are widespread
in prisons. They have had to face forced displacement
and bad economic conditions.
We see this exchange of prisoners and detainees
as a good indication that the issue could be resolved
once and for all on the condition that it is an all-for-all
exchange. We call upon the international community
and international rights organizations to assume
6/20

16/08/2023

their responsibilities and put an end to the suffering
of thousands of the abductees, forcibly disappeared
persons and their families. Their families are waiting
for them, despite their present conditions, which are
a violation of their most basic human rights, running
counter to all international laws and conventions, in
particular the Fourth Geneva Convention.
When we speak about the abductees, we speak
of thousands of families and children who have been
forcibly displaced and forced to live in places with
substandard living conditions. They suffer acute
shortages of food, medicine and clean water. They live
in scorching heat with total power cuts.
Women are the most adversely affected by the
conflict, which has undermined their lives and
livelihoods. They are enduring social-based violence
in different areas under the control of the combating
parties. They suffer the presence of landmines and
snipers, in addition to policies imposed by the Houthis
that limit their abilities to travel, move, work and
study. Travel is forbidden for women without being
accompanied by a mahram, a male relative. Women
cannot access basic services, including sexual and
reproductive health services. They are also subject
to threats, abduction, forced disappearance and even
targeted killing. This is especially the case for women
peacebuilders and defenders of human rights.
We believe that the Security Council has great
power. We trust that it also intends to resolve this
specific issue by bringing about an end to the conflict
and protecting civilians in Yemen in general. We would
therefore present Council members with a number of
recommendations, as follows, that we hope will be
taken into consideration.
We call for comprehensive peace, the return of
State authority, disarmament and non-interference by
external parties in our internal affairs. We call for the
release of all detainees and abductees and for the fate of
those forcibly missing and disappeared to be disclosed.
We call for the immediate implementation of the
Stockholm Agreement, which calls for the unconditional
release of abductees and detainees. Utmost priority
should be given during negotiations to the issue of male
and female abductees and the forcibly disappeared. We
call for the families of abductees and forcibly missing
persons to be represented in negotiations. We call for
this issue to be resolved in a fair manner because it is
the most important step towards achieving peace and
23-24203

16/08/2023

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.9396

stability in Yemen. We call for all those responsible
for the abduction and forced disappearance and torture
to be brought to domestic and international justice.
Indeed, they must not be allowed to enjoy impunity. We
warn that agreeing to a fragile peace will lead only to
the return of violence and fighting.

Houthi attacks and continued threats to prevent oil
exports from Government-controlled areas are having
a severe impact on Yemen’s economy. Those attacks on
the economy are attacks on the livelihoods and services
for some of the most vulnerable people in Yemen. We
urge the Houthis to stop those attacks.

There is simply not enough time to give the Security
Council a detailed account of the situation. However,
it is important for all Council members to know that
the Yemeni people and those personally affected have
high hopes for the Council in its efforts to make a
breakthrough on all tracks.

The United Kingdom welcomes the recent deposit
of $250 million from Saudi Arabia, as the first tranche
of a generous $1.2 billion pledge of economic support.
As Director Wosornu said, the Government of Yemen
will remain dependent on external financing to provide
basic services and pay public salaries until the Houthis
stop their economic warfare and the Government can
generate its own revenues.

We remain firm in our resolve to achieve our goal of
ensuring human rights, including the right to freedom,
justice and equality. We believe in the Council, its role
and its support so that our efforts come to a positive
end. We will continue making our efforts.
The President: I thank Ms. Al-Hajj for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I would like to start by thanking Special Envoy
Grundberg, Director Wosornu and Ms. Amat Al-Salam
Al-Hajj for their briefings.
I would also like to join others in condemning
the murder of World Food Programme staff member
Moayad Hameidi and echo briefers condolences to his
family and his friends.
I also want to join others in congratulating the
United Nations, the Dutch salvage company SMIT
and all who were involved in the successful transfer
of oil from the FSO SAFER tanker to the Yemen. The
successful completion of that operation demonstrates
what can be achieved when all actors work together in
the interests of Yemen and its people.
Taking encouragement from the achievement, the
United Kingdom urges all parties to work together to
build on the truce-like conditions in Yemen and pave
the way for a United Nations-led Yemeni-Yemeni
peace process. In particular, it is essential that the
Presidential Leadership Council remain united towards
one common goal: a lasting and inclusive peace
for the Yemeni people. An inclusive peace process
under United Nations auspices is the only pathway to
permanently ending this war.

In spite of the relative peace in Yemen over the past
18 months, the humanitarian situation remains dire.
We continue to see impediments to the free movement
of female aid workers to deliver assistance to women
in need, to independent monitoring and assessment
missions and to the fair selection of humanitarian
service providers. The humanitarian response is
already severely underfunded. Those impediments
pose additional and entirely avoidable burdens on the
humanitarian effort and, ultimately, on the Yemeni
people. We urge the Houthis to lift the restrictions and
allow unfettered access of humanitarian aid.
Finally, the United Kingdom reiterates its call for
the unconditional release of all Baha’is detained by
the Houthis.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We are grateful to the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Hans Grundberg, and the
Director of Operations and Advocacy of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Eden
Wosornu, for their briefings on the political and
humanitarian situation in Yemen. We also listened to
Ms. Al-Hajj.
We would also like to express our sincere
condolences to the family of Moayad Hameidi, the
World Food Programme staff member who died on
21 July. That is a tragic incident and demonstrates
once again the pressing need to genuinely prioritize the
security of humanitarian workers.
We note some positive developments in the
situation in the Republic of Yemen, which have been
possible thanks to the resolve of key regional players
to establish more constructive relations. Despite the

23-242037/20

S/PV.9396

The situation in the Middle East

lack of a formalized truce since October 2022, the
parties to the conflict are continuing to refrain from
large-scale hostilities that could provoke a dangerous
escalation of tension. That was achieved largely owing
to the intensified mediation efforts since the end of
last year of regional Powers, primarily the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia and the Sultanate of Oman. Furthermore,
agreement was reached on a number of important
humanitarian issues, including the exchange of prisoners
and detainees. In June, Yemenis living in Ansar Allahcontrolled territory were able to participate in the Hajj
for the first time since the conflict began, thanks to the
establishment of flights between Sana’a and Jeddah.
However, the Yemeni settlement is currently
paused. It appears to be important to await the outcome
of the efforts of international and regional players. We
are convinced that escalation is not in the interest of
either of the parties. On the contrary, their priority is to
continue dialogue and find compromises.
For our part, we intend to continue to closely
coordinate approaches with all leading Yemeni
protagonists, including Ansar Allah and key regional
partners. We strongly urge the Yemeni forces to
rule out the option of armed confrontation and to be
patient, while maintaining close contact with Special
Envoy Grundberg as the key international mediator.
We reaffirm our full support for his mediation efforts.
We hope that his efforts in support of normalization in
Yemen will lead to a long-term truce and an eventual
comprehensive political process.
The humanitarian situation in the country remains
dire. Two thirds of its population — 21 million
people — require humanitarian assistance, and
3.2 million people are facing food shortages. The
Yemeni people must have unimpeded access to food,
medicine and other essential goods throughout the
country, regardless of where they live. Restrictions on
the delivery of humanitarian assistance and obstacles
to the work of humanitarian workers are unacceptable.
I would also like to recall that we have always
opposed an expansive interpretation of the Security
Council sanctions resolutions on Yemen. Restrictive
measures should be used to promote a peaceful
settlement and not to fuel political unrest in the region.
We note with concern that some foreign naval presences
are unscrupulously manipulating Security Council
decisions when conducting inspections of vessels in
nearby waters.
8/20

16/08/2023

We welcome the completion of the transfer of oil
from the FSO SAFER tanker, which is decaying off the
coast of Yemen. We note in particular the contribution
of representatives of United Nations structures to
resolving that issue, including in cooperation with
the official Yemeni authorities and the Ansar Allah
movement. The resolution of that long-standing
problem will make it possible to avert a large-scale
environmental catastrophe in the Red Sea.
In conclusion, I would like to recall once again
resolution 598 (1987) and other initiatives aimed
at subregional stabilization, including the updated
Russian concept of collective security.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Envoy Grundberg and Ms. Wosornu for
their briefings. I also listened carefully to Ms. Al-Hajj’s
statement. We welcome the participation of the
representative of Yemen at today’s meeting.
I would like to make three observations.
First, there is a need to remain committed to
dialogue and negotiation. China commends all
relevant parties to the Yemeni issue on maintaining
communication on the resumption of the truce and
countries in the region, such as Saudi Arabia and Oman,
for their ongoing efforts. We hope all parties adhere to
the overall direction of a political solution, prioritize
the interests and well-being of the Yemeni people and,
with a heightened sense of urgency, show political will
and the necessary flexibility.
China supports Special Envoy Grundberg in
his work and supports the United Nations in its role
as the main channel of mediation. China calls on
Council members to remain united and on countries
with influence vis-à-vis the Yemeni situation to play
a constructive role in order to jointly arrive at tangible
results in the political process in Yemen as soon
as possible.
Secondly, we must monitor closely the security
situation. Taiz, Marib and other locations have
repeatedly seen sporadic armed conflicts. The security
situation in Yemen remains fragile. Against that
backdrop, all parties to the conflict should remain
calm, show restraint, avoid any action that could
prevent mutual trust or increase tensions and avoid all
measures that could hamper diplomatic or mediation
efforts or complicate the political process.
23-24203

16/08/2023

The situation in the Middle East

Thirdly, humanitarian assistance to Yemen must be
increased. Eight years of conflicts have plunged Yemen
into a serious humanitarian crisis. Currently, 17 million
people are food insecure. Health-care, infrastructure
and other humanitarian needs are also dire. The Yemeni
currency recently depreciated sharply, and inflation
has been on the rise, making people’s lives increasingly
difficult. We call on the international community to
increase its humanitarian development aid for Yemen
and welcome the economic assistance provided by
Saudi Arabia and other countries.
The news that the head of the World Food
Programme’s office in Taiz governorate was shot and
killed is harrowing. The security of humanitarian
workers should be effectively guaranteed. The transfer
of crude oil from the FSO SAFER was recently
completed, thereby averting a potential environmental
and humanitarian disaster. China highly commends the
United Nations and other relevant parties on their efforts
and hopes that the funds required for the subsequent
clean-up operation will be secured, as soon as possible.
We call on all parties in Yemen to negotiate an effective
plan for the disposal of the crude oil and the resolution
of all other relevant issues.
Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank Special Envoy Hans Grundberg and the Director
of Operations and Advocacy of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Edem
Wosornu, for their briefings. My thanks also go to
Ms. Amat Al-Salam Abdullah Abdo Al-Hajj for
her statement.
In the light of the recent developments of the
past weeks, I would like to highlight the following
three points.
First, I would like to reiterate Switzerland’s strong
support for the United Nations efforts to bring about
peace and ensure the protection of civilians in Yemen.
We thank the Special Envoy for his sustained and
inclusive work towards a lasting intra-Yemeni political
settlement under the auspices of the United Nations.
We also welcome the commitment of Saudi Arabia and
Oman to achieving peace. We hope that the current
talks will lead to tangible results for the benefit of
the entire population. In that context, the decision to
relocate Yemeni Government officials to Aden in the
near future is likely to strengthen the trust of the people
in the authorities.

S/PV.9396

Secondly, Switzerland strongly condemns the
murder on 21 July of Moayad Hameidi, head of the
World Food Programme’s office in Taiz and expresses its
condolences to his family and colleagues. Humanitarian
personnel and their activities are protected under
international humanitarian law. We therefore call on
all parties to guarantee the safety of humanitarian
workers. We also reiterate our call on the parties to
the conflict to allow for and facilitate the rapid, safe
and unhindered delivery of humanitarian aid. That
includes not only facilitating access for humanitarian
workers to vulnerable members of the population, but
also ensuring that international organizations are free
to choose their local partners independently.
Thirdly, we welcome the completion of the first
phase of the FSO SAFER oil tanker rescue plan on
11 August. The unity shown from the outset by all the
members of the Security Council concerning the matter
has been encouraging and remains crucial. It was
incumbent upon us to prevent an environmental and
humanitarian catastrophe that would have exacerbated
the suffering of the Yemeni people at a time when the
country is already experiencing a major crisis linked
to the armed conflict. That success demonstrates
that important results can be achieved through joint
efforts. In that regard, Switzerland commends the
role played by Yemeni civil society organizations, in
particular women, who were among the first to warn
of the dangers posed by the shipwreck of the FSO
SAFER. Their voice, and that of civil society in general,
are essential if we are to deal effectively with all the
challenges facing Yemen.
Switzerland remains at the disposal of the United
Nations and all parties in support of the implementation
of other important confidence-building measures, such
as the further release of prisoners.
Mr. Biang (Gabon): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the members of the three
African members of the Security Council (A3), namely,
Ghana, Mozambique and my own country, Gabon.
We thank Special Envoy Hans Grundberg and the
Director of Operations and Advocacy of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Edem
Wosornu, for their briefings. Our appreciation also goes
to the civil society briefer, Ms. Amat Al-Salam Abdullah
Abdo Al-Hajj, for providing us with her perspective.
We welcome the participation of the representative of
the Republic of Yemen at this meeting.

23-242039/20

S/PV.9396

The situation in the Middle East

The A3 welcomes the safe and successful transfer of
more than 1 million barrels of oil from the decaying FSO
SAFER to a replacement vessel. Had the international
community failed to act in a timely manner, the toll on
the economy, livelihoods and environment would have
been detrimental to the entire process of stabilizing
Yemen. The operation has averted what would have
been the fifth largest oil spill from a tanker in history.
That was made possible through the efforts of all
stakeholders involved in the process, particularly the
United Nations and all donors. The successful salvage
operation offers us a lesson as to what concerted
international efforts, coupled with the cooperation of
local stakeholders, can achieve. It comes during the
longest period of relative calm since the war erupted
nearly a decade ago and is a vivid illustration of a peace
dividend. It is a lesson that can be applied to the wider
crisis in Yemen. If the conflicting parties in the country
showcase their determination and commitment to stop
fighting, genuinely seek peace and fully cooperate
with the international community for the sake of their
people, a solution to the country’s crisis will be found
sooner rather than later.
While the A3 has no illusion about the complexity
of the Yemeni crisis, it is of the firm belief that a longterm solution to the crisis depends on the willingness
of the parties to make political compromises in the
interest of the people of Yemen. The current period of
relative calm offers them a huge opportunity to advance
the negotiation process. They must therefore seize the
present momentum to engage constructively in the
ongoing dialogue for a breakthrough towards ending
the crisis. A Yemeni-led and Yemeni-owned inclusive
political process under the auspices of the United
Nations remains the surest path to peace. In addition,
the role of regional stakeholders and international
actors in the endeavour is critical. The latter must
actively use their influence to help the ongoing peace
process. Any initiative in that direction will have our
full support. Gabon, Ghana and Mozambique therefore
acknowledge the constructive role being played by the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the Sultanate of Oman in
the Yemeni peace process. We also commend Special
Envoy Grundberg for his efforts towards bringing a
peaceful end to the conflict and pledge our unflinching
support to him as he strives to accomplish his mission.
We are deeply concerned about the underfunding
of the humanitarian response plan in Yemen and its
serious consequences. As the country is facing one of
10/20

16/08/2023

the worst humanitarian crises of our times, the World
Food Programme (WFP) is compelled to reduce food
rations to millions who depend on them on a daily basis.
We make an urgent appeal to the donor community to
shore up support to the country’s humanitarian response
plan, which is currently 70 per cent underfunded, to
enable every Yemeni in need of support to receive it.
The A3 wishes to highlight the funding shortfall of
approximately $2.9 million faced by the United Nations
Verification and Inspection Mechanism for Yemen,
which is said to be operating at partial capacity and will
have to suspend operations at the end of September if
nothing is done about its financial position.
Millions of women and children in Yemen face
severe malnutrition due to a lack of aid. That situation
is very worrisome. In hospitals, people are still fighting
for their lives in the face of widespread hunger and food
shortages. Children, unfortunately, remain the most
vulnerable victims. Furthermore, Gabon, Ghana and
Mozambique remain concerned about the devastation
caused by landmines and other explosive devices
among civilian populations, especially children. Those
remnants of war pose a danger to the daily movement
of people.
In the same vein, we are saddened by the killing of
the World Food Programme staff member in Turbah,
in the Taiz governorate. The A3 strongly condemns
such cruel targeting of humanitarian staff and calls
for enhanced measures to safeguard the safety and
security of all humanitarian personnel. We extend our
condolences to the family of the victim and the WFP for
the tragic loss of human life.
On a positive note, the A3 welcomes the release of
five United Nations defence, safety and security staff,
who had been kidnapped in the southern governorate
of Abyan for more than a year. We rejoice even more
because good news is rare in the context of a war in
which civilians, including United Nations personnel,
are targeted.
The A3 remains convinced that an inclusive
political process, including women, that is owned and
led by Yemenis is at the heart of a lasting resolution
to this crisis. We therefore encourage the international
community to support that process, under the leadership
of Special Envoy Grundberg.
In conclusion, the A3 underscores the need for the
parties to prioritize the interests of the people of Yemen
over and above any other interests. As we have said
23-24203

16/08/2023

The situation in the Middle East

before, attempts to re-arm during this period of relative
calm would not serve the cause of peace. Continuous
fighting is neither beneficial to the parties nor in the
interests of the people of Yemen. The eventual solution
to the crisis is political, so we encourage the parties
to be flexible and negotiate directly in good faith.
They need to make concessions, strive to find common
ground to renew and extend the truce agreement and
ultimately find a lasting and comprehensive solution to
the crisis.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I am grateful for the information provided by the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen,
Mr. Hans Grundberg. My thanks also go to the
Director of Operations and Advocacy of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA),
Ms. Edem Wosornu, and Ms. Amat Al-Salam Abdullah
Abdo Al-Hajj of the Abductees’ Mothers Association. I
acknowledge the presence in the Chamber today of the
representatives of Yemen and Saudi Arabia.
I commend the teams on the ground for their work
in completing the first phase of the transfer of oil from
the FSO SAFER to the Yemen. The swift mobilization
of United Nations funds and the commitment of donors
have been crucial in that stage of this operation, which
will free Yemen and the region from an environmental
threat of major proportions.
Nevertheless, my delegation is concerned that
the promising prospects for a resolution of the
political situation in Yemen could be diluted in the
absence of concrete political agreements leading to
the establishment of a road map for overcoming the
conflict, resolving humanitarian needs and achieving
economic and social stability. The political momentum
achieved in recent months cannot go to waste. We
encourage the parties to return to the path of dialogue
and consultation, as we believe that only by supporting
the consolidation of an intra-Yemeni political process,
under the auspices of the United Nations and other
regional actors, can sustainable peace be achieved in the
short term. It is imperative to create an environment of
peace and trust in order to advance the development and
implementation of interlinked strategies on economic
recovery and the rebuilding of institutions in order to
overcome the multidimensional crisis facing Yemen.
We condemn the assassination in July of a World
Food Programme official, Moayad Hameidi, and

S/PV.9396

emphasize the urgency of maintaining the truce
agreements in order to prevent the loss of civilian lives.
Eight years of conflict have had devastating
humanitarian consequences for the Yemeni people.
Figures from OCHA warn that 21.6 million people
remain in need of humanitarian assistance and show a
growing trend of undernourishment, malnutrition and
food insecurity.
We emphasize the need to guarantee freedom of
movement and the reduction of bureaucratic obstacles
that limit the work of United Nations mission personnel
and female humanitarian assistance personnel. While
we welcome the release of the five United Nations staff
members who were kidnapped in February 2022, we
also reject the requirement that female staff members
must be accompanied by male guardians in order to
carry out their work.
We are also concerned about the vulnerability
of the 4.5 million displaced persons and the lack of
progress on the removal of anti-personnel mines and
explosive remnants of war, one of the main obstacles to
encouraging the voluntary return of displaced persons.
Finally, Ecuador expresses its support to Special
Envoy Grundberg’s team and hopes for a return to
the path towards a Yemeni-led peaceful and inclusive
political transition, in accordance with the provisions
of resolution 2140 (2014), with the meaningful
participation of women, young people and all social and
political segments.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): I thank Special Envoy
Grundberg, Director Wosornu and Ms. Al-Hajj for
their briefings.
We welcome the Special Envoy’s sustained
engagement and mediation efforts with the parties and
the actors in the region. We also commend the efforts
of Oman and Saudi Arabia in that regard. In our view,
the parties should work towards a comprehensive,
nationwide ceasefire and an inclusive and peaceful
political solution under United Nations auspices.
Resuming an inclusive Yemeni-owned political
process remains a priority. The support of the Security
Council for the mediation efforts of the Special Envoy
is crucial for the way forward. We commend the further
steps undertaken by his Office towards enhancing
confidence-building measures and reiterate our support
for an all-for-all principle for the release of conflictrelated detainees.

23-2420311/20

S/PV.9396

The situation in the Middle East

16/08/2023

While we welcome all positive steps, concerns about
the volatile security situation in the country persist.
Insecurity and life risks are also affecting the lives
of humanitarian workers and staff of United Nations
agencies on the ground. Albania condemns the cruel
murder of the World Food Programme staff member in
Taiz last month. Aid workers should never be a target,
and those responsible must be held accountable. We
are concerned by the continued restrictions on the
movement of humanitarian workers. Insecurity and
movement constraints for all those working on the
ground is having an impact on the delivery of aid to the
most vulnerable, including women and children. We
condemn all restrictions on female relief workers and
on the freedom of movement in general.

on the developments in the situation in Yemen, as
well as Ms. Amat Al-Hajj for her intervention. I also
welcome the participation of the representatives of the
Republic of Yemen and the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
in this meeting.

We deplore the mistreatment of religious minorities
in the country and call on the Houthis to immediately
release the Bahaʼi abductees. We further reiterate our
call for the unconditional and immediate release of
the Yemenis employed by the United States and by the
United Nations in Sana’a. We also welcome the release
of the five United Nations staff members and appreciate
the efforts of all those involved to achieve that.

Despite those positive developments, we express
our sincere condolences and warm sympathy to the
family of Mr. Moayad Hameidi, head of the World Food
Programme office, and to the Government and people
of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan. The United Arab
Emirates reiterates its condemnation of his killing in
Taiz governorate.

Ms. Al-Hajj’s statement is a clear testimony to
the need for the full integration of accountability and
transitional justice in the peace process in Yemen. It
is also a vivid call for the meaningful participation
of women in conflict resolution, peacemaking and
decision-making.
We fully support the implementation of the
Stockholm Agreement, call on the parties to fully
implement international humanitarian law for all
civilians, detainees, abductees and forcibly disappeared
persons and call for their release.
While the economic situation in Yemen continues
to be a concern, the reports of Houthis blocking the
flow of oil and essential goods from south to north,
worsening the humanitarian crisis, are still ongoing.
We call on the Houthi to end the economic war and
focus on a peaceful future for Yemen.
In conclusion, we would like to welcome the
offloading of more than a million barrels of crude oil
from the FSO SAFER and commend the excellent work
of everyone involved.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I would like to begin by thanking Mr. Hans
Grundberg and Ms. Wosornu for their valuable briefings
12/20

The Yemen file has experienced positive
developments over the past week. As we have heard,
the five United Nations staff members kidnapped in
Abyan governorate in February 2022 were released.
Additionally, the process of offloading the FSO SAFER
oil tanker was completed, preventing an environmental
and humanitarian catastrophe. In that context, we
appreciate the efforts of the United Nations and the
Coalition to Support Legitimacy in Yemen that have
contributed to the success of that operation.

Despite the fragile calm observed in Yemen, we are
deeply concerned about the Houthis’ continued attacks
along the front lines in several governorates. We renew
our call for an immediate cessation of those provocative
attacks. All parties should refrain from impeding the
efforts of the international and regional mediators
working to reach a comprehensive political solution to
the Yemeni crisis.
Achieving peace requires a comprehensive
ceasefire and taking practical measures in that regard.
Such measures include the release of all prisoners
and detainees on the basis of an all-for-all principle,
the opening of roads and the lifting of the siege on
the city of Taiz to end the suffering of its residents,
which has persisted for more than eight years. My
country therefore regrets the actions and statements
by the Houthis, which have failed to contribute to
the confidence-building necessary for resuming the
political process.
On the other hand, the deterioration of the
humanitarian and economic conditions in Yemen as
a result of the restrictions imposed by the Houthis on
humanitarian organizations, which have also affected
private sector companies, demonstrate that the Houthis
continue to ignore their responsibilities to the Yemeni
people, including the provision of necessary services
23-24203

16/08/2023

The situation in the Middle East

and the disbursement of salaries. Therefore, the Houthis
must first think of the interests of the Yemeni people,
devoid of any other agendas, and refrain from taking
arbitrary measures that could exacerbate the suffering
of the population throughout the country.
In the light of the challenges affecting services
in Yemen, the United Arab Emirates has focused on
supporting service projects for the Yemeni people.
The cost of the projects that have been planned and
implemented this year has exceeded $300 million. That
encompasses strategic projects in the field of clean
and renewable energy, such as the Aden solar power
plant, which has a capacity of 120 megawatts, and the
Mokha solar power plant, which has a capacity of 15
megawatts, with the aim of reducing the energy deficit
and carbon emissions.
The United Arab Emirates has also supported the
health sector in Yemen by rehabilitating 14 hospitals and
health centres in Shabwah and allocating $27 million
to support the health sector in Sana’a. Additionally, we
supported Yemen’s water and agriculture sector through
a project establishing the Hassan Dam in Abyan. In that
context, we highly appreciate the role of the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia in continued support for humanitarian
efforts in Yemen, including a new allocation of a
$1.2 billion support package and its relentless efforts to
renew the truce and launch a comprehensive political
process under the auspices of the United Nations.
Finally, we affirm that attempts to reignite the
war in Yemen do not serve the interests of any party
and would have severe consequences for the fraternal
Yemeni people, who have endured immense suffering
for many years. Prolonging the war by the Houthis
exacerbates the threat posed by terrorism to Yemen’s
security and stability, especially as Al-Qaida in the
Arabian Peninsula continues to launch terrorist attacks.
We reiterate that reaching a comprehensive
and lasting solution can be realized only through
an inclusive national dialogue among all Yemeni
stakeholders. We reiterate our full support for the
efforts of the United Nations and its Special Envoy to
achieve security, stability and prosperity for Yemen
and its fraternal people.
Mr. França Danese (Brazil): We extend our
gratitude to Mr. Hans Grundberg, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Yemen, and Ms. Edem
Wosornu, Director of Operations and Advocacy at the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,

S/PV.9396

for their comprehensive briefings and their dedication
to the people of Yemen on behalf of the international
community. I thank Ms. Amat Al-Salam Abdullah
Abdo Al-Hajj for her compelling testimony. We also
welcome the delegations of Yemen and Saudi Arabia
and look forward to hearing their insights.
Brazil deeply regrets yet another tragic death of a
United Nations worker in carrying out his humanitarian
duty in Yemen. The cowardly assassination of
Mr. Moayad Hameidi affects us all and cannot
go unpunished.
Brazil reiterates its view that Yemen’s current state
of no war and no peace is detrimental to the country’s
future. The stalemate threatens to become a way of life,
but we must collectively redouble our efforts to prevent
such a grim reality from taking hold.
We believe that a Yemeni-Yemeni agreement is
the cornerstone for broader peace across Yemen. We
urge all parties to exercise restraint, cultivate moderate
positions rooted in realism and work towards a common
understanding that transcends short-sighted individual
interests. Such an understanding would likely pave the
way for additional agreements on vital issues, such as
the equitable sharing of natural resources, including oil
reserves and exports, central bank policies and assets,
and the resumption of freedom of movement across
Yemeni roads in and out of the country’s vital ports.
While the Yemenis must ultimately decide
their political future, we must not underestimate
the importance of the Council’s unified — and I
emphasize, unified — support for the work undertaken
by Special Envoy Hans Grundberg. Similarly, broad
consultations with women, youth and civil society
are essential to foster the conditions necessary for an
inclusive intra-Yemeni political dialogue. The current
momentum, galvanized by such positive geopolitical
trends as the Saudi-Iranian rapprochement and recent
confidence-building measures, must be effectively used
to Yemen’s advantage. The exchange of prisoners and
bodies of deceased fighters and the increase in flights
and destinations out of Sana’a airport are promising
signs and must be built upon. However, we must not
lose sight of the 21.6 million Yemenis in desperate
need of humanitarian assistance. The alarming lack
of funding, which has led the World Food Programme
to halt aid in several nations, including Yemen, is of
particular concern to us. We are also concerned about
the reports regarding the situation of members of the

23-2420313/20

S/PV.9396

The situation in the Middle East

Baha’i religious community who remain detained in
Yemen. We recall the importance of fully respecting
the rights of religious minorities.
Bolstering the country’s economy and strengthening
the ability of the local authorities to provide essential
services is a sustainable way to address urgent needs.
Brazil welcomes the recent offer by Saudi Arabia of
a substantial package of economic aid to help boost
Yemen’s struggling economy, pay salaries and improve
food security. We also commend United Nations
partners and donors for the remarkable progress in the
operation to salvage the dilapidated FSO SAFER oil
supertanker. The successful transfer of the equivalent
of 1.14 million barrels of oil to the replacement vessel
was a significant achievement that averted a combined
humanitarian and environmental disaster in the Red
Sea. Brazil expresses its hope that the next stages are
safely concluded. Achievements such as that one should
inspire us all when dealing with crises.
The current state of affairs in Yemen is not
sustainable, as it provides no real solution to the
protracted suffering of millions of Yemenis, especially
women and children. Let us renew our commitment to
a nationwide political settlement and a Yemen that is
peaceful, stable and prosperous.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I thank Special Envoy
Grundberg, Director Wosornu of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and Ms. Al-Hajj
for their briefings.
Japan welcomes the successful implementation of
the FSO SAFER rescue project. We are encouraged to
learn that the risk of a massive oil spill in the Red Sea
has now been averted, thanks to the concerted efforts
to address that potentially unprecedented crisis. Japan
highly values the endeavour and perseverance of United
Nations bodies and the persons involved in navigating
the difficulties and achieving that milestone, especially
the United Nations Development Programme.
However, a substantial financial shortfall still
exists. We need to fill the gap to pay back and ensure the
stability of the Central Emergency Response Fund. In
that regard, we appreciate the recent additional funding
commitments made by many donors, including a timely
announcement from the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. Japan
also remains committed to further helping to fill the
financial gap, in addition to its previous contribution,
given the significance of preserving the international
crisis response capability of the United Nations.
14/20

16/08/2023

While we witnessed progress on the FSO SAFER
issue, the dire humanitarian situation in Yemen
persists. The briefing given by Ms. Al-Hajj on the
situation concerning abductions is simply terrifying.
That situation should end right away, and they should be
returned to their families and friends. It is distressing to
learn that some of the humanitarian programmes have
been suspended due to critical funding shortfalls. The
safety of humanitarian officers remains of concern.
Japan is deeply saddened by the recent tragic killing
of a World Food Programme staff member, for which
we express our deepest condolences and sympathies.
Any attacks against humanitarian service providers are
unacceptable, violate international humanitarian law
and should be condemned. In that regard, we welcome
the release of five United Nations staff members from
their detention.
Japan would like to stress that intra-Yemeni
dialogue under the auspices of the United Nations
remains key to bringing peace to the country. The
Special Assistant to the Japanese Minister for Foreign
Affairs on the Yemeni Issue, Ambassador Hayashi,
visited the region last month and stressed that point,
urging all parties to the conflict to join the efforts of
the United Nations Special Envoy to pave the way for
inclusive Yemeni-led talks.
In order to build on the ongoing communication
between Saudi Arabia and the Houthis, it is also vital
to seize the opportunity created by the current calm
to foster dialogue among various groups of Yemenis,
including civil society. The role of the United Nations
Special Envoy in coordinating that dialogue is
indispensable. In that regard, we call on the Houthis to
refrain from making attempts to degrade the situation
on the ground, including by disrupting the economic
capacity of the Government of Yemen. All parties to the
conflict in Yemen must engage more constructively to
achieve national stability and safeguard the interests of
all Yemeni people. Japan would appreciate coordination
and support among countries in the region in that
regard. Before concluding, I would like to say that we
fully align with the point made by Ms. Wosornu, that
political solutions should go hand in hand with the
provision of essential services.
Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault (France) (spoke in French):
I thank Mr. Hans Grundberg, Ms. Eden Wosornu
and Ms. Amat Al-Salam Abdullah Abdo Al-Hajj for
their presentations.
23-24203

16/08/2023

The situation in the Middle East

France reiterates its full support for the work of the
Special Envoy, and we commend his efforts to facilitate
discussions between the parties. France also welcomes
the diplomatic efforts of various regional stakeholders,
in particular Oman and Saudi Arabia. Only a
comprehensive and inclusive political solution that takes
into account the concerns and interests of all Yemenis
will bring the conflict to an end. The participation of
Yemeni women in all discussions is essential, as is the
unity of the Presidential Leadership Council.
While the relative calm on the ground is positive,
efforts to reach an agreement between the parties must
be sustained. The negotiations, which have been under
way for months, must yield concrete results. We call on
the Houthis to make the necessary efforts to achieve
a lasting nationwide ceasefire. Such an agreement is
essential to launch an intra-Yemeni political process
under United Nations auspices.
France reiterates its full support for the Yemeni
Government. It is essential for all political actors to
respect institutions and support the Government’s
work to restore essential public services. We welcome
Saudi Arabia’s financial support for the Government,
which will help to bolster the fragile Yemeni economy.
France is also providing support to Yemeni institutions,
in particular the country’s central bank. France will
continue its engagement, alongside its partners, to
ensure compliance with the arms embargo established
by the Security Council. We reiterate our full support
for the United Nations Verification and Inspection
Mechanism, which is crucial to facilitating the
continued import of basic goods. The Mechanism must
continue to be funded.
On the humanitarian front, funds are still lacking,
particularly for the World Food Programme, and the
working and safety conditions of humanitarian actors
remain alarming. We once again call on the Houthis
to put an end to the restrictions imposed on them,
including those targeting female aid workers.
France reiterates its strongest condemnation for
the murder of a World Food Programme aid worker in
Yemen. It recalls the obligation to protect humanitarian
workers and calls on the Yemeni authorities to shed
full light on this crime. There can be no impunity for
crimes committed against humanitarian workers.
The protection of Yemeni children also remains
a priority. We call on the Houthis to implement the
commitments they have made to the United Nations.

S/PV.9396

They must stop recruiting children for combat and stop
indoctrinating them in so-called summer camps.
France reiterates its call for the immediate release
of the 11 Baha’i community members detained by the
Houthis. It reiterates its commitment to the freedom
of religion or belief on an equal footing with all other
fundamental freedoms.
The town of Taiz remains largely under blockade,
a situation that is neither acceptable nor tenable for the
civilian population. France reiterates its call for the
roads to Taiz be opened so as to unblock the city.
Allow me to conclude on a positive note. First of
all, we welcome the release of the five United Nations
staff members detained since February 2022. The
perpetrators of these acts must be brought to justice.
Finally, we welcome the completion of the transfer of oil
from the FSO SAFER tanker to the replacement vessel
Yemen. France, which contributed to the financing of
this operation, salutes the efforts of the United Nations
and of numerous countries to bring this complex rescue
plan to a successful conclusion, thereby averting an
ecological, humanitarian and economic disaster in
the Red Sea. We call on States Members of the United
Nations and the private sector to redouble their efforts
to fill the budget gap, as several French companies have
done, in order to put a definitive end to the residual
environmental risk.
Ms. Gatt (Malta): I also thank Special Envoy
Grundberg, Director Wosornu, and Ms. Amat Al-Salam
Al-Hajj for their briefings.
Malta remains encouraged that the people of Yemen
continue to benefit from the longest period of relative
calm since the beginning of the conflict. However, as
we have heard again today, this calm remains fragile.
We reiterate our call on parties to the conflict to
maintain this positive momentum. We hope that they
will engage constructively in peace talks to achieve a
formalized and permanent ceasefire and pave a path
towards a Yemeni-led and Yemeni-owned political
process under United Nations auspices. This crucial
window of opportunity will not remain open forever,
and it must be seized without delay.
Malta remains gravely concerned about the
humanitarian situation in Yemen, where civilians,
including women, children and other vulnerable groups,
continue to bear the brunt of the protracted conflict.
Nearly 22 million Yemenis are in need of humanitarian

23-2420315/20

S/PV.9396

The situation in the Middle East

16/08/2023

assistance; some 17 million are food insecure. This
is inexcusable. Children continue to suffer from
the horrors of protracted conflict. Many have never
experienced anything different. Over 11 million of them
are in need of humanitarian assistance, 2.3 million are
internally displaced, and more than half a million are
acutely malnourished.

In conclusion, Malta commends the completion of
the ship-to-ship transfer of oil from the FSO SAFER.
Thanks to donors and the dedicated work of United
Nations staff, a monumental environmental and
humanitarian catastrophe has been avoided. We hope
the remaining funding will be made available to ensure
the timely completion of the project.

Humanitarian aid workers continue to operate
under extremely difficult and dangerous conditions.
Malta strongly condemns the murder on 21 July of
Moayad Hameidi, who served for nearly two decades
with the World Food Programme. We convey our
deepest condolences to his family and the humanitarian
community and call on the authorities to bring the
perpetrators to justice.

The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of the United States
of America.

The lack of funding for Yemen’s humanitarian
response plan is also troubling. Almost eight months
into 2023, the plan remains less than one third funded,
preventing the delivery of essential aid to those in need.
Despite many warnings, the lack of financing has led
the World Food Programme to cut its assistance. At this
delicate juncture, the international community must
redouble its efforts to rectify this desperate situation.
Furthermore, as we continue to see no improvement
in chronic access impediments faced by humanitarian
workers, we remind all parties of their obligations
under international humanitarian law. Restrictions of
movement for women aid workers further exacerbate
the suffering of Yemen’s most vulnerable and must be
lifted immediately.
On a positive note, we welcome the release on
11 August of five United Nations staff members who
had spent 19 months in detention. We call on the parties
to continue the dialogue on prisoner exchanges and
reiterate our call for children, humanitarian workers
and other detainees, including those from the Baha’i
community, to be released.
Malta is also concerned by the campaigns of
disinformation and misinformation on vaccines in
Yemen, which are causing needless and preventable
long-term suffering. We emphasize that vaccines are
crucial, particularly for children, and strongly encourage
authorities to counter such callous acts in a decisive
manner. We also call for greater mine-clearance efforts
and increased explosive-ordnance-risk education
across Yemen, to eliminate the indiscriminate threats
posed by mines and explosive remnants of war.
16/20

Let me start by thanking Special Envoy Grunberg
and Director Wosornu for their briefings. Their
briefings highlight the intensive United Nations efforts
undertaken to address the challenges facing the Yemeni
people, and I am grateful for the opportunity to hear
from Ms. Amat Al-Salam, Al-Hajj, founder of the
Abductees’ Mothers Association, which advocates
the unconditional and immediate release of unjustly
detained persons in Yemen.
I would also like to express my profound
condolences to the family of the World Food Programme
staff member, Moayad Hameidi. Those who attack and
kill humanitarian workers must be held accountable.
The United States also welcomes the release
of the five United Nations personnel who were
kidnapped in the southern governorate of Abyan last
year. Too many innocent people are still in detention,
including wrongfully targeted individuals and religious
minorities, as well as members of the United States
locally employed staff who have been detained in
Sana’a for over a year and a half. We call for the release
of all those who have been unjustly detained, including
the 11 Yemeni members of the Baha’i community and
Levi Marhabi.
Today I am pleased to highlight a bright spot for
Yemen. The continued success of the United Nationsled FSO SAFER operation. All the oil from the decaying
vessel, as we have heard, has now been transferred onto
a new vessel, the Yemen. The completion of the United
Nations operation’s emergency phase was an enormous
effort undertaken by the United Nations system, the
international community and private sector donors.
We are grateful to Mr. David Gressly and his team,
the United Nations Development Programme and the
ship’s crew.
However, this operation is not yet finished, and
we need continued coordination and funding to see
23-24203

16/08/2023

The situation in the Middle East

it through to completion and eliminate any residual
threats. The United Nations needs $22 million to finish
the job, and we urge Member States, the private sector
and environmental groups to step up without delay.
The FSO SAFER operation is a model example
of international cooperation. It shows what we can
accomplish when we work together. We must use it as a
blueprint as we work to meet the immense humanitarian
needs of Yemen.
The United States welcomes Saudi Arabia’s recent
announcement of $1.2 billion in budget support for the
Government of the Republic of Yemen, which can help
mitigate the worst consequences of the dire economic
situation. But more attention and financial support are
needed to address Yemen’s economic and humanitarian
crisis, especially at a time when the United Nations
response effort in Yemen remains grossly underfunded.
Houthi attacks on maritime shipping are also
exacerbating the humanitarian crisis. We strongly
condemn these senseless attacks, which impede muchneeded oil-export revenues that fund basic services.
Ultimately, as we have heard from our briefers, only
a durable and inclusive political resolution between the
parties can ease the suffering of the Yemeni people.
And advancing justice and accountability is key to
peacebuilding efforts. To that end, the United States
welcomes the launch of the Yemen Declaration for
Justice and Reconciliation — an impressive initiative of
over 40 Yemeni civil society organizations and survivor
associations to achieve justice and reconciliation for
post-conflict Yemen.
We also commend Ms. Amat Al-Hajj’s advocacy
for women’s rights and civil freedom and condemn
the worrisome trend of gender-based violence in
Yemen. The United Nations Population Fund estimates
7.1 million women and girls require services to prevent
and address gender-based violence. We know women’s
shelters and other services remain overstretched or
completely absent. And we know women detainees and
migrants in Yemen face an increased risk of sexual
violence and extortion. That is deeply disturbing and
wholly unacceptable.
We must all do everything possible to stamp out
gender-based violence, support the United Nations
peacebuilding efforts and address Yemen’s security,
economic and humanitarian challenges. The Yemeni
people have endured nearly a decade of fighting, and

S/PV.9396

they are crying out for peace and justice. We must not
let them down.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank Mr. Hans Grundberg, Ms. Edem Wosornu
and Ms. Amat Al-Salam Al-Hajj for their briefings.
At the outset, I would like to express our sincere
condolences to the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, the
family of the deceased Moayad Hameidi, the World
Food Programme and the international community
as a whole. My country’s Government reiterates its
condemnation and rejection of those criminal acts
which run counter to all human values and principles.
We reaffirm our commitment to take all necessary legal
measures to ensure that justice is served, to prosecute
the perpetrators, guarantee safety for humanitarian
personnel and facilitate humanitarian work so that aid
can reach all those in need throughout our country.
The Presidential Leadership Council would like
to emphasize its full commitment to comprehensive,
sustainable and just peace on the basis of the agreed
terms of reference for a political solution, namely,
the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and its
Implementation Mechanism, the outcomes of the
comprehensive National Dialogue Conference and
relevant Security Council resolutions on Yemen,
notably resolution 2216 (2015). We reiterate our
support to the good offices of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General and all regional and international
efforts aimed at renewing the truce and resuming
the global political process under the auspices of the
United Nations with Yemeni ownership and leadership.
In that context, we underscore the importance of the
complementarity of various efforts and the sincere
endeavours by our brothers in the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia and the Sultanate of Oman to revive the peace
process and relieve the humanitarian suffering of the
Yemeni people.
The Yemeni Government has always welcomed and
respected all regional and international initiatives to
bring an end to the war launched by the terrorist Houthi
militias and to alleviate the suffering of the Yemeni
people to fulfil their aspirations for peace. Despite
all the concessions and facilitations that the Yemeni
Government has always made and all the efforts
deployed to turn the page on this conflict, it continues

23-2420317/20

S/PV.9396

The situation in the Middle East

to face the persistent aggressive behaviour of those
militias. Their inhumane economic war, even during
the truce, proves to the whole world, without a shadow
of a doubt, that those militias have no true desire to
achieve peace and do not recognize political solutions
or care about the catastrophic humanitarian economic
situation in the country.
Those militias, since the beginning of the official
end of the truce last October, have continued their
economic and military escalations. They are targeting
ports and vital economic and strategic infrastructure.
They are continuing their serious violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law and are
compromising the interests of the Yemeni people and
their national gains. They have recently stepped up
their threats against maritime lines in the Red Sea,
the Bab Al-Mandeb Strait and the Gulf of Aden, and
they consider those to be military zones. They have
even threatened to attempt to try out new weapons in
the Yemeni islands. They have threatened to target the
commercial ships and oil carriers in universal trade
corridors. Once again, those militias, backed by the
Iranian regime, are trying to destabilize the security
and stability of the region and threaten international
maritime shipping lines and global energy security.
They are thereby undermining any peaceful resolution
to the Yemeni crisis.
The Houthi militias’ opportunistic behaviour in
their approach to peace and their continued intransigence
requires a closer look by the Security Council and the
international community. Everything has shown us that
the Houthis and their leaders are living off this war
and gaining wealth from it, while the human suffering
of the Yemeni people is only increasing. That must
be taken into account by all Council members and
the stakeholders of the international community as a
whole, as well as by any party that supports restoring
peace in Yemen.
The Houthi militias are using the judicial system
as a tool to settle differences with all those who are
against their coup objectives. They are trying to
suppress the freedom of expression, to pillage and to
seize goods and property from citizens in areas under
their control. They are attempting to legitimize their
criminal practices against the Yemeni people. The most
recent attempts are the imposition of sectarian criteria
for joining the Supreme Judicial Council and the
substitution of hundreds of judicial personnel by their
18/20

16/08/2023

own elements to drain State institutions and exploit
them for their own coup practices and activities.
Against a similar backdrop, the Houthi militias
have imposed still further restrictions and measures
against Yemeni women in the areas under their control,
restricting their movement and depriving them of
their most fundamental rights. They have prohibited
travel and the movement of women without guardians
between the governorates and towns, and they have
recently separated girls and boys in all educational
establishments and Government institutions, thereby
depriving women of their right to education and to
work outside the house and their right to political
and social participation and to contribute to building
the society. They have imposed restrictions on all
fundamental freedoms, including coercive measures
against girls in educational institutions. That is a
measure that threatens social peace, coexistence and
tolerance among the Yemeni people who have enjoyed
those things for many centuries.
All of that comes on top of the unjust besieging
of the city of Taiz and the closure of all roads. The
international community has remained silent in the face
of the siege of millions of civilians in that overcrowded
city. The Houthi militias continue to randomly place
thousands of explosive devices and mines in farms and
along roads. Therefore, we call on the United Nations
through the United Nations Development Programme
to continue its support for our national anti-mine
programme to ensure that mine clearance activities
continue and that the lives of thousands of civilians,
including those of women and children, are saved.
My country’s Government warns that the
escalation of the Houthi activities can only exacerbate
humanitarian suffering and could lead to an erosion
of the economic situation as well. They are imposing
high taxes on the movement of goods and commodities
at important crossing points between the free zones
and the zones under their control. That constitutes
an economic war against the Government and the
Yemeni people.
My Government emphasizes that it will not sit
idle in the face of that grave escalation. We will revisit
the facilitation of the operationalization of the port of
Al-Hudaydah, and we will take all necessary measures
to safeguard the interests of the Yemeni people. We
call on the Security Council and the international
community to reconsider their response to the Houthi
23-24203

16/08/2023

The situation in the Middle East

militias. They must put pressure on them to commit
seriously to achieving peace and calm, honouring
their commitments — first and foremost, to lifting the
unjust sieges of Taiz and other cities — enabling the
unhindered movement and circulation of goods and
people, releasing all prisoners and abductees based
on the all-for-all principle and ending their systematic
economic war, which threatens the prospects for peace
and could lead to further complications.
My Government commends the continued political,
economic and development support provided by our
brothers in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia under the
leadership of King Salman Bin Abdulaziz, Custodian
of the Two Holy Mosques, and Crown Prince and Prime
Minister Mohammed Bin Salman, which reflects the
depth and persistence of the exceptional relations
between our two brother countries and peoples. The
latest example of that support is the $1.2 billion allocated
to the Presidential Leadership Council and the Yemeni
Government to fill the budget gap and enable the
Government to carry out a series of economic, financial
and monetary reforms ensuring that it can continue to
fulfil its responsibilities, provide services and ensure
food security and the stability of the national currency.
We also appreciate the support from our sister country
of the United Arab Emirates for implementing various
development and humanitarian projects.
The Yemeni Government welcomed the successful
efforts of the United Nations in salvaging the FSO
SAFER through the transfer of its oil to another
tanker, thereby avoiding an environmental, economic
and humanitarian disaster that threatened maritime
security and the global economy in the Red Sea. In that
context, we would also like to commend the efforts by
Secretary-General Guterres, Mr. Gressly, the United
Nations Resident Coordinator for Yemen, and his team
and the United Nations Development Programme, with
all of them sparing no effort to resolve the problem.
For its part, the Yemeni Government never wavered
in providing all the help needed while demonstrating
the greatest possible flexibility in support of the
salvage operation. Without the Government’s support
and cooperation it could never have been done. In
that regard, we would like to underscore the generous
financial assistance provided by brotherly and friendly
countries and the private sector with a view to
preventing a potential environmental disaster.
In conclusion, we have an opportunity to end the
conflict in Yemen, but above all that requires genuine

S/PV.9396

resolve to end the war, achieve peace, accept others,
abandon the principle of a divine right to power and
enable unilateral control of the country. That also
requires synergies and joint regional and international
efforts aimed at resolving the Yemeni crisis and
returning to the political process.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Alwasil (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to begin by thanking the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Yemen, Mr. Hans Grundberg,
for his briefing and his exemplary and tireless
efforts to achieve peace in Yemen. I would also like
to thank Ms. Edem Wosornu, Director of Operations
and Advocacy of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), for her valuable
briefing. We greatly appreciate OCHA’s continued
efforts, which are helping to alleviate the suffering of
our brother people of Yemen. And I welcome Ms. Amat
Al-Hajj, Founder and President of the Abductees’
Mothers Association, and thank her for her briefing.
We wish her every success in her noble mission. On
behalf of my country’s Government, I would also like to
express our sincere condolences to the family of World
Food Programme staff member Moayad Hameidi,
who was killed in Taiz. We firmly condemn that act
of treachery.
We recently witnessed an excellent example of
international cooperation, with positive and significant
results with regard to the humanitarian situation in
Yemen, which ultimately prevented an environmental
catastrophe for Yemen, its neighbours and the entire
world that could have resulted from the wreck of
FSO SAFER, which was carrying more than 1 million
barrels of crude oil near the port of Al-Hudaydah.
In that context, we can say without doubt that the
international community marshalled its resolve and
ensured a salvage operation in which a tremendous
quantity of oil was successfully transferred from
the FSO SAFER to the oil tanker Yemen. We cannot
imagine the scale of the economic and environmental
catastrophe that would have resulted had an oil spill
occurred, and we appreciate the efforts of the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), OCHA
and the Coalition to Support Legitimacy in Yemen in
that regard.
I would like to note in that regard that Saudi
Arabia was among the first countries to call the

23-2420319/20

S/PV.9396

The situation in the Middle East

international community’s attention to the catastrophe
that could have ensued had we failed to take action on
the tanker. My Government had repeatedly warned of
the consequences of such a catastrophe and called for
years for pooling regional and international efforts to
establish a clear international plan aimed at dealing
with such a crisis. We are also among the largest donors
funding the salvage operation, having so far provided
$10 million to the United Nations agencies involved in
the rescue operation, and we will continue to provide
every kind of support to UNDP and OCHA until the
operation is completed. We would like to take this
opportunity to call for completing the measures related
to the tanker that were agreed to with the Yemeni
parties concerned before the rescue operation began, so
that all the Yemeni people will be able to benefit from
the oil revenue, in accordance with the initial United
Nations plan.
Finally, Yemen is currently enjoying an
unprecedented period of calm and stability that has
been significantly reflected in the humanitarian and
security situation throughout Yemen. That is a result of
the tireless mediation efforts for peace in Yemen, which
have continued to call for prioritizing the country’s
national interests over all others, finding common
ground among the parties in order to address the
outstanding political and economic problems hindering
the improvement of the Yemeni people’s economic
welfare and halting all provocative military operations

20/20

16/08/2023

that could prevent a permanent political solution in
Yemen. Saudi Arabia has announced the allocation of
$1.2 billion in support of economic stability in Yemen
and has deposited $1 billion at the Central Bank of
Yemen in a demonstration of our continuing interest
in supporting our brother people of Yemen, and we
reiterate our interest in achieving stability and security
in Yemen and the entire region. We call on all the
Yemeni parties to accept political solutions in order to
restore security and stability in Yemen and ward off
threats in the region.
We reiterate our strategic initiative to end the war
in Yemen and reach a comprehensive political solution.
We emphasize our support for United Nations and
international efforts to achieve a political solution in
line with resolution 2216 (2015). The Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia also reiterates our firm position in support of the
Presidential Leadership Council in Yemen and hopes
that the ongoing efforts will achieve a comprehensive
political solution. We continue to call on the Houthis
to prioritize wisdom, reason and the interests of the
honourable Yemeni people over everything else.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at noon.

23-24203
