UNITED ~NATIONS

THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR

nd
MEETING:

13 APRIL

1982

‘1 y!

1.1b

NEW YORK

ai

CONTENTS

.... ,, .,. .. .. .. ... .. .. .,. .. .... ... ...

1

Adoption of the agenda , . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . .

I

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 12 April 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Morocco
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l4967);
Letter dated 13 April 1982 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Iraq to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/ 14969) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..I.............

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2352)

SlPV.2352

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combin& with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
&cuments
of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Officia1 Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adop’ted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 196.5, became fully operative
on that date.

2352nd MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday,
President:

Mr. KAMANDA
(Zaire).

1982, at 3.30 p.m.

wa KAMANDA

Pwsent: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, lreland, Japan, Jordan,
Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern lreland, United States of America, Zaire.

Provisional

13 April

agenda (S/Agenda/2352)

1.

Adoption

of the agenda

2.

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 12 April 1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Morocco to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/ 14967):
Letter dated 13 April 1982 from the Chargé
d’affaires of the Permanent Mission of Iraq
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/14969)

Adoption of the Agenda

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 12 April 1982 from the Permanent
Representative of Morocco to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/14967);
Letter dated 13 April 1982 from the Chargé d’affaires
a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Iraq to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/14969)
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpwtrrtion
jkm French):
1 should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received from the representatives of Iraq, Israel,
Morocco,
Pakistan, Saudi Arabia and Turkey letters in which they request to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the item on the agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, 1 propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right
to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

,

2. The PRESIDENT
(intPrprctcrtion jlom Frenrh):
1 should like to inform members of the Council that
1 have received from the representative of Jordan a
letter dated 13 April [S/I49701 which reads as follows:
“1 have the honour to request the Security Council to extend an invitation to the representative of
the Palestine Liberation Organization to participate
in the consideration of the item entitled ‘The situation in the occupied Arab territories’, in accordance
with the Council’s usual practice.”
3. The proposa1 of the representative of Joidan is
not made pursuant to rule 37 or rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure, but, if approved by the
Council, the invitation
to participate in the debate
would confer on the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) the same rights of participation as those
conferred on a Member State pursuant to rule 37.
Does any member of the Council wish to speak on this
proposal?
4. Mr. LICHENSTEIN
(United States of America):
The United States delegation has on many occasions
explained the reasons why we oppose the special procedure that appears to give the PL0 the same rights
of participation
in the proceedings of the Council as
if it represented a State. The PL0 is not a State; it is
a political movement which presents its claims in the
name of a collectivity
whose members live under
various political jurisdictions.
No formula justifies
this departure from the rules of procedure. The formula proposed seems to us to seek without basis to
enhance the prestige, and indeed to falsify the status,
of those to whom it is directed.
5. We have always stressed-and
1 stress todaythat we have no objection to the Council’s hearing
the PL0 representatives.
lndeed, we have no objection to the Council’s hearing the representatives of
any political group with a stake in questions discussed
here. But we consider that this cari be accomplished
legally only on the traditional basis of rule 39, which
empowers the Council to grant hearings to persons
speaking on behalf of non-governmental
entities.

I
6.

! :,

./

6. Accordingly, we ask that the terms of this proposed invitation be put to the vote. The United States
Will vote “no”.

as Chairman of the Al-Quds Committee,
wished the
Council to hold an urgent meeting to consider the grave
events which are now taking place in the Holy City of
Jerusalem under Israeli military occupation,

7. The PRESIDENT
(interpwtc~tio~z .fbom Frcnc4):
If no other member of the Council wishes to speak,
1 shall take it that the Council is ready to vote on the
proposa1 of Jordan.

13. 1 should also like to’ tel] you how pleased my
country is to see you presiding over this discussion,
because of your qualities as a skilled diplomat, whose
contribution is greatly sought after and highly appreciated in the most delicate situations at the United
Nations: but, in addition, my country is proud to have
close and fraternal relations with Zaire-a mutually
fruitful co-operation in domains which, for your country as well as for mine, are of major importance, especiaIly as regards safeguarding peace and stability in
Africa and defending and strengthening the values of
the unity and harmony of our continent.

In ~~woI//.: China, Guyana, Ireland, Jordan, Panama,
Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Zaire
Agoimt:

United

States of America

Alxtaining:
France, Japan, United
Great Britain and Northern Ireland

Kingdom

of
14. 1 also wish to take this opportunity to pay a tribute to Mrs. Jeane Kirkpatrick,
who last month, on
behalf of the United States, was a brilliant President
of the Council at a time when this body was considering, as is also the case today, situations that are SO
troubling and that present such a danger to international peace and security.
1.5. Having paid my respects to you, Mr. President,
and to the members of the Council, 1 should like to
inform the Council that, given the gravity of the events
which have taken place and which continue to take
place in the Holy City of Jerusalem, His Majesty
Hassan II, King of Morocco and Chairman of the AlQuds Committee, has vested in me the great honour of
reading out the message which His Majesty has addressed to the honourable members of the Council and,
through you and the members of the Council, to the
whole of the international
community.
The royal
message reads as follows:

8. The PRESIDENT
(interpwtntion
jwrz Frenrh):
1 should like to inform members of the Council that
1 have received from the representative
of Jordan
a letter dated 13 April [S/1#97/],
which reads as
follows:
“1 have the honour of requesting the Security
Council to invite Mr, Clovis Maksoud, Permanent
Observer of the League of Arab States, to participate
in the consideration of the item entitled ‘The situation in the occupied Arab territories’,
in accordance
with rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure.”

“Mr. President, if we have taken the initiative,
as the head of a Muslim State Member of the United
Nations, of asking for the Security Council to be
convened, our request is also justifïed by the fact
that we are Chairman of the Al-Quds Committee of
the Islamic Conference. The letter which all representatives of States participating in that Conference
have addressed to you in support of our action
[S//4969],
while expressing the support of the
Muslim world as a whole, bears witness to the
depths of its emotion at the very serious events
that occurred in Jerusalern on 11 April.

9. If 1 hear no Ob*jection, I shalf take it that the Council decides to accede to this request.

10. The PRESIDENT
(infe~prctrrtio}I jwn Frcnc~h):
The Council is meeting today in response to the request
contained in the letter dated 12 April addressed to the
President of the Council by the representative
of
Morocco [S//4967] and the letter dated 13 April addressed to the President of the Council by the Chargé
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Iraq
of Mo-

“Once again, a bloody and sacrilegious action
has rendered more dangerous a situation that aiready endangered international peace. The facts are
well known.

12. Mr. MRANI
ZENTAR
(Morocco) (intrrprrtatiorr .fkom FwncV~): Mr. President, permit me first to
convey to you and the honourable
members of the
Council my thanks for having acceded to the request
by His Majesty King Hassan II, who, in his capacity

“An Israeli soldier in uniform burst into the
square in front of the AI-Aqsa Mosque-the
venerated Mosque of Omar, which is among the most
venerated Holy Places of Islam-and,
using a rifle,
opened fire on a crowd of Muslim worshippers.

[SII4969].

II.
The first speaker is the representative
rocco, on whom 1 now call.

2

“The international
press has noted that the
witnesses agree in stating that he was aiming at those
worshippers. At that time, two men died from the
bullets of this murderer-a
60-year-old man, guardian of the Mosque of Omar, and a Young man 20 years
of age. The murderer, who took refuge in one of the
mosques, continued his profane and barbarous
actions, wounding 22 people, several of whom
remain in very serious condition.

to claim Jerusalem as the eternal capital of Israel.
That vote violated measures of the United Nations,
especially resolution
476 (1980), whose purpose
was to preserve the status and character of the
Holy Places.
” We wish on our own behalf and on behalf of
41 Islamic nations solemnly to protest against an
attempt that has but plunged Israel further into
international
illegality and provocation.
This new
kind of.fuit uccotnpli has never been recognized by
the international
community.
If we refer to the
reactions of Governments,
we cari see that they
consider it unacceptable for the status of Jerusalem
to be the abject of unilateral action.

“The responsibility
Israel bears cannot be disputed. It cannot maintain, in order to attempt to free
itself from that responsibility,
that the perpetrator
of those crimes was acting on his own initiative.
Even supposing that that were established, Israel
would not be the less guilty for not having been
able to prevent, or wanting to prevent, such criminal
acts.

“That was the reaction of the Federal Republic
of Germany, which viewed it as an act contrary to
international
law and the relevant resolutions of
the United Nations; and of France, which saw it as
a decision that was one of a series of measures
aimed at once again calling into doubt the status
ofJerusalem. This opinion was shared by the spokesman of the United States Department of State, who
stated that the United States considered unilateral
acts aimed at changing the status of Jerusalem
outside the framework of a negotiated régime to be
without any effect.

“Indeed, the international press on this occasion
has noted the extreme passivity, not to speak of
collusion,
manifested by the Israeli Government
in Jerusalem in regard to various Zionist terrorist
movements. These actions, following a whole series
of hostile acts committed against the Holy Places
of Islam in Jerusalem and against the worshippers
who crowd there, recall those which in 1969 were
marked by the burning of the AI-Aqsa Mosque.

“Let us recall that the Netherlands
American States having embassies
decided to indicate their disapproval
designs by immediately
transferring
sies to Tel Aviv.

“That indescribable act aroused the indignation
of all Muslims throughout the world and led to the
establishment
of the Islamic Conference, whose
first meeting was held in Rabat in September 1969
and brought together a11 the Islamic heads of State.
The Conference set up a committee whose task
it is to protect the presence of Islam in Jerusalem:
the Al-Quds Committee, of which 1 became Chairman in 1979. 1 was confirmed in that post at the
Taif summit in 1981.

and 12 Latin
in Jerusalem
of the Israeli
those embas-

“Finally,
through the United Nations the various
reactions of States were consecrated by the organized international
community. On 3 1 July the Secretary-General
made it known that any measure
intended to change the status of Jerusalem had no
legal validity and on 20 August the Council condemned the Israeli measure by 14 affirmative votes
to one abstention [,.csu/l,tiolz 478 (/980)].

“That grouping of Islamic countries vis-à-vis
Jerusalem cari be explained on the basis of the violation of international law to which that city has been
subjected since the Israeli occupation on 7 June
1967. That act is dealt with in relevant Security
Council resolutions concerning the illegality of the
occupation of the territories acquired in the war
launched by Israel; moreover, it was specifically
condemned as an assault upon a city venerated
by three revealed religions, a city whose status cari
be determined
only through negotiation and not
through ajXt ncwmpli.

“The unilateral action taken by Israel is fraught
with political consequences; it also seriously affects
the peaceful coexistence of cultures. No one cari be
surprised that at its General. Conference held in
1980, the United Nations
Belgrade in Octobet
Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization
adopted a resolution
condemning
Israel for its
decision to take over Jerusalem.
“That non-recognition
on the part of the international community is based on law and justice, but
also on reason. Indeed, the ,frrit trccotnpli
created
in Jerusatem by Israel in violation of the law of
nations is being consolidated by bloody acts that are
in themselves flagrant violations
of the fourth
Geneva Convention’
on the protection of civilian
Pei-sons, and it fundamentally
affects the specifïc
nature of Jerusalem as the Holy City in which the
three monotheistic
religions coexist.

“The situation thus created by Israel in Jerusalem
cari only lead to further tension, and especially
because of the aggression against Muslims that it
makes possible, it gives them the feeling of being the
victims of discrimination,
an insult to their faith.
Israel’s contempt for the peaceful religious coexistence that Jerusalem had enjoyed throughout a long
history was manifested once again, inadmissibly,
in
the Knesset vote of 30 July 1980, which ventured
3

“How could anyone not see that the criminal
acts of the Zionists violate the interests of the faithfui of those religions? Only tolerance and mutual
respect among men of faith and goodwill, not new
religious wars, Will enable Jerusalem once again
to regain its truly holy significance.
I
“That it why, with an insistence that Will not
cesse, we call for condemnation
of the state of
intolerance
and violence that is disfiguring
and
desecrating a holy city and steeping it in blood.
We ask that the file on Jerusalem be reopened.

direction, for a duration of half an hour. Eyewitnesses
at the scene reported that he had a large stock of
ammunition on his shoulders, to murder the maximum
number of devout worshippers and civilians in the
vicinity. Having murdered 9 and wounded 40 others
in the Mosque, this Israeli-American
criminal directed
his fïre at the Al-Manbar-pulpit-the
chandeliers, the
mosaic, the marble and the carpets, some of which
caught fil-e. The casualties in that premeditated and
well-planned assault totalled at least 100 inside and
outside the holy mosque.
19. Fearful that the highly provoked victims would
capture that gutter terrorist, his accomplices-the
Israeli so-called anti-riot troops-imposed
a total
curfew on that historic and ancient City, demolished
a part of one of the walls of the holy sanctuary, stormed
the Dome of the Rock and ensured the safety of the
criminal by fïring at the crowd, and then whisked him
away to safety in a closed military van.

“For its part, Islam Will never abandon one of
the basic principles of its holy book, the Koran,
which 1 shall now quote:
L’ ‘Act in the best way possible until your enemy
considers you his friend.’ ”
16. Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): Mr. President,
a
mere two weeks ago the Security Council convened
[2344tlz /nc~ting] in emergency session, under your
wise guidance, to consider the sinister and provocative
Israeli occupation acts of dismantling
the structures
and functions of duly elected municipal institutions
in the occupied Palestinian
and Arab lands. They
carried out those bestial acts at the point of a gun in
a wilful and self-deceptive
attempt to break the Will
of our heroic people and complete the incorporation
of their ancestral homeland.
With bare hands and
chests, the Palestinian people fought it out with the
occupation’s heavily armed troops and proved to them
that brute force, terrorism and lawlessness cari never
break the indomitable spirit of a proud people struggling
for survival and freedom from the yoke of foreign
invaders, whatever the cost in lives, injury and suffering.

20. Those are but highlights reported truthfully and
without the manipulations
and censorship which
have attempted, in vain, to belittle the “Easter Sunday
massacre” at one of Islam’s holiest sites and one of
humanity’s great legacies by the very same people who
owe their very existence to massive acts of terror and
destruction, as well as terrorism against the people of
Palestine as far back as the mid-1940s-acts
which
are too numerous to enumerate.
2 1. 1 should like now to draw the Council’s attention
to the real objectives of the Easter Sunday massacre
-for the Palestinian people have never been sparing in
shedding their blood in defence of their national homeland, their deep religious beliefs and their millenia-old
glorious legacy.
22. The Israeli racist, exclusive and blood-thirsty
ends and objectives are the following.

17. On Sunday, II April, at 9.20 a.m., a gang of
armed Israeli troops directed heavy fïre from various
directions at the Al-Aqsa Mosque, the first Kiblah in
Islam and the third holiest shrine, and the magnifîcent Dome of the Rock from which the Prophet Muhammad-upon
whom be peace-made
his noctural
and spiritual ascension to heaven. This great monument had been painstakingly
constructed by artisans
to the glory of God over many, many centuries, 14 in
all.

23. The first is to complete the incarceration, strangulation and expulsion of the lawful Palestinian owners
of Palestine. They succeeded substantially-and,
1 am
certain, only temporarily-in
achieving this objective
in 1947 and 1948 by unlawfully seizing four fifths of
Palestine and expelling the majority of the inhabitants
by abominable terror and massacres in defiance of the
relevant United Nations resolutions. And now, having
seized and colonized 40 per cent of the tiny West
Bank, including Holy Jerusalem, a mere 5,500 square
kilometres, and having armed to the teeth the illegal
settlers and confiscated Palestinian lands, the Zionist
aggressors of all shades of opinion evidently bave
decided that the time has corne to expel the rest,
As 1 stated in the course of a previous debate on the
situation in the occupied Arab territories, the Countdown in this final process of liquidation has begun,
The Easter Sunday massacre is but one manifestation
of this series of acts of cannibalization.

18. That Israeli carnage was carried out to give caver
to an Israeli soldier-or
is he an American? He is in
fact both-by
the name of Alan Harry Goodman, who
was on a murderous journey of death and desecration.
He killed in cold blood a 65year-old
unarmed Arab
guard at the Bab al-Magharibah-Moroccan
Gateevidently unchallenged
by the armed Israeli trooper
who sits there. He murdered in cold blood two othei
unarmed guardians and seriously wounded a third
at the entrante to the Dome of the Rock Mosque;
and, havingforced his entry into the Dome of the Rock,
opened up his fire-arms at the worshippers in every

24. Secondly, there is a determination
by a racist
Zionist entity and ideology to tolerate no faith or exist4

ence other than its own implanted one. They are determined to destroy every Islamic vestige or legacy in the
Holy Land, the eternal symbol of which is the holy
sanctuary comprising Al-Aqsa Mosque and the noble
Dome of the Rock. On their list of targets, of course,
are Christian holy sites which they have frequently
vandalized
during the occupation.
Indeed, since
1948 threatening letters have been addressed to Palestinian leaders of the Christian faith. Even an ambulance donated to Bethelehem University, started by
His Holiness
the Pope through a German church
organization,
was recently barred.

would issue a statement warning that the international
community and the Security Council would not, in any
circumstances, stand idly by and accept such a heinous
crime [ikid., ptrrvr. 171.
27. Indeed, a photostat of one of those threats has
been printed in our press, copies of which, though
unclear and in Arabie, 1 put at the disposa1 of Council
members. 1 shall make arrangements for the translation. The Israeli occupation authorities were furnished
with the originals.
28. Having in mind that this criminal murdered in
cold blood many innocent people and wounded many
more others, and knowing the background of this
bestial act, the Council would agree with me that it
was highly inappropriate
to exonerate the criminal
while deploring
the act-as
the State Department
spokesman did when, in effect, he absolved the crimina1 as lone and deranged. This is prejudging an issue
which is whjudice,
if not a caver-up, to say the least.
The Supreme Muslim Council in Jerusalem, which has
called a seven-day general strike throughout the occupied territories,
denounced a statement issued
Sunday by the office of Prime Minister Menachem
Begin which described the Israeli soldier as mentally
ill, The criminal,
Alan Harry Goodman, formerly of
Baltimore,
was inducted into the army last month for
the brief service customary for immigrants.
Of course,
he has a dual nationality.

25. A State Department spokesman has described the
abominable crime against the Islamic Holy Places and
God-fearing
worshippers as an act of a “lone, deranged individual”,
oblivious of the fact that there are
documents available which prove beyond any shadow
of doubt that the heinous crime was carried out after
a series of threats addressed, over the past several
weeks, to His Eminence Sheikh Saddruddin Al-Alami,
President of the Supreme Muslim Council in JeruSalem. The threats and warnings bore the signatures of
the leaders of the Gush Emunim terrorist gang, the
so-called trustees of the Temple Mount and Rabbi
Meir Kahane’s terrorist gang, whose exploits in New
York itself are well known and which advocates the
total forcible expulsion of the Palestinian people from
their homeland and the destruction of the holy AlAqsa Mosque. 1 am sure that some of my colleagues
must have read Rabbi Meir Kahane’s book, which was
recently published, advocating this expulsion. His
Eminence Sheikh Saddruddin Al-Alami had notified
the occupation authorities of the dangers posed to these
Holy Places and had requested the withdrawal of the
Israeli guards inside the Holy Sanctuary and the intensification of measures to safeguard the sanctity and
inviolability
of these Holy Places. His requests-attached to which were the threats-fell
on deaf cars,
went unheeded, because of the undoubted collusion
between these terrorist gangs and their godfather,
Begin, and his henchmen. They are the supporters who
tip the scales in the maintenance of his Cabinet.

29. The Islamic Council said it was absurd of the
Prime Minister’s
office to describe the assailant as
deranged, because soldiers were supposed to undergo
physical examinations.
Moreover, the Islamic Council added, the assailant was not alone. It asserted that
he had been covered during his attack by fire from
many directions. How else could he have continued
his shooting spree within the Dome of the Rock for
half an hour until he had expended all his bullets?
30. The Zionist designs against the Islamic Holy
Sanctuary are long and infamous. A chronological
survey of these activities includes the following.

26. Indeed, as may be seen in the Verbatim record
of a Security Council meeting held as recently as
1 April, 1 found it imperative to read out the text of
the threats addressed to the Director of the Islamic
Foundation
and the Director-General
of Religious
Instruction
and Guidance [ibid., prr,.a. 131, in which
the aforementioned
terrorist organizations had threatened to blow up the Al-Aqsa Mosque, the Dome of
the Rock and the surrounding area, with the attendant
substantial number of Arab dead and wounded. 1 stated
then that Council members might think that this was
just another one of those threats emanating from terrorist organizations,
but that we know full well how
blurred is the line between so-called unofficial terrorist organizations and the Government [ibid., ptrrcr. I Il.
We have had a long expefience in this field. 1 concluded, right here in the Council, by expressing the
hope that the President, on behalf of the Council,

31. First, continuous
and sustained deep digging
under the Al-Aqsa Mosque and, the Holy Sanctuary
as a whole-structures
which are 14 centuries oldbegan immediately
after the Zionist occupation of the
Holy City, in addition to the demolition
of hundreds
of buildings in the area adjacent to it. These deep
diggings have reached such depths that entire structures are threatened with collapse. The diggings are still
continuing.
32. Secondly, on 2 1 August 1969 the Zionists carried
out a plot of arson to set the entire Al-Aqsa Mosque
on fire. The fire resulted in the total destruction of
an 800-year-old magnifîcent Salahaddin pulpit, handmade over seven years by highly-skilled
artisans in
Aleppo, and other sizeable sections of the Mosque.
The arsonist, Michael Rohan, an Israeli Australian,
5

was declared deranged-not
unlike the person in question today-and
sent to Australia.

the machine is but an invention of the spirit and of
man. The attempt to deprive I billion Muslims. close
to a quarter of humanity, of one of their most cherished
spiritual anchors Will not remain unanswered. The
Israeli chauvinists and Fascists Will belatedly discover
that assured fact.

33. Thirdly, on 9 May 1980, 120 kilos of high explosives, scores of bombs, wires and other explosive contraptions were accidentally
discovered a mere few
minutes away from the time of detonation on the roof
of a Jewish school in the Ofd City, ISO yards away from
the target. The Gush Emunim terrorist movement was
behind the plan, which aimed at blowing up the AlAqsa Mosque and other historical buildings. The day
was a Friday and tens of thousands of worshippers
might have been killed or maimed if that arsenal of
explosives had not been accidentally discovered two
minutes before the explosion.

40. His Majesty King Hussein of Jordan, in response
to a cal1 from His Majesty King Khalid Ibn Abdul
Aziz of Saudi Arabia, has directed the Government of
Jordan to declare tomorrow. Wednesday, a day of
solemn protest throughout the Islamic world. All work
Will be suspended throughout the public and private
sectors in solidarity with the struggling Palestinian
people and the sanctity of the Holy Places. This is a
step which Will no doubt be followed by many others,
until afl Israeli occupation forces have been withdrawn
from all the occupied Palestinian and Arab territories
-foremost
among which is holy Jerusalem-and
Ehe
full rights of the Palestinian people have been fully
restored. That is the only way by which the historical
serenity, the magnificence and the eternal, universal
message of holy Jerusalem cari be restored and assured.

34. Fourthly, repeated attempts have been made by
Israeli groups to force their way into the mosques of
the Holy Sanctuary, leading to numerous clashes.
35. Fifthly, last year the Israeli Gush Emunim started
digging a tunnel leading to the Dome of the Rock. The
attempt was discovered and foiled by the civilian
inhabitants.

41. The PRESIDENT
(intopretation
$wnz Frenc4):
The next speaker is the representative of Israel, on
whom 1 now cal].

36. Sixthly, last Thursday,
7 April-that
is, three
days before the Easter Sunday massacre-explosive
charges placed by the same Israeli terrorist gangs
were discovered at the entrante
to the AI-Aqsa
Mosque and dismantled. Beside the charges were pamphlets threatening to blow up the Al-Aqsa Mosque
and physically liquidate the religious dignitaries. The
threats were written in broken Arabie and issued from
the Kiryat Arba illegal settlement overlooking the city
of Al-Khalil (Hebron),

42. MI-. BLUM
(Israel): A tragedy occurred in
Jerusalem last Sunday. A man who may well be mentally deranged committed an act of lunacy. The crime
was promptly and vigorously condemned by the Government of Israel, by the two Chief Rabbis of our
country and by the Mayor of Jerusalem. The people of
Israel and the Jewish people around the world share
the sense of revulsion at this despicable act. The
perpetrator has been apprehended and Will have to
account for his deeds before a court of law.

37. More revealing about the character and orientation of the culprits are a few sentences of an article
dated 11 April from Jerusalem, reporting on the events,
an article by correspondent
David Shipler, which
appeared in Thc~ NPII~ York Times of 12 April. He said,
referring to the Disraeli troops, that

43. Today we have been summoned here at the
whim of certain countries which seek to exploit in the
most cynical manner the misdeeds of one particular
individual,
acting on his own, in order to fan the
flames of religious hatred and incitement. There is
a danger-nay,
indeed, a certainty-that
this debate
is intended to be exploited with a view to playing upon
religious sentiments of millions around the world. Let
me appeal to the Council not to permit the voice of
intolerance and prejudice to prevail here. What we
are confronted with here is not merely intolerance
and prejudice, but also bigotry, bigotry of the highest
degree.

“Just before going, one of them, with a laugh,
threw a tear gas grenade near the [Al-Aqsa] mosque,
upwind of the main door. Smoke from the perfectly placed cannister blew into the mosque, and
worshippers came out coughing and wiping their
eyes. One elderly man was carried to an ambulance.
A few of the troops walked away laughing.”
38. If the spot is as sacred to those troops as they
cIaim it is, it is truly incongruous
that the soldiers
could have behaved with that bellicose and nauseating
meanness which trufy reveals what lies deep in their
sick hearts. It is not a lone deranged soldier: it is a
deranged society, the more dangerous as it is being
armed to the teeth by its strategic ally and mainstay,
the United States.

44. We did not hear about the sanctimonious Concern of Arab representatives when fil-e was opened by
a Turkish fanatic against Pope John Paul II in Saint
Peter’s Square on 13 May 1981; no Security COUnd
meeting was then requested, and rightly SO. Nor were
international
peace and security deemed threatened
when hundreds of Muslim zealots stormed into the
holy shrine of Makkah in a premeditated and wellplanned attack on 20 November 1979. It took more than

39. But, as in all encounters throughout history, the
spirit is afways more formidable than the machine, for
6

a month to flush out the rebels from that mosque,
after 244 attackers were killed, hundreds wounded and
64 heads forfeited to the Saudi executioners. The initiators of this debate did not corne to the Council then,
nor did they raise their customary hue and cry in their
own councils. They knew perfectly well that long
drawn-out discussions would only inflame the spirits
and create dangers for the Saudi custodians of the
holy shrine of Makkah.

48. Under the Protection of the Holy Places Law,
passed by the Knesset in 1967, the Government of
Israel has the duty to protect all the holy sites in JeruSalem. Under this Law, whosoever desecrates OI
otherwise violates a Holy Place shall be liable to
imprisonment
for a term of seven years. Israel has
faithfully discharged its obligations in this regard.
49. The considerable efforts made by the Government of Israel, indeed by any Covernment,
to protect
Holy Places are unfortunately
no guarantee against
isolated acts of sacrilege by individuals
suddenly
running amok, as happened in the case before us. That
regrettable incident in no way changes the policy basic
to the Government and the people of Israel, to strive
for tolerance and coexistence in an atmosphere of
peace and reconciliation
in Jerusalem, whose holiness
is great to Judaism, Christianity and Islam. Notwithstanding the repeated provocations
here and elsewhere, Israel Will maintain this policy, SO unlike the
one that reigned under Jordanian control in the city
between 1948 and 1967.

45. The reason why we are being assembled here
today is precisely to boost the incitement, the violence
and the religious tensions being set into motion elsewhere. This is the method that Arab leaders have
chosen to distract attention from their own problems
-the dreary and cruel oppression of their own peoples,
the wanton razing of their own ancient cities and
mosques in Syria and in Lebanon and the attempts
to blot out the rankling memory of the destruction
by Jordan of Jewish synagogues and cemeteries in
Serusalem.
46. The countries that are behind the hasty convening of the Council today are of course the very
same countries that over the years have not only
encouraged acts of terrorism against Israel, but also
lent their support-military,
financial, diplomatie and
othet -to a terrorist organization bent on the destruction of rny country and on the deliberate and indiscriminate murder of men, women and children in Israel
and eIsewhere. We have never heard from them a
word of condemnation of PL0 banditry. What we have
heard over the years has been their rejoicing at the
wanton killings of Israelis and Jews by PL0 terrorists.
These countries that bear such a heavy responsibility
for the scourge of international
terrorism in general,
and for PL0 terrorism in particular, have the audacity
to pose here today as the champions of law and order
in international
relations. No doubt we shall hear soon
from the representative of Syria, who only a couple of
weeks ago treated the Council to the startling concept
of sacrifïcing 40 million Arabs in order to achieve the
noble goal of destroying a Member State of the United
Nations. We shall also be subjected in all likelihood to
the customary high-sounding sanctimonious nonsense
of Mr. Maksoud. And we have already been subjected
to the display of supreme arrogance, hypocrisy and
mendacity
by the representative of the Kingdom of
Jordan, which is the Palestinian Arab State and which
over the period of 19 years of Jordanian control of
Jerusalem’s Holy Places established for itself a dismal
record of sacrilege and desecration. When one listens
to Mr. Nuseibeh, one frequently has to ask oneself
whether- Mr. Nuseibeh himself has become persuaded
by his flights of fantasy and outright lies.

50. The PRESIDENT
(intL>rpretrrtim jhm Fwnch):
The next speaker is the representative of the Palestine
Liberation Organization.
I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
51. Mr. ABDEL
RAHMAN
(Palestine Liberation
Organization):
Once again the Council has been convened to consider a threat to peace and security in our
region and in the world at large from the crimes committed by the Zionist Israeli forces of occupation.
Although we, the Palestinian people, and the Arab
nations have already been the victims of the most
despicable crimes and atrocities-and
those crimes
are nothing new to us, given the racist ideology of the
Zionists-the
sacrilegious crime committed
this past
Sunday is of paramount significance. The crime itself
was committed
on the Christian holy day of Easter
Sunday and the target was one of the holiest houses of
God, the Haram al-Sharif, the sacred Al-Aqsa Mosque.
52. 1 am sure that all the representatives around this
table and in this chamber have read the papers or seen
television footage giving some of the details of what
happened on that Christian holy day in that Muslim
holy shrine. And 1 feel compelled to share with them
some further information
about that crime which the
media here were not able or disposed to divulge.
53. At 9.20 a.m. on Sunday, II April, a group of
Israeli soldiers passed through two check-points
manned by the Israeli army. They entered the area of
the Dome of the Rock, Haram al-Sharif. One of the
soldiers was later identified as Alan Harry Goodman.
This Israeli soldier, brandishing an American-made
M-16 assault rifle, took aim at a 65year-old
man,
Haj Saleh Yaman, sitting on a bench at the entrante
to the mosque and shot and killed him in cold blood.
Then he shot Yihad Badr, a 22-year-old youth.

47. While the shrill voices of incitement are again
filling the air, let me assure the Council that Israel fol
its part Will continue to work for the peace and wellbeing of its capital, Jerusalem, and its people, as well
as for the preservation of the special place which
Jerusalem holds in the hearts of people of diverse faiths
around the globe.
7

54. Protected by the covering tire of the other Israeli
soldiers, who sprayed fit-e from various directions,
Alan Goodman entered directly into the sacred mosque
and began shooting the worshippers inside the holy
shrine who were in the midst of their prayers. Over
50 worshippers were injured.

Prime Minister in the Zionist State. But what Israel
would he be a Prime Minister for?
60. Zionist teaching and its racist tenets cannot but
produce sick minds. An ideology that preaches selfchosen superiority over others cari only produce sick
minds and criminal behaviour. This was in fact highlighted in an editorial in The Wrrshington Post of
13 April, which cautioned us about accepting the
simple explanation that the incident is the action of a
crackpot-one
deranged man-that
should not be
given disproportionate
importance,
as the representative of Menachem Begin tried to tel1 us here today,
Maybe they are too simple, too narrow, to make the
connection between the actions of one man and the
prevailing ills of his society and its leaders. The P«sr
editorial highlights that connection:

55. Immediately
after he finished his “mission”,
other Israeli soldiers in the area moved in to rescue
him. Meanwhile, worshippers in the area and inside
the holy place-confused
and shocked by the criminal
act and the brutal murders-started
shouting and
protesting. The Israeli soldiers responded with their
firearms and tear gas to caver the withdrawal of the
“command unit” headed by Alan Goodman.
56. Palestinians-Muslims
and Christians alike-in
the Holy City of Jerusalem and other cities, villages
and towns on the West Bank and in the Gaza Strip,
outraged by the heinous crime, took to the streets to
express their anger and to resist the occupation and to
tel1 the whole world that we, as a Palestinian nation,
shah live.

“The gunman is from the fringe, but it is a fringe
sustained politically
and psychologically
by a far
larger and more central body of Israeli opinion. Prime
Minister Begin couldn’t resist twisting the knife when
he deplored ‘this terrible sacrilege’ at a place holy,
as he felt it necessary to say, ‘to Judaism, Christianity and Islam-in
that historical order’.”

57. The Israeli leadership immediately
ordered the
so-called anti-terrorist
squad into the area-this
was
done with expediency and with total disregard of
and disrespect for the emotions and feelings of the
people and the sanctity of the Holy Places, Israeli
soldiers responded with their usual neo-Nazi methods
of repression. They shot into the unarmed civilian
crowd. On the first day alone, over 100 people were
injured.

61. Our people in the occupied Palestinian territory
have been victims of Zionist Israeli terror for the past
three decades. Only five days ago a Palestinian peasant
woman was murdered by Israeli soldiers while she
was in the simple act of toiling on her land. Simply
working in her field, she was unarmed and unprotected; yet she was openly and brutally murdered.

58. Protests and demonstrations
continued throughout yesterday and today in every single village, town
and refugee camp throughout the whole of Palestine,
in an expression of the anger of the people at the
Israeli crime. Palestinians armed only with their faith,
their determination
and their bare breasts-men,
women and children-faced
the Israeli Zionist soldiers, soldiers equipped with the most sophisticated
instruments of oppression that Western technology
has been able to produce. Those soldiers, today alone,
shot over 27 Palestinians.
Fourteen of those are less
than 12 years of age. One 7-year-old Child was shot
several times in the head in the Jabaliya refugee camp,
assassinated by the supermen of Menachem Begin.

62. Palestinian youths are abducted and tortured
-some to death-by Israeli soldiers and Zionist settlers. Vigilantism is rampant and is practised wantonly
by the Zionist settlers against the Palestinians. Crops
are destroyed. Homes are fired upon. Cars and property are vandalized by those Zionist Sett]ers, who
roam freely and at Will. Zionist vigilantes, armed and
under the protection of the Zionist Israeli soldiers,
are spreading like a plague through Palestinian villages and towns, intimidating,
beating and terrorizing
the unarmed civilian population with the purpose of
forcing the Palestinians out of their homeland SO that
more Zionist Jews cari be brought in from other parts
of the world-like
Mr. Goodman, who came frcm
Baltimore in the United States of America.

59. That criminal act cannot be seen, nor should it
be seen, as an isolated incident, because it is consistent with Zionist Israeli methods and practices in
Palestine. And 1 think that it is relevant for us to recall
here that on 9 April 1948, about this same time of the
year, yet 34 years ago, another man-then
also described by his peers as a madman-went
into a Palestinian village, the village of Deir Yassin, and massacred over 254 villagers in cofd blood. That so-called
madman in 1948 is now, in 1982, thc Prime Minister
of Israel, Menachem Begin. Therefore, it should not
be surprising to us if at some point Mr. Alan Goodman
is rewarded by the Zionists and assumes the office of

63. 1 think it worth mentioning here that over 60 Per
cent of the so-called settlers are exported to us from
the United States. And the other 40 percent are main1Y
from Western Europe. In this sense, the United States
not only exports weapons to the Zionist Israeli régirn%
but also exports Zionist settlers to use those weapons.
64. 1s it not about time for the United States to start
reconsidering
its policy and to take some action
against those Americans with dual citizenship-those
who carry an American passport and practise a PurelY
racist ideology abroad, while, at least legally, racism
8

-

is condemned in their own country? 1s it not about time
afso that the United States-which
not only practises
separation of church and state now but was in fact
established by immigrants who were seeking refuge
from that dominating combination SO prevalent two
centuries ago-stopped
aiding and abetting a Fascist
entity where State terrorism is institutionalized
and
racism and racial discrimination
on the basis of religion
are both a practice and policy of that State?

late to finish them off today.’ ” Professor Elon asked
why they would want to do that. The answer of the
soldiers: “Because they are Arab.”
71. Most of us cari neither give any excuse for such
blatant racism or find a response to such stated “logic”.
1 would, however, repeat the response of the dismissed
Mayor of Nablus, Bassam Shaka’a, who lost both
his legs two years ago in an Israeli assassination
attempt. Just the other day he was barred from his
office by a soldier who reportedly taunted himfor being
“only half a man”. Mr. Shaka’a replied. *‘I may have
lost my legs, but you bave lost your mind.”

65. 1 stated earlier that what took place in Jerusalem
and what has now been taking place for many years
is the logical outcome of a system of government,
education and information that propagates the inferiority of the Christians and Muslims in Palestine
and the superiority of the Jews.
66.

72. Indeed, the Zionists have instituted a policy of
driving the Palestinians from their homeland through
terrorism, oppression and suppression. Their plan is
deliberate.
Since the occupation began, more than
20 percent of the total population of the territories has
been detained. More than 250,000 Palestinians of the
West Bank and the Gaza Strip have visited either
the interrogation
centre or Israeli gaols. More than a
third of the land of the West Bank has been illegally
seized and expropriated
under numerous pretexts.
Farmers who have worked and earned their living from
the land have been deprived of their only means of
livelihood. Some who have managed to retain their land
have had their water stolen or diverted, their crops
left to die and their income ruined. The Zionist military occupation has extended its military authority to
the realms of academia, rendering the proper education of our youth, and even an educational environment, almost impossible. And, in contravention of the
laws and norms upheld by the international
community, the Israeli occupying Power has expelled outright some of the population of the occupied Palestinian territory. In the fïrst 10 years of occupation
alone, the Israelis deported more than 1,560 leaders
of the Palestinian community.
Only two years ago the
Council witnessed the expulsion of the Mayors of
Hafhoul and Al-Khalil.
Last year two mayors were
severely crippled in an assassination attempt. And just
last month three mayors were removed from the posts
to which they had been elected. Two of them were the
very same mayors who had survived assassination
attempts against them.

Only

recently, a noted columnist of Thc NCIV
Anthony Lewis, brought out the message
and meaning behind the headlines and news of Israeli
Zionists in his column “Destroying
the Dream”,
published in The New York Times of 1 April, where he
wrote: “Israel is trying, by force, to bring a million
Palestinians under its permanent control.” The implications of this, as he notes, are alarming: “There
could not be a surer recipe for division, hatred, insecurity.”
York Tirnw,

67. Zionism abolishes equality among all men, and
by SO doing worsens the moral injustices that one man
cari commit against another man in open brutality. This
ideology of inequality cornes to life and practice in the
actions and orders of the Israeli soldiers.
68. In the incident of Sunday, a soldier laughed as
he threw a tear-gas grenade near the Mosque. Smoke
filled the Mosque, and worshippers came out coughing
and wiping their eyes. One elderly woman was taken
away in an ambulance. A few of the troops walked
away Iaughing. This perverted display of “empathy”
is backed by clear orders.
69. It was Uri Avneri, a member of the Knesset,
who submitted a letter to the Knesset in which he
quoted an Israeli soldier on the orders that soldiers
receive from their commanders. 1 shall now quote from
Uri Avneri’s letter:

73. The Zionist Israelis have claimed that they are
at war with the PL0 in the occupied Palestinian territory. Yes, we are at war with the Israelis. It is a war
that we Will win, because we represent the national
aspirations of our Palestinian people. We represent the
Will of our Palestinian people, and we represent not
only this generation of Palestinians but even the unborn
generations of Palestinians.

“Anyone you catch outside, your fïrst beat with
the clubs all over his body except the head. Have no
mercy. Break all his bones. Give no explanations.
First of all, beat. Do not treat this beating as a privilege: Et is a duty. They understand no other way.”
These are orders from the military Government
to
Israeli army conscripts on the West Bank as quoted
by the aforementioned
Uri Avneri.

74. 1 am sure that all those who are ready and willing
to understand Will comprehend the significance of this.
It arises from an integral and inextricable composite:
the PL0 and the Palestinian people.

70. In an article in the Israeli newspaper Htr’~i~~tz,,
Professor Amos Elon recounts his conversation with
two soldiers: “Said one soldier, ‘Pity we did not finish
them off in 1948.’ The other said, ‘Beasts. It is not too

75. There is no doubt that our region of the world
is living a tragedy. Our tragedy originates with the
9

racist, colonialist
movement that was originated in
Europe, a movement inspired by the colonial thinking
of Europe at that time and further deformed by the
refinements of racist Nazi thinking and behaviour. In
other words, the Zionist movement is a combination
of obsolete theocratic and anti-historical
ideologies
equipped with terroristic methods acquired from their
Nazi oppressors.

81. We remind the United States that militarism
cannot be a substitute for political solutions. No glabal strategy, no global consensus, against imaginary
threats in our region cari deceive the Arab world and
distract the attention of our people from the real and
imminent danger that confronts us today-the
Zionists
in Tel Aviv. We are confident of the trends in our
region and of the feelings of our people. Those who
claim to be concerned for the achievement of a peacefui settlement in the Middle East must learn how to act
responsibly; otherwise they only further aggravate the
situation.

76. That infamous movement,
which was transplanted into the heart of our homeland and formed
what is known to members here as the State of lsrael,
is the source of the tragic situation that we Palestinians and Jews alike are suffering from at the present
time.

82. As long as the United States and lsrael continue
their defiance of the Will of the international community and international legality, further disasters cari and
are to be expected. lsrael cannot continue to behave
like the little boy who kills both his parents and then
goes to the judge and begs for mercy because he is an
orphan.

77. More than 60 per cent of those who deprive us,
the Palestinian people, of being in Palestine were not
born in Palestine, including Menachem Begin and his
representative Yehuda Blum, while more than 60 pel
cent of those of us who are not now living in Palestine
were born in Palestine.

83. Our struggle does not need any legitimization;
nor Will we be intimidated. We warn those who do not
understand, or are ignorant of, our history to study it.
We have outlasted a11 the invaders throughout our
history: they have left; we remain.

78. Resistance to the illegal occupation of our homeland, Palestine, and to the continued denial of ou1
people’s inalienable rights by the Zionist junta is the
legal and moral obligation of all the Palestinian people.
The world stood with the French and other Europeans
in their fïght against Nazi occupation in the Second
World War. The Zionist occupiers are for us, 1 assure
you, no different from the Nazi occupiers of Europe.

84. Mr. LICHENSTEIN
(United States of America):
1 have no intention of discussing the merits of whatever issue may in due course be brought before us.
But in view of the astonishing characterization by the
representative of Jordan of the statement issued by
the United States Department
of State on Easter
Sunday and, further, in view of the astonishing inferences that he chose to draw from that statement,
1 believe that for purposes of the record it is essential
that 1 read out the actual statement to the Council.
lt was issued on the afternoon of 11 April by the Acting
Secretary of State, Deputy Secretary Walter Stoessel,
and reads as follows:

79. I should like to remind representatives that it is
enshrined in all human values that violence used by a
victim in self-defence cannot be equated with violence
used by the victimizer.
In fact, it should be recalled
here that responsible Governments
list in their telephone directories instructions to their people on how to
resist foreign occupation in the event that it occurs.
1 recommend
that representatives
verify that by
looking at telephone
directories-in
Sweden, for
example-in
which Governments
outline for their
populations the procedures for fighting occupation,
including sabotage against the forces of occupation,
Therefore, SO long as we are denied our fundamental,
inalienable rights to self-determination
and national
independence and to live in freedom and dignity in our
homes, we have no option but ta continue our struggle
and we shall not spare any effort to achieve a peaceful
settlement of this conflict, which has plagued us and
our part of the world for SO long,

“We deeply deplore and condemn the senseless
violence at the site of one of Islam’s most sacred
mosques and extend our condolences for ail those
who have suffered physically and spiritually from
this outrage. According to the information available
to us, this was the work of a deranged individua
who has now been taken into custody. We cal1 UPon
ail Governments and peoples throughout the Middle
East to refrain from any acts of violence which could
cause further loss of life and increase tensions in the
area.”

80. A peaceful settlement based on the recognition of
our national inalienable
right to self-determination,
independence and the solution of our refugee problem,
all within the rightful context of international
legality,
is our objective. Schemes that do not meet those conditions cannot be imposed upon us. And the experience
of the last four years should be a lesson to a11 those
who attempt ta change the course of history from its
forward progression to a digressive, unnatural venture
back to the errons of the cold war hegemony.

85. The PRESIDENT
(interpwtation
fr-om Fratd~l:
The next speaker is the representative of Iraq. I invite
him ta take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
86. Mr. MOHAMMAD
(Iraq): On behalf of my delegation and in my capacity as current Chairman of the
Organization of the lslamic Conference, 1 should like
to thank you, Mr. President, and the members of the
10

Council for inviting us to speak. We have high hopes
that under your wise leadership the Council Will be
able to adopt a resolution on the serious issue that
is before it in keeping with the dictates of justice and
law.

Palestinians protesting against the Israeli criminal act
now include all the people in the towns and villages of
the occupied Arab Palestinian territories. A general
strike has been called.
92. Moreover, a11Islamic nations have declared their
solidarity with the Arab Muslims and expressed their
outrage at this criminal act. His Majesty King Khalid
has declared 14 April a solemn day of protest throughout the Islamic world in solidarity with the Palestinian
people.

87. The nations of the Muslim world find it impossible to believe that the terrible crime, which is the
subject of this meeting, against peaceful worshippers
in the Al-Aqsa Mosque could have been perpetrated
without the complicity of the racist Zionist authorities. Otherwise, how cari one explain the fact that
an Israeli soldier, carrying a rifle, could pass unnoticed
through two Israeli check-points,
then enter the
Mosque and the Dome of the Rock, one of the most
sacred shrines of Islam, and spray the worshippers
inside without anyone trying to stop him?

93. My country expresses its deepest concern and
indignation at Israel’s defïance of the resolutions of the
Security Council and the General Assembly. We
believe that the time has corne when condemnation
and censure alone Will no longer be enough to induce
Israel to desist from its present acts of aggression and
its continued criminal acts. Strict imposition of the
sanctions provided for under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations, including interruption
of economic and military relations with Israel, is imperative to impress upon Israel the necessity to bring an
end to its occupation of Palestinian and Arab territories, including the Holy City of Al-Quds.

88. Furthermore,
1 should like to quote the following
which appeared in The NPIIJ York Tims of 12 April
about this criminal act:
“one of [the soldiers], with a laugh, threw a tear
gas grenade near the mosque, upwind of the main
door. Smoke from the perfectly placed cannister
blew into the mosque, and worshippers came out
coughing and wiping their eyes. One elderly man was
carried to an ambulance. A few of the troops walked
away laughing.”

94. Finally, firm and decisive action by the Council
would reinforce the faith of the international community in the effectiveness and ability of the United
Nations with regard to the maintenance and strengthening of international
peace and security.

1 need not add to this graphie description of the actions
of Israel and its soldiers which refutes their claim of
protecting
and respecting the Holy Places and the
Holy City.

(interpwtcrtion
fimn French):
95. The PRESIDENT
1 cal1 on the representative of Jordan, who has asked
to speak in exercise of his right of reply.

89. The Council has met a number of times during
this year to consider the continuing grave situation in
occupied
Palestine, the Zionist policy of creeping
annexation
and the liquidation
of the Palestinian
people. The criminal attack by an Israeli soldier-who
is aIso a Citizen of the United States-against
the holy
sanctuary, the sacred Al-Aqsa Mosque, is a manifestation of the racist, colonialist mentality of the rulers in
Tel Aviv. It is sad to see that all those policies and
practices are encouraged and protected by the United
States, a permanent member of this respected body,
through its vetoes and its military and economic support of the Zionist entity.

96. Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): 1 must say that 1 was
quite astonished to hear the representative of the
United States describe as “astonishing”
what 1 had
said in regard to the statement of the spokesman of the
State Department.
Indeed, 1 find no contradiction
between what 1 have just said and what he has read
out to us-namely,
the text of the statement.
97. 1 was right in saying that the spokesman for the
State Department,
on the spur of the moment and
before investigations had been carried out, volunteered
the judgement that the man who committed this abominable act was a “lone, deranged individual”.
1 acknowledged in my statement that the State Department
spokesman had deplored the act, while describing the
perpetrator as a “lone, deranged individual”.
But how
could he have known?

90. The criminal, barbarie action of the Israeli forces
against the Muslims in AI-Quds has once again thrown
out a challenge to the entire Islamic world and has
provoked
widespread protest in the Muslim community everywhere. We consider that the act is only a
logical outcome of a policy that is intended to insult
and violate the religious beliefs and institutions of the
Palestinian
people and the Islamic nation as a whole.

98. 1 am surprised also, as 1 said in my main statement, that the State Department,
with the magnitude
of its information,
was not aware of the background
of the crime which had been committed at the Holy
Sanctuary. In fact, 1 reminded the Council of the statement 1 had made on I April, in which 1 quoted Verbatim
the threats and warnings that had been addressed to
the leaders of the Islamic community,
that the Al-Aqsa

91. The resistance of the Palestinian people in the
occupied
territories reflects their determined rejection of the Fascist military occupation. The news
dispatches
of yesterday and today report that the
II

,

Mosque and the Dome of the Rock and a11 the adjacent areas would be blown up. 1 am sure that the
Consulate General in Jerusalem, which has some
very capable people, knows full well what is going on.
It is, therefore, jumping
to the wrong conclusions
-indeed,
more than that: it is almost absolving the
perpetrator of the crime-when
a spokesman for the
well-informed State Department volunteers the judgement that this man is a “lone, deranged individual”.
How could he have known?

individual”.
But even if we were to assume that there
would be a full investigation of the case, nobody would
venture to make a judgement while the case was still
pending, because that would simply absolve the
criminal of his crime. We all know that no deranged
person cari be held liable or responsible, nor cari hebe
punished, for any crime that he commits.
100. It is therefore astonishing to me that what I staled
seemed SO astonishing to the representative of the
United States.

99. Evidence which 1 read out today proves that the
perpetrator was part of a gang which gave him full
tire caver and made sure that he would be whisked
away to safety. 1 cannot see what is astonishing about
my statement and in what ways it contradicts the statement which the representative of the United States has
just read out to us. 1 stated that while deploring this
act the State Department spokesman had ventured the
judgement that it was the act of a “lone, deranged

NOTE

’ United Nations, T~ory Seri~.~, vol. 7.5, No. 973, p. 287.

12

HOW

TO OBTAIN

Unitcd
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

publications
your bookstore

NATIONS

may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
or Write to: United
Nations,
Sales Section,
New

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
monde entier.
Informez-vous
auprès
des ventes.
New York ou Genéve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

c’

Nations,

New

York

DES NATIONS

sont en vente dans les librairies
de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
todas partes del mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Litho in United

PUBLICATIONS

DE LAS NACIONES

Unidas
estan en venta en librerias
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

00300

throughout
the
York or Gcneva.

UNIES

et Ics agences
(i : Nations

depositaires
du
Unies, Section

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas,
SecciOn de Ventas,

X&f&lR+-Junc

I XQ-X’~O
