S/2021/584

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
18 June 2021
Original: English

Implementation of Security Council resolution 2334 (2016)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is the eighteenth quarterly report on the implementation of
Security Council resolution 2334 (2016). The reporting period is from 23 March to
11 June.

II. Settlement activities
2.
In its resolution 2334 (2016), the Security Council reaffirmed that the
establishment by Israel of settlements in the Palestinian territory occupied since 1967,
including East Jerusalem, had no legal validity and constituted a flagrant violation
under international law and a major obstacle to the achievement of the two -State
solution and a just, lasting and comprehensive peace. In the same resolution, the
Council reiterated its demand that Israel immediately and completely cease all
settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem,
and that it fully respect all of its legal obligations in that regard. No such steps were
taken during the reporting period.
3.
On 20 May, the Jerusalem District Planning Committee approved the Har Homa E
plan for 540 additional housing units in occupied East Jerusalem. The issuance of
building permits for the plan is contingent on several conditions. The plan, if
implemented, would serve as another step towards connecting the existing Gilo and Har
Homa settlements and create a contiguous built-up area of Israeli settlements along the
southern perimeter of East Jerusalem. It would also separate Bethlehem and the southern
West Bank from East Jerusalem. In early May, settlers established a new outpost, called
Eviatar, south of Nablus. In early June, the Israel Defense Forces issued demolition orders
for structures housing some 50 Palestinian families in Eviatar and issued a military order
banning further construction at the site and its complete evacuation by 14 June.
4.
During the reporting period, demolitions and seizures of Palestinian -owned
structures continued across the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem. Citing
the absence of Israeli-issued building permits, which remain almost impossible for
Palestinians to obtain, Israeli authorities demolished, seized or forced people to
demolish 72 structures, resulting in the displacement of 78 people, including
47 children and some 15 women, and leaving 357 others affected.

21-08205 (E)

230621

*2108205*

S/2021/584

5.
A total of 53 per cent of the structures were demolished (3) or seized (35)
without, or with very short, prior notice on the basis of military regulations allowing
the summary requisition of “newly installed” structures defined as “movable” or
suspected to be used to commit a criminal offence. Three structures were demolished
on the basis of military order No. 1797, which authorizes an expedited process giving
owners only 96 hours to demonstrate that they possess a valid building permit.
Another six structures were demolished by their owners following receipt of
demolition orders. A total of 14 structures demolished or seized were donor-funded.
6.
Overall, in occupied East Jerusalem, at least 218 Palestinian households,
comprising 970 people, including 424 children, have eviction cases currently pending
in Israeli courts. Most of the cases were initiated by Israeli settler organizations and
are based on the application of Israeli laws that allow for properties in East Jerusalem
that were owned by Jews prior to 1948 to be reclaimed. No similar law allows
Palestinians to reclaim their property in Israel.
7.
In the occupied East Jerusalem neighbourhood of Shaykh Jarrah, on 10 February
and 2 March, the Jerusalem District Court rejected appeals against cases brou ght by
settler organizations to evict 15 Palestinian families from the neighbourhood, where
they had lived for decades. A request for an appeal by the Palestinian families was
made to the Supreme Court. Following a request by the Attorney General of Israel ,
on 9 May, the Court postponed by a month a hearing on the matter. On 25 May, the
Supreme Court gave the Attorney General until 8 June to provide a position on the
case. On 7 June, the Attorney General announced that he would not intervene in the
Supreme Court’s proceedings with respect to the pending eviction of four of the
families. The Supreme Court announced that it would schedule a hearing before
20 July on the families’ request for an appeal and issue a ruling accordingly.
8.
On 28 May, the Jerusalem District Court postponed until December its decision
on an appeal against an eviction order related to two residential buildings, comprising
three apartments, in the Batan al-Hawa neighbourhood of Silwan, in East Jerusalem.
In its decision, the Court noted that it would wait for the High Court of Justice to
issue a decision in similar cases. The Attorney General’s position has also been
requested by the High Court of Justice. If the eviction were to proceed, a total of
seven Palestinian families, comprising 33 persons, including 19 children, 2 elderly
women and 1 man with special needs, would be directly affected. On 10 June, the
Jerusalem District Court postponed until 8 July its decision on an appeal against
another eviction order related to two residential buildings, comprising three
apartments, in Batan al-Hawa. If the eviction were to proceed, a total of three
Palestinian families, comprising 20 persons, including 12 children, would be directly
affected.

III. Violence against civilians, including acts of terror
9.
In its resolution 2334 (2016), the Security Council called for immediate steps to
prevent all acts of violence against civilians, including acts of terror, as well as all
acts of provocation and destruction, called for accountability in that regard and called
for compliance with obligations under international law for the strengthening of
ongoing efforts to combat terrorism, including through existing security coordination,
and to clearly condemn all acts of terrorism.
10. The reporting period was marked by increased violence throughout the occupied
Palestinian territory, including clashes between Palestinians and Israeli security
forces, settler-related violence, alleged and attempted attacks, the throwing of stones
and Molotov cocktails by Palestinians, the firing of rockets by Palestinian armed

2/12

21-08205

S/2021/584

groups from Gaza towards Israel, Israeli air strikes and shelling against targets in
Gaza and the use of lethal force by Israeli security force s against Palestinians.
11. Overall, and throughout the reporting period, 295 Palestinians, including
42 women and 73 children, were killed by Israeli security forces during
demonstrations, clashes, search-and-arrest operations, air strikes and shelling and
other incidents across the occupied Palestinian territory, and 10,149 Palestinians,
including 17 women and 148 children, were injured, 4,703 by tear gas and 840 by live
ammunition. In all, 90 members of Israeli security forces and 857 Israeli civilians
were injured by Palestinians in clashes, as well as by the throwing of stones and
Molotov cocktails, indiscriminate rocket and mortar fire and other incidents.
12. Tensions were high in the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem,
throughout the reporting period. The Israeli authorities’ planned eviction of four
extended Palestine refugee families from their homes in the Shaykh Jarrah
neighbourhood heightened tensions between Palestinians and Israeli security forces,
resulting in increasingly tense protests beginning in April. In early April, videos went
viral on social media depicting violent attacks by Palestinians against ultra -Orthodox
Jews and attacks against Palestinians by extreme right-wing groups. Following the
start of Ramadan, on 13 April, there was a marked increase in unrest after Israeli
authorities installed metal barriers outside the Damascus Gate in the Old City of
Jerusalem, blocking access to a public area used by Palestinians. Following the
installation, widespread protests and violent clashes between Palestinians and Israeli
security forces occurred in occupied East Jerusalem, in particular in the vicinity of
the Aqsa Mosque and the Damascus Gate, as well as in Shaykh Jarrah.
13. The unrest increased further on 22 April, when Israeli civilians marched towards
the Damascus Gate, chanting “Death to Arabs” and other anti -Arab slogans and
clashed with Palestinians, who were also chanting inflammatory rhetoric, before both
groups were dispersed by Israeli security forces. The removal by th ose forces of the
barriers, on 25 April, temporarily restored a relative calm to the area. Beginning on
28 April, Palestinians held daily protests in the Shaykh Jarrah area, which, combined
with a continued heavy presence of Israeli security forces and pro vocation by Israeli
civilians, triggered repeated clashes throughout East Jerusalem.
14. While full details remain unclear, the situation in occupied East Jerusalem
escalated further on Jerusalem Day, 10 May, when Israeli security forces entered the
Aqsa Mosque compound, launching stun grenades, using tear gas and firing rubber coated metal bullets. Israeli authorities took steps to reduce tensions, including
rerouting a scheduled demonstration, organized by right-wing Israeli activists to mark
Jerusalem Day, away from the Muslim Quarter of the Old City, postponing a Supreme
Court hearing on the Shaykh Jarrah evictions and barring Jewish visits to the holy
sites. Nevertheless, the violence and heavy security presence continued within the
Old City. During the reporting period, 2 Palestinians were killed and 1,635 were
injured in East Jerusalem – including 657 on 10 May alone – while 99 Israelis were
injured, 32 of them on 10 May.
15. Against the backdrop of tensions in Jerusalem, violence erupted between Isra el
and Palestinian armed groups based in the Gaza Strip, leading to the worst escalation
of armed hostilities since 2014. On 10 May, late in the afternoon, a spokesperson for
the Hamas Izz al-Din al-Qassam Brigades published a statement giving Israel “an
ultimatum until six in the evening today to withdraw its forces from the blessed Al
Aqsa Mosque and Sheikh Jarrah neighbourhood and release all detainees from the
recent events in Jerusalem”. That evening, Palestinian armed groups indiscriminately
fired 191 rockets and mortars towards Israel, including some aimed at Jerusalem, to
which the Israel Defense Forces responded with 60 missiles and shells, hitting Gaza.
For the next 10 days, Israel continued intensive air strikes and shelling, reportedly
21-08205

3/12

S/2021/584

targeting armed groups and their infrastructure, while Palestinian armed groups in
Gaza continued to launch rockets and mortars at an unprecedented scale towards
Israel, including from highly populated civilian neighbourhoods. The inner compound
yard of one United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) school was struck by two Israeli missiles despite the school
being designated as an emergency shelter for civilians during the hostilities. In the
context of a subsequent investigation into how to secure the building from the
missiles, UNRWA discovered the existence of a possible tunnel under the school for
potential use by Palestinian armed groups. There is no indication of the existence of
any entry or exit points for the tunnel within the premises.
16. In total, Palestinian armed groups fired over 4,000 rockets and projectiles
towards Israel, with over 600 falling within the Gaza Strip, reportedly accounting for
some Palestinian casualties. According to Israeli sources, Israeli forces carried out
over 1,500 strikes from air, land and sea across the Gaza Strip. Israeli air strikes and
shelling, directed at what Israel said were targets containing militant installations,
caused extensive damage to civilian property and infrastructure, including public
buildings, residential homes and commercial units, including four high -rise towers, –
one of which hosted international media outlets – humanitarian organizations,
medical facilities and roads. Rockets from Gaza reached as far as the outskirts of
Jerusalem, Tel Aviv and its suburbs and Ben Gurion Airport. The rockets struck
multiple locations, causing damage to residential and commercial property, as well as
to schools and a crude oil pipeline.
17. Throughout the hostilities, the United Nations worked with all sides to restore
calm, de-escalate the situation and prevent any further loss of life. The escalation
continued until both sides announced a cessation of hostilities, which began at 2 a.m.
on 21 May. The cessation has continued to hold, with no further rocket firing or air
strikes reported.
18. The armed hostilities took a severe toll on the civilian population. Between 10
and 21 May, 259 Palestinians were killed in Gaza, including 66 children and 41
women (4 of whom were pregnant), with 248 of them, including 63 children, killed
in air strikes and by falling rockets. According to the Gaza Ministry of Health, 1,948
Palestinians were injured. At least 129 of those killed were civilians. In some cases,
families, including women, children and infants, were killed in their homes by Israeli
air strikes. Over 40 people are estimated to have been killed in a series of air strikes
reportedly targeting tunnels under residential areas in Gaza City overnight on 15 May,
with many people still unaccounted for. The fatalities included the head of internal
medicine at Al-Shifa Hospital, the main hospital in the Gaza Strip, and one of Gaza’s
few neurologists, as well as members of their families, and nine members of a family –
two women and seven children – from the Al-Shati refugee camp.
19. In Israel, a 5-year-old boy was killed by a rocket in Sderot, and a 16-year-old
girl and her father were killed in Lod. Throughout the 11 days of hostilities, hundreds
of thousands of Israelis across much of the south and centre of the country repeatedly
had to run for shelter amidst rocket barrages. Nine Israelis, including two children,
four women and one soldier, and three foreign nationals were killed and hundreds of
Israelis were injured during the hostilities. In addition, incendiary balloons and kites
launched from Gaza sparked dozens of fires in southern Israel during the period.
20. In the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem, 39 Palestinians, including
2 women and 7 children, were killed. A total of 8,217 Palestinians were injured, 4,703
of them from tear gas inhalation. Most of the fatalities resulted from the use by Israeli
security forces of live ammunition in the context of demonstrations or clashes or in
response to attacks or attempted attacks. In all, 1 Israeli was killed and 137 were
injured, including 90 members of Israeli security forces. The number of incidents in
4/12

21-08205

S/2021/584

the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem, increased during the reporting
period, in particular during the period of escalation, from 10 to 21 May.
21. On 6 April, Israeli security forces shot and killed a Palestinian man at an ad hoc
checkpoint in Bi’r Nabala village, north of Jerusalem. The man d ied of his injuries,
and his wife, also in the vehicle, was injured. Israeli security forces initially said that
the man had attempted a ramming attack, an account disputed by the man’s wife and
eyewitnesses. Israeli security forces launched an investigati on into the incident.
22. On 3 May, a Palestinian killed an Israeli man and injured two others in a drive by shooting attack at Za’atara checkpoint, south of Nablus. On 5 May, a 16 -year-old
Palestinian boy was killed as a result of Israeli forces shooting him in the back under
disputed circumstances during clashes between Palestinians and Israeli security
forces in the village of Udalah, south of Nablus.
23. On 7 May, Israeli forces shot and killed two Palestinian men and seriously
injured a third near Salem checkpoint, north-west of Janin, after the men, travelling
on a bus into Israel, reportedly opened fire at border police.
24. On 11 May, Israeli forces shot and killed one Palestinian man and seriously
injured another at Za’atara checkpoint, under unclear circumstances. On 12 May, a
Palestinian man was reportedly shot and killed by Israeli security forces during
clashes in Fawwar refugee camp, south of Hebron. Israeli security forces prevented
Palestinian ambulances from reaching the man.
25. On 12 May, during clashes in Aqqaba, in Tubas, Israeli security forces shot and
killed a 16-year-old boy in the back with two live bullets. Reportedly, the incident
occurred in the context of Israeli security forces withdrawing from clashes in Tubas,
where they shot and injured two Palestinians with live ammunition and where two
additional Palestinians were injured as a result of being rammed by a military jeep.
26. On 14 May, Palestinians held solidarity protests in support of Gaza, many of
which escalated into clashes between Palestinians and Israeli security forces in
Qalqilyah, Ramallah, Nablus, Bethlehem, Hebron and dozens of other locations. In
the deadliest day in the occupied West Bank in over a decade, 10 Palestinians were
killed by Israeli security forces in such demonstrations and clashes and about 250
were injured by live bullets, raising concerns over excessive use of force by Israeli
security forces. Another Palestinian was killed near Ofra settlement in an alleged
ramming and stabbing attack against Israeli security forces.
27. On 15 and 16 May, two Palestinians were shot dead by Israeli security forces in
separate ramming and alleged ramming attacks against those forces in Shaykh Jarrah
and in the southern West Bank, respectively. In the southern Wes t Bank, seven Israeli
border police officers were injured, two moderately. On 16 May, three Palestinians
were killed by the live ammunition of Israeli security forces during demonstrations
and clashes in Tulkarm, Nablus and Hebron, including a 14-year-old boy, who died
of his injuries after being shot in the head by those forces in Hebron on 13 May.
28. On 18 May, a Palestinian man armed with a submachine gun was shot dead by
Israeli security forces in Hebron as he reportedly attempted to throw a pipe bomb. On
the same day, Israeli security forces killed two Palestinian men during demonstrations
and clashes in Ramallah, as well as a 16-year-old boy in the village of Bil‘In. A fourth
Palestinian man, who was shot in the head during demonstrations and clashes in Janin
on 18 May, later died of his wounds.
29. On 25 May, Israeli special forces killed with live ammunition a Palestinian from
al-Am‘ari refugee camp who was sitting in his car in the Umm al-Sharayet
neighbourhood of Ramallah. The shooting occurred in the context of an arrest
operation in search of the man’s family member in what appears to be a case of
21-08205

5/12

S/2021/584

mistaken identity. On 28 May, Israeli security forces shot and killed a 28 -year-old
Palestinian man and injured at least 24 others during protests agai nst the
establishment of a new settler outpost in Jabal Sbeih, in Bayta, south -east of Nablus.
30. Across the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem, there was an
escalation in the severity of settler-related violence, including the use of firearms. A
total of 139 attacks were recorded in which Israeli settlers or other civilians injured
Palestinians or reportedly damaged their property. The attacks resulted in the killing
of one Palestinian and the injury of 51, as well as in damage to Palestinian -owned
properties, compared with two fatalities and 31 injuries in the first quarter of 2021.
According to Israeli sources, Palestinians perpetrated 228 attacks against Israeli
settlers and other civilians in the occupied West Bank, including the throwing of
stones, Molotov cocktails and pipe bombs at civilian vehicles, resulting in 47 injuries
and damage to property.
31. During the reporting period, Israeli security forces conducted 805 search -andarrest operations, resulting in the arrest of 851 people, including 31 children, the
killing of two Palestinians, including a child, and the injury of 98 people during
subsequent clashes. Of these, 130 took place in East Jerusalem against a backdrop of
heightened tensions.

IV. Incitement, provocations and inflammatory rhetoric
32. In its resolution 2334 (2016), the Security Council called upon both parties to
act on the basis of international law, including international humanitarian law, and
their previous agreements and obligations, to observe calm and restraint and to refrain
from provocative actions, incitement and inflammatory rhetoric, with the aim, inter
alia, of de-escalating the situation on the ground, rebuilding trust and confidence,
demonstrating through policies and actions a genuine commitment to the two -State
solution and creating the conditions necessary for promoting peace.
33. There was a serious escalation in the instances of incitement and inflammatory
rhetoric throughout the reporting period, many of which drove or exacerbated the
ongoing violence. In the lead-up to the outbreak of hostilities in Gaza, and throughout
the escalation, Hamas leaders repeatedly called for violence against Israelis and
issued threats. One Hamas official called upon Palestinians living in Jerusalem to “cut
off the heads of the Jews with knives”, explaining how to do so most effectively. The
official social media pages of Fatah repeatedly conveyed calls from the group’s
national and local leadership to engage in confrontations with Israeli soldiers and
settlers, in some cases urging the use of “all means possible”. In an interview, a senior
Fatah official addressed “every Palestinian who has a stone or a word or a bullet”,
saying that the “battle has opened”. In sermons broadcast on the official Palestinian
television channel, some Palestinian Authority religious officials claimed that Israel
was seeking to destroy the Aqsa Mosque and “defiling” it.
34. At the same time, Israeli officials incited violence and engaged in a series of
provocative steps and statements. During demonstrations in Shaykh Jarrah, a Deputy
Mayor of Jerusalem was filmed telling a Palestinian activist that it was “a pity” that
he wasn’t shot in the head. Far right members of the Knesset repeatedl y organized
provocative visits to flashpoints in Jerusalem, including the neighbourhood of Shaykh
Jarrah, the Damascus Gate and the entrance to the Holy Esplanade, sparking violent
clashes between their supporters and Palestinians. In a social media post, an Israeli
Minister wrote, following the death of an Israeli soldier, that the “Palestinian enemy
is raising its head. Like in the past 100 years, [they are] barbarians and savages”.
Reacting to a video of Palestinians attacking an Israeli driver near the Old City, a
member of the Knesset wrote on social media that Israel had lost control of its
6/12

21-08205

S/2021/584

sovereignty over Jerusalem and that “the time has come to reliberate the Temple
Mount and Jerusalem and show [Palestinians] who is in charge once and for all”.
Members of the Knesset made derogatory and unacceptable statements against Arabs,
with one tweeting that, “in the long run”, Arabs who don’t accept that “the Land of
Israel belongs to the People of Israel … won’t stay here”. Another wrote, in response
to footage of Palestinians in East Jerusalem cheering rocket strikes on the city, that
they should be “put on trucks and deported immediately”.

V. Affirmative steps to reverse negative trends
35. In its resolution 2334 (2016), the Security Council called for affirmative steps
to be taken immediately to reverse the negative trends on the ground that were
imperilling the two-State solution. Negative trends on the ground continued during
the reporting period.
36. On 30 April, the Palestinian President, Mahmoud Abbas, said that he was
indefinitely postponing Palestinian Legislative Council, presidential and Palestinian
National Council elections scheduled for 2021 until the participation of Palestinians
in occupied East Jerusalem was guaranteed by Israel. Preparations for Palestinian
Legislative Council elections, scheduled for 22 May, were well advanced. Some
93 per cent of eligible voters had registered to participate, amounting to over
2.5 million Palestinians, some 50 per cent of whom were women, and more than
40 per cent would have been first-time voters. Thirty-six candidate lists, comprising
a total of 1,389 candidates, had been cleared to participate by the Central Elections
Commission, and the campaign period was set to begin on 1 May.
37. In Gaza, extensive damage was inflicted on residential and commercial
buildings, health facilities, schools and infrastructure, including roads, electricity
feeder lines and networks, wastewater networks and pumping stations, pipelines,
water wells and agricultural land. Gaza has been contaminated by a significant
amount of undetonated explosive remnants of war, necessitating life -saving mine
action interventions and the urgent education of civilians on the risks of s uch
remnants. On 9 June, an explosive accident killed a 9-year-old boy and severely
injured his brother. In the context of the recent escalation, a United Nations risk
assessment confirmed the presence of 14 deep-buried bombs, including 2 below an
UNRWA school.
38. Initial estimates by local authorities reported the total destruction of 2,000
housing units and damage to 15,000 others. Over 113,000 Palestinians were
temporarily displaced in UNRWA schools or with host families during the hostilities,
heightening the risk of the spread of coronavirus disease (COVID -19) owing to
overcrowding, with some 8,500 Palestinians seeking shelter with host families or in
two UNRWA schools as at 10 June. Approximately 600 families (3,600 individuals)
have remained internally displaced for more than six years, since the 2014 conflict.
39.

Damage was also inflicted on 141 schools and 33 health facilities.

40. The electricity supply across the Gaza Strip was further reduced, from an
average of 15 hours per day to 5 to 6 hours per day, owing to damage to key electricity
feeder lines, transformers and networks, as well as to Israel barring entry for fuel
delivered through the United Nations for the Gaza power plant, causing disruptions
to the provision of basic services, including water, sanitation and health care. About
800,000 people temporarily lacked regular access to safe piped water as a result of
damage to infrastructure and the reduced electricity supply. During the reporting
period, the key electricity feeder lines were repaired, partially restoring electricity,
and significant repairs to water infrastructure were completed.

21-08205

7/12

S/2021/584

41. On 11 May, following the commencement of hostilities between Israel and
Palestinian armed groups, Israel closed the Erez Crossing, including to movement of
humanitarian cases and personnel, and the Kerem Shalom Crossing for goods.
However, on 18 May, Kerem Shalom was reopened for fuel for UNRWA and animal
feed only, following its early closure owing to mortar fire from Gaza. Erez was opened
exceptionally for one day, on 17 May, for the entry of a shipment from Jordan of
medical aid, along with medical personnel. The closure of crossing points from Israel
throughout the period of hostilities, combined with the effects of the damage
sustained by electricity infrastructure in Gaza, aggravated the humanitarian situation
and affected the well-being of the entire Gaza population.
42. The Rafah Crossing remained open, except during public holidays. The Salah
al-Din Gate opened on five days during the hostilities to allow for the entry of
commercial goods, including fuel. On 9 May, Israel sealed off the Gaza fishing zone,
which was restored to six miles on 25 May. It had already closed the fishing zone
completely for three days, from 26 to 28 April, in response to the firing of rockets and
incendiary balloons towards Israel.
43. Following the cessation of hostilities, on 21 May, 40 truckloads of humanitarian
supplies were permitted entry. On 25 May, Israel announced the opening of the
crossings for certain humanitarian goods and personnel. Israel has facilitated the entry
of over 46,000 COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access (COVAX) vaccines.

VI. Efforts by the parties and the international community to
advance the peace process, and other relevant developments
44. In its resolution 2334 (2016), the Security Council called upon all States to
distinguish, in their relevant dealings, between the territory of the State of Israel and
the territories occupied since 1967.
45. In its resolution 2334 (2016), the Security Council also called upon all parties
to continue, in the interest of the promotion of peace and security, to exert collective
efforts to launch credible negotiations on all final status issues in the Middle East
peace process and urged in that regard the intensification and acceleration of
international and regional diplomatic efforts and support aimed at achieving, without
delay, a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East on the basis of the
relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid terms of reference, including the
principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet Road Map, and
an end to the Israeli occupation that began in 1967. The Council underlined that it
would not recognize any changes to the 4 June 1967 lines, including with regard to
Jerusalem, other than those agreed by the parties through negotiations.
46. On 23 April and 16 and 28 May, the Envoys of the Middle East Quartet met
virtually to discuss the latest political developments and the situation on the ground,
including the latest escalation and cessation of hostilities between Israel and
Palestinian armed groups.
47. During the escalation between Israel and armed groups in Gaza, the Security
Council met, on 10, 12, 16 and 18 May, to express its deep concern over the ongoing
violence and encourage the parties to end the hostilities. On 20 May, the General
Assembly held an urgent meeting to address the situation, during which the Secretary General reiterated his call to all sides for an immediate ceasefire. On 22 May, the
Security Council issued a statement welcoming the announcement of a ceasefire and
stressing the immediate need for humanitarian assistance to the Palestinian civilian
population, in particular in Gaza. On 27 May, the Human Rights Council decided to
establish an ongoing commission of inquiry into alleged violations of international
8/12

21-08205

S/2021/584

humanitarian law and all alleged violations and abuses of international human rights
law in the occupied Palestinian territory and Israel leadin g up to and since 13 April
2021.

VII. Observations
48. I remain deeply troubled by the continued illegal settlement expansion of Israel
in the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem, which further entrenches the
Israeli occupation, undermines the right of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination and sovereignty, continues to encroach on Palestinian land and natural
resources, hampers the free movement of the Palestinian population and increases the
risks of violent confrontation. Israeli authorities continue to advance settlement plans
that had been frozen or delayed for years, located in areas crucial for the contiguity
of a future Palestinian State.
49. The advancement of expansion plans for the Har Homa settlement in occupied
East Jerusalem is a particularly concerning example. It is yet another step on the road
to consolidate the continuum of illegal settlements along the southern perimeter
separating East Jerusalem from Bethlehem and other Palestinian communities in the
occupied West Bank to its south.
50. Israeli settlements in the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem, have
no legal validity and constitute a flagrant violation of United Nations resolutions and
international law. They undermine the prospect of achieving a two -State solution by
systematically eroding the possibility of establishing a contiguous, independent and
viable sovereign Palestinian State. I urge the Government of Israel to cease the
advancement of all settlement activity immediately.
51. I remain deeply concerned by the continued demolitions and seizures of
Palestinian structures, which have included internationally funded humanitarian
projects. I call upon the Israeli authorities to end the demolition of Palestinian
property and the forcible displacement and eviction of Palestinians, in line with the
country’s obligations under international humanitarian and international human rights
law, and to approve plans that would enable these communities to build legally and
address their development needs.
52. I remain deeply disturbed by the possible forced evictions of some Palestinian
families from their homes in the Shaykh Jarrah and Silwan neighbourhoods of
occupied East Jerusalem. As demonstrated in recent weeks, such forced evictions, in
particular in such politically sensitive areas, can trigger dangerous tensions and
violence.
53. The rapid escalation of violence, violent attacks against Palestinian and Israeli
civilians and incitement to violence spiralled quickly out of control and into a
devastating exchange between Israel and armed groups in Gaza at a scale not seen in
years. The events have only deepened the divisions between Israelis and Palestinians
and made progress towards peace an even greater challenge. The violence must stop,
and all perpetrators of violence must be held accountable.
54. I am deeply concerned by the multiple instances in which officials exacerbated
the tensions and violence through unacceptable rhetoric or provocative actions. The
statements and actions contributed to the deadly escalation. Violence and incitement
must be clearly condemned and unequivocally rejected by all. Instead, on too many
occasions, they were encouraged and amplified. At the same time, I commend
initiatives led by civil society organizations to call for peace, reconciliation and an
end to the fighting.

21-08205

9/12

S/2021/584

55. The indiscriminate launching of rockets and mortars towards Israeli civilian
population centres, including from highly populated civilian neighbourhoods, by
Hamas, Palestinian Islamic Jihad or others constitutes a clear violation of the
principle of distinction under international humanitarian law and must cease.
Although Israel took a number of precautions, such as advance warning of attacks in
some cases, air strikes in densely populated areas resulted in a high level of civilian
fatalities and injuries, as well as the widespread destruction of civilian infrastructure.
Israeli authorities must abide by the rules of international humanitarian law governing
armed conflict and take all feasible precautions to spare civilians and civilian objects
in the conduct of military operations.
56. I am appalled in particular that children continue to be victims of violence.
Sixty-six children in Gaza, six children in the occupied West Bank and two children
in Israel were killed as a result of the recent hostilities. I reiterate that children should
not be the target of violence or put in harm’s way. They should be afforded special
protection from any form of violence.
57. There are serious concerns that Israeli security forces used disproportionate
force against those participating in demonstrations, in particular through the use of
live ammunition. I reiterate that security forces must exercise maximum restraint and
use lethal force only when it is strictly unavoidable in order to protect life. Israeli and
Palestinian authorities must carry out thorough, independent, impartial and prompt
investigations into all instances of possible excessive use of force.
58. I am deeply concerned by the continued settler-related violence in the occupied
West Bank, including East Jerusalem. I am especially troubled by the increasing
severity of settler attacks, including reports that Israeli settlers are using live
ammunition against Palestinians. Israel, as the occupying power, has an obl igation to
ensure the safety and security of the Palestinian population and to investigate such
attacks. I am also deeply concerned by attacks by Palestinians against Israeli civilians.
Perpetrators of violence on all sides must be held accountable and swi ftly brought to
justice.
59. I would like to reiterate that the fate of two Israeli civilians and the bodies of
two Israel Defense Forces soldiers held by Hamas in Gaza remains an important
humanitarian concern. I call upon Hamas to provide information on their status, as
required by international humanitarian law.
60. I also remain deeply concerned by the continued Israeli practice of holding the
bodies of killed Palestinians. I call upon Israel to return withheld bodies to their
families, in line with its obligations under internati onal humanitarian law.
61. I welcome the cessation of hostilities agreed on 21 May and recognize the
important efforts of Egypt, Qatar and the United States of America to support ending
the violence. I also wish to thank my Special Coordinator for his efforts. Nevertheless,
the situation in Gaza remains deeply worrying, including the severe emotional trauma
and suffering experienced by its people after years of prolonged Israeli closures and
severe economic and movement restrictions, the nature of Hamas rul e and the ongoing
threat of violence. Although a cessation of hostilities continues to hold, it is fragile,
and the risk of a major escalation is ever-present. The devastating events of the past
few weeks are a stark reminder that this conflict cannot be p erpetually managed. I
reiterate that no amount of humanitarian or economic support on its own will address
the challenges in Gaza, which ultimately require political solutions and the political
will to pursue them.
62. In the immediate period, maintaining the calm, stabilizing the cessation of
hostilities and taking steps to urgently address humanitarian needs are crucial
priorities. I appeal to the international community to work with the United Nations to
10/12

21-08205

S/2021/584

develop an integrated, robust package of support for swift, sustainable reconstruction
and recovery that supports the Palestinian people and strengthens their institutions. I
am committed to ensuring that the United Nations plays its part.
63. The United Nations is coordinating the delivery of urgent hum anitarian
assistance to the people of Gaza, and I highlight the $95 million humanitarian flash
appeal launched on 27 May. The United Nations, the World Bank and the European
Union are also working on a rapid damage needs assessment in which the longer-term
reconstruction and recovery needs in Gaza will be estimated. For humanitarian relief
to be delivered to Gaza rapidly, immediate funding for health, protection, education,
food, shelter, water, sanitation and hygiene is required. All parties must also faci litate
unimpeded access to humanitarian relief. Israel must fast-track the entry of goods for
humanitarian response and reconstruction and the passage of essential humanitarian
and reconstruction personnel, including Palestinian nationals. Israel must also
increase significantly the number of Gaza exit permits issued for patients to receive
life-saving cancer treatments and other interventions.
64. I remain extremely concerned by the UNRWA $150 million programme budget
shortfall. I welcome the resumption of funding from the United States last April and
call upon Member States to ensure that the organization has the liquidity over the
summer to conduct operations. UNRWA is vital to the region’s stability, in particular
in the aftermath of a devastating conflict and while the region continues to be volatile.
I welcome efforts by Jordan and Sweden to organize an international conference on
UNRWA in October. Investing in UNRWA remains an indispensable investment in
regional stability and support for the goal of Middle East peace.
65. It is critical that the important Egyptian-led intra-Palestinian reconciliation
efforts continue. The United Nations stands firm in its support of the efforts by Egypt
in this regard, and I call upon all Palestinian factions to make serious efforts to ensure
the reunification of Gaza and the occupied West Bank under a single, democratic,
national Government. Gaza is, and must remain, an integral part of a future
Palestinian State as part of a two-State solution.
66. The postponement of the Palestinian election process has had significant
implications, both for the security situation on the ground and the future of the
Palestinian national project. I commend the tireless efforts of the Palestinian Central
Elections Commission, which, throughout the process, ensured that all the technical
aspects were effectively implemented. The holding of elections in the occupied West
Bank, including East Jerusalem, and Gaza would be a crucial step towards Palestinian
unity, giving renewed legitimacy to national institutions, including a democratically
elected Parliament and Government in Palestine.
67. The pull of short-term fixes must be avoided, and the focus must be on working
towards advancing intra-Palestinian unity, lifting the debilitating closures in Gaza, in
line with Security Council resolution 1860 (2009), and, ultimately, returning to a
peace process that will end the occupation and create a viable two -State solution.
68. I remain committed to supporting Palestinians and Israelis to resolve the conflict
and end the occupation in line with relevant United Nations resolutions, international
law and bilateral agreements in pursuit of achieving the vision of two States – Israel
and an independent, democratic, contiguous, viable and sovereign Palestinian State –
living side by side in peace and security within secure and recognized borders, on the
basis of the pre-1967 lines, with Jerusalem as the capital of both States.
69. I urge Israelis, Palestinians, regional States and the broader international
community to take practical steps that will enable the parties to re -engage on the path
towards meaningful negotiations and, ultimately, peace. The Special Coordinator is

21-08205

11/12

S/2021/584

actively engaged in advancing these efforts with his counterparts in the Middle East
Quartet, key regional partners and Israeli and Palestinian leaders.
70. I express my deep appreciation to Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland for his
outstanding service in what remains a challenging context. I also pay tribute to all
United Nations personnel working under difficult circumstances in the service of the
Organization.

12/12

21-08205
