A /67/PV.67

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Offi cial Records

Sixty-seventh session

67th plenary meeting
Wednesday, 13 March 2013, 4 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jeremić . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Serbia)

The meeting was called to order at 4.15 p.m.
Tribute to the memory of His Excellency Mr. Hugo
Rafael Chávez Frías, President of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela
The President: Before we proceed to the item on our
agenda, it is my sad duty to pay tribute to the memory
of His Excellency Mr. Hugo Rafael Chávez Frías,
President of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, who
passed away on 5 March 2013.
On behalf of the General Assembly, I request the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
to convey our condolences to the Government and the
people of Venezuela and to the bereaved family of
President Chávez Frías.
I now invite representatives to stand and observe
a minute of silence in tribute to the memory of His
Excellency Mr. Hugo Rafael Chávez Frías.
The members of the General Assembly observed a
minute of silence.
The President: It was with great sadness that
I learned of the passing of His Excellency Mr. Hugo
Rafael Chávez Frías, President of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela. On behalf of the General
Assembly, and in my own name, allow me to offer my
deepest condolences to his bereaved family and friends,
the Government and the people of Venezuela, as well
as to his many admirers throughout Latin America, the
Caribbean and the rest of the world.

On this solemn occasion, it is my hope that we can
put aside any personal or political differences and come
together to pay our respects.
History will no doubt remember President Chávez
Frías, who was a charismatic leader whose progressive
policies brought Venezuela’s poverty rate down from
over 70 per cent at the close of the twentieth century to
around 20 per cent today. Throughout his term in office,
he remained committed to the cause of social justice,
working hard to improve the lives of Venezuelans,
especially the most underprivileged among them.
Under his strong leadership, Venezuela made great
strides towards fulfilling the Millennium Development
Goals, to the lasting benefit of a great and proud nation.
He was a man who came from humble beginnings,
brought up in a mud-floor house on the cattle-ranching
plains of Barinas state. That helped him better
understand and feel the pain and privations of ordinary
Venezuelans. While he was a great advocate of the
sovereignty of his country, President Chávez Frías
was also a strong proponent of the revitalization of
the United Nations. Throughout his political career, he
remained a vocal advocate of the global South and a firm
believer in the potential of the Non-Aligned Movement
and the Group of 77 in helping to uplift the developing
world. He was also a driving force behind efforts to
deepen Latin American and Caribbean integration.
That led President Chávez Frías to be actively involved
in establishing or strengthening organizations such
as Petrosur, Petrocaribe, the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States, the Union of South

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

13-25742 (E)

*1325742*

A/67/PV.67

American Nations and the Bolivarian Alliance for the
Peoples of Our America.

for his ability to connect at a human level with the most
vulnerable and give voice to their aspirations.

As President of the General Assembly, I remain
steadfast in my commitment to deepening the
relationship between Venezuela and this body, with
the aim of strengthening the founding principles of the
United Nations.

In memorializing President Chávez, I would like to
recall his message when he first addressed the General
Assembly in 1999. On that occasion, he stated his wish
that one day in the near future it would be possible to
proclaim that “peace, democracy and development have
triumphed” (A/54/PV.7, p. 4). Let us honour the legacy
of President Chávez by renewing our pledge to work
toward these noble goals.

May he rest in peace in the homeland of his hero,
Simón Bolívar, from whom he drew inspiration time
and again.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: It is an honour to join
with the Assembly in paying tribute to the work and
memory of His Excellency President Hugo Chávez
Frías. President Chávez was one of those leaders who
made a difference in his country, the region and the
world. His sense of solidarity with the most vulnerable
and his commitment to improving the lives of the most
underprivileged resulted in a fierce attachment to the
Millennium Development Goals.
He also showed solidarity towards other nations in
the hemisphere. Perhaps most notably, President Chávez
ensured that Venezuela provided crucial assistance to
Haiti following the devastating earthquake of 2010. He
always reminded the region of the historic debt that it
owed to Haiti, the first republic to gain independence in
Latin America and the Caribbean.
I also want to recognize the contribution that
President Chávez made to the peace talks in Colombia
between the Government of President Juan Manuel
Santos Calderón and the Revolutionary Armed Forces
of Colombia. Basing himself on an eminently Latin
American vision, President Chávez provided decisive
impetus to new efforts towards regional integration.
The United Nations has followed with interest and
appreciation the advances in regional integration to
which he gave momentum.
The progress in this area is clear, as illustrated
by the Permanent Observer status before the General
Assembly that the Union of South American Nations
acquired in 2011. As the process of regional integration
progresses, the key role that President Chávez played
in promoting the unity of the peoples of Latin America
and the Caribbean will be present in everyone’s minds.
But perhaps President Chávez will be best remembered

2

The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
I now give the floor to the representative of Chad,
who will speak on behalf of the Group of African States.
Mr. Allam-Mi (Chad) (spoke in French): I have the
great honour to speak on behalf of the Group of African
States at this solemn gathering of the General Assembly
to pay tribute to the memory of His Excellency
President Hugo Chávez Frías, the late President of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, who recently passed
away. I would like first of all to bow to the memory of
this great son of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
and to record that the announcement of his premature
death at the age of only 59 years profoundly shocked
and saddened millions of Africans.
Africa has lost a great friend. The passing of this
great friend of Africa is undoubtedly an irreparable
loss, but his leadership, especially in the conduct of
international affairs in the interests of a fairer world,
will not have been in vain. History will record his
tireless fight for the weakest and most vulnerable, both
in his country and around the world. In other words,
President Chávez will live on in the hearts of millions
of Africans.
(spoke in English)
On this solemn occasion, I also have the honour,
on behalf of the African Group, to convey my deepest
condolences to the family of the late President Hugo
Chávez and to the Government and people of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela at this great loss.
We remain prayerful that as they traverse this sad and
painful period, his memory will remain forever etched
in their hearts and minds.
For many of our countries in Africa, the
commitment of the late President Hugo Chávez to the
economic well-being of his people was greatly admired.

13-25742

A/67/PV.67

The bond between the late President Chávez and Africa
was further cemented through his leadership role in the
establishment of the Africa-South America Partnership.
May his soul rest in peace and light perpetual shine
upon him!

Venezuela will overcome the hardship that they are
going through, and wishes them success in their efforts
to achieve the development to which they aspire and to
build the prosperous future of which President Chávez
Frías dreamed. May his soul rest in peace.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar, who will speak on behalf of the
Group of Asia-Pacific States.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Moldova, who will
speak on behalf of the Group of Eastern European
States.

Sheikh Meshal Hamad M.J. Al-Thani (Qatar): On
behalf of the Group of Asia-Pacific States, I would like
to express my deepest condolences at the passing of the
late President of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
Mr. Hugo Chávez Frías. It is with grief and sorrow that
the Asia-Pacific Group received the sad news of the
death of the late President of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, Mr. Hugo Chávez.
At the outset, let me refer to a statement issued
by the World Bank regarding the education system in
Venezuela, which notes that the number of children
enrolled in secondary education rose during the
14 years of his presidency. The Centre for Economics
and Policy Research has pointed out that poverty in
Venezuela has fallen to its lowest level in a decade. The
Asia-Pacific Group witnessed the efforts exerted by
the deceased President to stand by his commitments to
the poor and vulnerable in his country and beyond. He
directed his country’s wealth to vast social programmes
and provided his citizens with the vital services they
most needed — health care and education. He also
strove to improve the educational system of his country
and provided its citizens with free education, as well as
eradicating illiteracy.
At the international level, the late President spoke
out in favour of oppressed people and was a vocal
advocate of an international system based on justice
and equality for all. The Asia-Pacific Group believes
that President Chávez was a strong advocate of a strong
United Nations and of strengthening South-South
cooperation. The number of world dignitaries and
Venezuelan people who attended his funeral on Friday
stands as testimony to his status as a world figure who
had a great impact on the lives of millions of people.
Based on President Chávez’s sympathy with the
Asia-Pacific Group and the just causes of developing
countries, he will be missed by his dearest friends and
colleagues and will be remembered for his devotion
to their causes. At this critical time, the Asia-Pacific
Group hopes that the Government and the people of

13-25742

Mr. Lupan (Republic of Moldova): On behalf of the
Group of Eastern Eastern European States, let me extend
our condolences over the death of Hugo Rafael Chávez
Frías, the late President of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, as well as to convey our sympathies to his
family and to the people and Government of Venezuela.
President Chávez Frías will be remembered
as a prominent personality who was active in the
international arena, standing for social justice and
equality for the citizens of Venezuela. The States
members of the Eastern European Group look forward
to the durable development of Venezuela and to the
strengthening and diversification of our bilateral
relations for the benefit of our peoples.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saint Lucia, who will speak on behalf
of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States.
Ms. Rambally (Saint Lucia): It is an honour to
address the General Assembly on behalf of the Group
of Latin American and Caribbean States. Today, we pay
our deepest respects to the memory and contribution
of the late President of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, Hugo Rafael Chávez Frías. Our region and
the entire world have lost a man of enormous character
and great courage and vision. He was bold and fearless,
never hesitant to express his deep convictions and
not afraid to champion the cause of the weak and the
dispossessed.
We honour President Chávez Frías as a brave
and distinguished leader who was firmly committed
to the cause of the integration of the Latin American
and Caribbean region, which he regarded as the patria
grande. He reinforced that commitment in words and
fulfilled it in deeds. His cooperation initiatives, such
as Petrosur, Petrocaribe and other bold and imaginative
measures, remain instrumental tools in assisting many
countries of our region in meeting the formidable
challenges to development caused by high energy costs.

3

A/67/PV.67

He often said that the resources with which his country
was blessed were to be shared in order to promote
the progressive and independent development of the
entire Latin American and Caribbean region, whose
collective growth would be further enhanced through
such collaboration.
To that end, his dedication to Latin American and
Caribbean integration was a hallmark of his tenure,
during which there was strong support for mechanisms
such as the Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our
America, the Union of South American Nations and the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States.
He was a strong advocate for South-South cooperation
and the importance of reinforcing concepts, ideas and
programmes to foster economic sovereignty among
the countries of the South. He was a founding member
of the Bank of the South, which was established in
September 2009 as an alternative to the International
Monetary Fund and the World Bank.
President Chávez Frías was a tireless champion
of the poor, the dispossessed and the marginalized,
in his beloved Venezuela and beyond. His efforts to
address economic, social and political inequality are
legendary. His initiatives resulted in reducing poverty
by a half and extreme poverty by two thirds, with a
significant reduction in income inequality, according
to independent estimates. His efforts steadily increased
the standard of living of the majority of his people. That
remained his primary focus.
One major success of President Chávez Frías was
the broadening of public participation in Venezuela’s
political process. Such efforts in the socioeconomic
and democratic spheres have created a new space for a
broader dialogue on creative forms of development, all
of which are people-centred.
President Chávez Frías was one of the most
charismatic leaders. He emerged from relative poverty
and identified with the ordinary man, the common
person, who, in turn, identified with him. Perhaps his
legacy is best illustrated by the thousands of people
who came out into the streets of Caracas and other
cities of the country to peacefully pay their respects to
their beloved fallen leader. The many shouts of “I am
Chávez” that filled the air were indeed an illustration of
the love and dedication of the man and his ideal and of
the commitment of the people to continue the struggle
and to dare to win.

4

The States members of the Group of Latin American
and Caribbean States grieve together with his family,
the people of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and
those across the world who share the deep commitment
of President Hugo Chávez Frías to working tirelessly
for the betterment of the people around the world and
for the self-determination of peoples.
(spoke in Spanish)
As the Group of Latin American and Caribbean
States, we stand in solidarity with the people of
Venezuela.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Finland, who will speak on behalf of
the Group of Western European and other States.
Mr. Taalas (Finland): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Group of Western European and other
States to offer our condolences to the people and the
Government of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
on the passing away of their President, His Excellency
Mr. Hugo Rafael Chávez Frías. Our thoughts and
sympathies are with the family of President Chávez
Frías and with the people of Venezuela at this difficult
time.
The countries of our Group stand ready to work
with Venezuela through the United Nations and other
platforms for prosperity, security and democracy.
We wish the people of Venezuela well and offer our
sympathies at this time of grief.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Fiji, who will speak on behalf of the
Group of 77 and China.
Mr. Thomson (Fiji): On behalf of the Group of 77
and China, I come before you, Mr. President, and the
General Assembly to express profound condolences to
the Government and people of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela at this time of mourning for the passing of
President Hugo Rafael Chávez Frías. President Chávez
Frías was the embodiment of the devoted leader who
pursued a courageously principled path until the very
end. He spoke for the multitudes of underprivileged
people, both in Venezuela and around the world, who
were most in need of the strong voice of a champion.
His focus on providing basic services and maintaining
policies that worked in favour of the poorest in
society predated the world’s articulation of the need
to eradicate poverty as the first of its Millennium
Development Goals. Deeds followed words and, under

13-25742

A/67/PV.67

his leadership, Venezuela moved up seven points on
the Human Development Index of the United Nations,
while a report by UN-Habitat in 2012 highlighted that
Venezuela had the lowest rate of income inequality in
Latin America and the Caribbean.

late President in these difficult times, we are assured
they will take forward his legacy and rise to achieve the
potential that President Chávez Frías saw for his people
and for his great country. May his soul rest in eternal
peace.

Those are achievements of a leader who understood
and acted upon the needs of his people. He was known
as a leader who was not afraid to undertake the major
changes needed to achieve his goals of greater inclusion
of the marginalized through the use of national
resources and the provision of education, housing
and health care. President Chávez Frías translated
those national priorities, which were shaped by his
personal life experience of growing up in poverty, to
the international arena. He challenged the laissez-faire
attitudes of the international system and reminded us
that real progress can be sustainable only if the benefits
of development accrue equitably to all citizens, rather
than just to elites.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran, who will
speak on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

President Chávez Frías stood fi rm in his commitment
to the principles of respect for sovereignty and the
equality of the rights of all States to make decisions
in the best interests of their peoples. He believed that
we must work together as equal States, and it was that
cooperative spirit that underpinned many of his efforts
to achieve regional cooperation and integration in the
Latin American and Caribbean region.
The commitment of President Chávez Frías to the
cause of the development of the South, his contribution
to South-South solidarity and his legacy of struggle for
equity in the world will serve as milestones to be long
remembered. His moral values for social justice and his
struggle for the cause of development for a better world
will certainly serve as a source of inspiration for our
Group. His legacy of providing effective leadership to
the South during his chairmanship of the Group of 77 in
2002, his role in fostering solidarity among developing
countries and his erstwhile promotion of South-South
cooperation will be a source of enduring pride for our
Group.
The world has indeed lost a visionary leader who
challenged us all in our thinking and encouraged us
to focus our work on the most pressing issues facing
our generation. May the vision of President Chávez
Frías continue to guide our work and spur us on as we
continue to confront the many challenges before us.
In sending our condolences to the Government and
people of Venezuela and to the bereaved family of the

13-25742

Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I address
the General Assembly on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement to express our deepest and most sincere
condolences to the citizens and the Government of
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and to the brave
family in the wake of the passing of President Hugo
Rafael Chávez Frías. President Chávez Frías devoted
the best part of his life to enhancing the welfare and
happiness of his people. He will be remembered as
one of the great leaders of the non-aligned countries
for the relentless efforts he made throughout his life to
strengthen the independence of his country and to put
in place measures and policies designed to improve the
lives of millions of his fellow countrymen.
The Bureau of the Non-Aligned Movement also
recognizes the role President Hugo Chávez Frías played
in the world. He believed in the need for the integration
of Latin America and the Caribbean and promoted the
processes aimed at helping to integrate that vast and
important region. The commitment of President Chávez
Frías to international peace and to the promotion of
a world order based on respect for international law,
sovereignty, political independence, the equality of the
rights of States and the self-determination of peoples is
also widely recognized.
The member countries of the Non-Aligned
Movement recognize the dedication of President Hugo
Chávez Frías to the interests of the people of the South.
For that reason, they bestowed the chairmanship of the
Movement upon his country, the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela, for the period 2015 to 2018. May his soul
rest in eternal peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba, who will speak on behalf of the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States.
Mr. Reyes Rodríguez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
I should like to begin my statement by reading out a
message from the Community of Latin American and

5

A/67/PV.67

Caribbean States (CELAC) on the death of Commander
and President Hugo Rafael Chávez Frías.
“The members of the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States and the peoples of
America learned, to their deep dismay and great
sadness, of the passing away of the Commander and
President of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
Mr. Hugo Rafael Chávez Frías, on Tuesday, 5 March
2013. We extend our deepest condolences to the
family of Commander President Chávez Frías,
to the Government of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela and to all the people of Venezuela, to
whom he dedicated his life.
“His unremitting dedication to the sovereignty
and integration of our nations and to the
development of solidarity among the peoples of
the region; his commitment to eradicating poverty
and inequality in Venezuela and in our region; his
determination to work towards achieving a united,
strong and secure Latin America and Caribbean
are all values that have inspired the Community
of Latin American and Caribbean States. For
CELAC — of which he was one of the key founders
and promoters — the example set by Commander
President Chávez Frías inspires us to redouble our
efforts to achieve unity, cooperation, solidarity and
integration in Latin America and the Caribbean.
That is the best tribute that the peoples of Latin
America and the Caribbean can pay to Commander
President Hugo Chávez Frías.”
As the Permanent Representative of Cuba, I would
like to reiterate the deep pain that the people and
revolutionary Government of Cuba feel over the death
of President Hugo Rafael Chávez Frías, a hero of the
Americas. The historic leader of the Cuban revolution,
Commander-in-Chief Fidel Castro Ruz, described
Chávez as the best friend that the people of Cuba had
throughout its history, and he emphasized that he was
honoured to have shared the Bolivarian leader’s ideals
of social justice and support for the exploited.
President Chávez Frías led a tremendous battle
throughout his short and fruitful life. We will always
remember him as a patriotic soldier in the service of
Venezuela and the great fatherland; as an honest,
perceptive, bold and brave revolutionary fighter; as
a supreme leader and commander who reincarnated
Bolivar in order to carry out the work he could not
finish.

6

All of Chávez’s work stands unassailable before
us. The victories of a revolutionary people, who saved
him from the coup of April 2002 and have followed
him without hesitation, are now irreversible. As Cuban
President Raul Castro Ruz said, Hugo Chávez died
undefeated, invincible and victorious, and he carved
out a distinguished place for himself in history.
Chávez shined in international battles in the face of
imperialism. He always defended the poor, the workers,
our peoples. He was passionate, persuasive, eloquent,
ingenious and moving. He spoke to the hearts of people,
sang our joys and recited our passionate verses with
eternal optimism.
Cuba will remain eternally loyal to the memory and
legacy of Commander President Chávez and will carry
on his ideals for the unity of the revolutionary forces and
for the integration and independence of our America.
His example will lead us in our next battles. Forever
onward to victory, Commander President Chávez!
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Peru, who will speak on behalf of the
Union of South American Nations.
Mr. Román-Morey (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): In
conveying our deepest condolences on this occasion,
on behalf of my country, Peru, as well as on my own
behalf and on behalf of the Permanent Mission that
I am honoured to represent, I ask the family, the
Government and, above all, the people of Venezuela
to accept our most heartfelt expression of Bolivarian,
South American and Latin American solidarity. On this
occasion, representing my country in its capacity as
Chair of the Union of South American Nations, I have
the honour of conveying the UNASUR statement on the
occasion of the recent death of President Hugo Rafael
Chávez Frías.
“The Union of South American Nations
(UNASUR) expresses its deepest grief at the passing
away of the President of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, Commander Hugo Rafael Chávez Frías,
a resolute champion of South American unity and
integration. It was under the visionary impetus
of President Hugo Chávez Frías that the decision
was taken to establish UNASUR, in April 2007, at
Isla Magarita, Venezuela. Since then, his tireless
commitment to the South American cause has
served to characterize our integration process with
the inspired search for well-being and justice for
the vast majority of our peoples.

13-25742

A/67/PV.67

“President Chávez Frías will live on in the
collective memory of our peoples because of his role
as a regional leader for integration and as a symbol
of a generation of statespersons who cemented
South American identity and unity, following the
legacy bequeathed to us by the liberators. UNASUR
shares in the pain and encourages the spiritual
strength of the noble people and Government of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, in particular the
family of President Chávez Frías in their grief in
such difficult circumstances.”
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guyana, who will speak on behalf of
the Caribbean Community.
Mr. Talbot (Guyana): On behalf of the member
States of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), I
have the honour to pay tribute to the memory of Hugo
Rafael Chávez Frías, late President of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela. His passing has touched our
Community with sadness and a profound sense of loss.
The overwhelming presence of CARICOM Heads of
State in Caracas on 8 March gave eloquent testimony
to the high esteem in which this remarkable leader was
held by the Governments and peoples of our region.
In the words of the Chairman of the Conference
of Heads of Government of the Caribbean Community,
His Excellency Michel Martelly, President of the
Republic of Haiti:
“President Chávez Frías opened a new chapter
in relations between the countries of CARICOM
and Venezuela with his generosity and deep interest
in the welfare of the peoples of the Community. His
outstretched hand to support our countries during
times of great challenge will never be forgotten,
in particular the generous assistance rendered
by Venezuela to my country, Haiti, following the
earthquake of 2010, as well as to other member
States of the Community. His desire to improve
the lives of the less fortunate in his country, the
Caribbean and in Latin America was the hallmark
of his political life and ensured that his name would
be etched in the history of the region.”
Hugo Chávez Frías was a true friend to CARICOM.
He demonstrated solidarity with the Governments
and peoples of the region through tangible acts of
cooperation, which redounded to the benefit of ordinary
people. President Chávez’s vision for the unity of the
people of Latin America and the Caribbean was driven

13-25742

by his deep sense of concern for the well-being of the
disadvantaged in society, not only in his country but
in the wider region. In that respect, his tremendous
advocacy for South-South cooperation and selfreliance was indeed a bold and determined appeal for
the sustainable development and economic prosperity
of developing countries — an appeal that challenged
leaders to combat inequality and injustice at the
individual, national, regional and international levels
and to work for the common good. The Community of
Latin American and Caribbean States, the Bolivarian
Alliance for the Peoples of Our America — Peoples’
Trade Agreement, the Union of South American Nations,
Petrocaribe, Petrosur and the Bank of the South, among
others, all bear testimony to his outstanding work in
concert with others.
President Chávez Frías has left an indelible imprint
on Latin America and the Caribbean and, indeed, the
world. Most importantly, he will be remembered for the
love and high aspirations he held for Venezuela and his
fellow compatriots.
I take this opportunity once again to extend
CARICOM’s deepest sympathies to the Government
and people of Venezuela and to the family of the late
President. I am confident that the strength and spirit
of the Venezuelan people, so strikingly exemplified by
President Chávez Frías, will sustain that sister country
in its time of grief and ensure its future in this season
of change.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bolivia, who will speak on behalf of
the Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): I wish at the outset to convey
revolutionary greetings to our colleague Mr. Elías Jaua
Milano, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, who is with us on this occasion.
At the same time, the Plurinational State of Bolivia,
on behalf of the countries of the Bolivarian Alliance
for the Peoples of Our America (ALBA) — Antigua
and Barbuda, Bolivia, Cuba, Dominica, Ecuador,
Nicaragua, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and
Venezuela — thanks you, Sir, for convening today’s
meeting in tribute to our dear President Comandante
Hugo Chávez Frías. ALBA endorses the statements
made by the representatives of the Islamic Republic of
Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, of Fiji on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China, of Cuba on behalf

7

A/67/PV.67

of the Community of Latin American and Caribbean
Nations (CELAC), and of Saint Lucia on behalf of the
Group of Latin American and Caribbean States, We also
welcome the statements made by the representatives of
Peru on behalf of the Union of South American Nations
(UNASUR) and of Guyana on behalf of the Caribbean
Community, as well as others who have spoken before
us.
We are here to honour the memory of an
extraordinary man. He was extraordinary not because
he was unable to hold his tongue, which is a great
deal in a world of complacent people who are used to
dissumulate their indignation and shame when they see
misery and injustice. In addition to speaking out loud
and clear, Hugo Chávez was a man who taught us to
build and to put our bodies, minds, hearts and souls
in the service of the greatest cause of all — that of the
liberation of peoples and the revolution that transforms
for the better the lives of each and every one of us. Hugo
Rafael Chávez was a man and leader who, together with
Fidel Castro, dared to interrupt the imperial monologue
when no one else would, and to denounce crimes that
take place every day. He was the man who spoke out
in this very Hall to tell truths that everyone thought
but no one dared to say. Chávez taught us in this very
place to speak of writers such as Noam Chomsky and
such books as The Open Veins of Latin America, of the
future from the present perspective and of the present
from the future perspective. That is why we believe that
today it is also necessary to learn from the life of this
great Latin American, this great revolutionary and this
great man.
Why did he not hold his tongue? He did not because,
as Fidel said in his message of farewell to this great
man, he shared with so many other men and women the
ideals of social justice and support for the exploited,
because he knew that the poor are the same all over the
world and that poverty is the first enemy to be defeated.
He denounced that reality in order to transform it,
starting long before he became the President of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, since the time he
was a young officer aware of the fact that he needed
to change a world marked by injustice. But as we have
already said, Hugo Chávez Frías was a man who did not
content himself with words. On the contrary, he always
knew how to put deeds ahead of speeches because he
was a man who believed in just causes and because he
was a revolutionary.

8

He was a leader who dreamed of giving the peoples
of America sovereignty and independence, and of
making the rights of Mother Earth a tangible reality. He
succeeded in doing so. He was a leader who gave us an
idea of a great homeland, as Simon Bolívar dreamed of
it. He also dared to put into practice such great initiatives
as ALBA, on behalf of whose members I speak today
and which seeks nothing less than to spread literacy and
to distribute medicine, doctors and nurses — that is, to
share with others the gifts we have received by luck
or by effort. Through such initiatives as the Bank of
the South, which unlike capitalist financial institutions,
acts for the sake of cooperation and solidarity to
provide funds to developing countries while respecting
their sovereignty and strengthening their national
independence, and not to subordinate them in order to
profit in exchange for impoverishing their people. They
therefore reject the odious conditionalities imposed
by the Bretton Woods institutions, which are a clear
violation of the sovereignty of nations.
At a time when unilateralism was being imposed,
President Chávez developed a geopolitical concept
of liberation based on strengthening the powers of
sovereign peoples and States predicated on multiple
polarities and multicentrism. Out of that arose ALBA,
UNASUR, the South America-Africa Cooperation
Forum and CELAC, which is also a new name for the
integration of peoples with dignity and sovereignty
and which, unlike others, is governed not by the will
of an empire, but rather by solidarity. Initiatives such
as Petrocaribe are the proof that our natural resources
can be shared for the good of all instead of being used
as an instrument of domination and the enrichment of
the very few to the detriment of the whole planet, and a
way of doing things differently, realizing the dream of
two other great Venezuelans — Bolívar and Miranda.
At a time when climate change, the loss of
biological diversity and desertification processes are
major threats to humankind, we need to remember Hugo
Chávez. His strength and admirable vigour have also
been acknowledged by the leaders of the Non-Aligned
Movement, which have designated Venezuela as the host
country for its next summit and future president of the
Movement. President Chávez showed us that solidarity
must defeat pillaging, and that complementarity is
more powerful than competitiveness because without
solidarity we fall apart. Hospitals, doctors, teachers
and education are of course greater than bullets,
cannons and invasions. In his way, he showed us that

13-25742

A/67/PV.67

the peoples of the South are no longer and never will be
again — please hear me clearly — never will be again
anybody’s backyard.
Today we mourn his passing, but we know that there
are grounds for happiness. The world that Hugo Chávez
left us is a better place. It is not yet the one he wished
to see, but it is much better for all of us. For that reason
also, anyone who was worried about the existence of
Chávez should be even more worried now because,
although he may have left us, the revolutionary force
lives on. Our sorrow over his passing strengthens us in
our courage to embrace and above all make a reality of
the dreams of Bolívar, Manuela Sáenz, Antonio José
de Sucre and José de San Martín. These were also the
dreams of Túpac Katari, Bartolina Sisa, Túpac Amaru,
Micaela Bastidas, José Martí, Francisco Morazán, Eloy
Alfaro, Augusto Sandino, Che Guevara, Fidel and Raúl
Castro and many others who never wavered in the fight
for the freedom, dignity and joy of the great and noble
peoples of Latin America and the Caribbean.
There are so many more. Today, at the head of this
movement that will not be stopped or turned back,
we have Baldwin Spencer of Antigua and Barbuda,
President Evo Morales of Bolivia, Raúl Castro of
Cuba, Roosevelt Skerrit of Dominica, Rafael Correa of
Ecuador, Daniel Ortega of Nicaragua, Ralph Gonsalves
of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, and our comrade
Nicolás Maduro, the man in whom Venezuela, Latin
America and the world vest their hopes.
Lastly, we endorse the words that Fidel Castro
uttered more than 54 years ago in Caracas and which
remain valid and as powerful today. If we wish to save
America; if we wish to save the freedom of each and
every one of our societies, which are ultimately part
and parcel of a great society of Latin America; and if
we wish to save the revolution of Cuba, the revolution of
Venezuela and the revolution of all the countries of our
continent, then we have to close ranks and back each
other up in solidarity; otherwise, alone and divided we
will fail.
Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
As Permanent Representative of Bolivia, I reiterate
the words of President Evo Morales Ayma, who said and
says that Hugo Chávez Frías was the champion of the
poor and that the fight against capitalism, imperialism
and colonialism remains valid. Long live the memory

13-25742

of Hugo Chávez Frías! Our best tribute will be always
to follow his example until victory. We will win!
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay, who will speak on behalf of
the Common Market of the South.
Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): As
Permanent Representative of Uruguay, allow me to start
by reiterating the grief and solidarity of the people and
Government of Uruguay with the family of President
Hugo Chávez Frías and the people and Government of
Venezuela. I have no words to add to those of President
Mujica in Caracas, but may the people and Government
of Venezuela know that Uruguay will always be where
it should be, at their side.
Allow me now to read out the official statement of
the Common Market of the South on the occasion of
the death of Hugo Rafael Chávez Frías, President of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, which has deeply
touched our people’s hearts.
“President Chavez Frías was the founder of
the modern and democratic State of Venezuela.
Historic injustices have increasingly given way to a
nation of equality and justice and the hope and trust
that we will have a future that is free.
“President Chávez Frías was also one of the main
architects of integration and sisterhood among our
peoples. Initiatives such as the Bolivarian Alliance
for the Peoples of Our America, the Community of
Latin American and Caribbean States, the Union
of South American Nations and the Bank of the
South became a reality thanks to the unwavering
dedication of President Chávez Frías to achieving
the generous dream of the great fatherland of
Simón Bolivar.
“President Chávez Frías is an irreplaceable
figure of the twenty-first century with an
outstanding presence in the eminent gallery of great
names in the struggle for the liberation of peoples
in world history. With a stature that matched that
of his revolutionary forefathers, he rose to today’s
complex challenges, in particular in building a
fair, equitable and happy future for humankind.
The ideals of freedom, democracy and equality
that governed the revolutionary life of President
Chávez Frías are at the heart of the integration
of the South and Latin American peoples and the
hope of building another world free of domination

9

A/67/PV.67

and oppression. That is not only possible but also
urgently needed. The history of humankind in the
liberation of peoples found in Hugo Rafael Chávez
Frías, President of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, one of its most noble authors. In that
regard, Chávez Frías was one of those vital human
beings proclaimed by Bertolt Brecht.”
Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): On
behalf of the Government and people of Chile, I wish to
convey our sincere condolences to the Government and
people and the Permanent Mission of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on the terrible loss of President
Hugo Chávez Frías. We also express our solidarity
with his family. After a long and hard fight for his life,
President Chávez Frías now rests in peace.
We remember him as a charismatic man of tireless
energy, dedicated to public service. Noted for his
commitment to the integration of Latin America and
the Caribbean, President Chávez Frías inspired various
initiatives in our region. As host of the Caracas summit
of December 2011, he was responsible for a historic
landmark, namely, the establishment of the Community
of Latin American and Caribbean States (CELAC).
During Chile’s presidency of CELAC, together with
the sisterly Republic of Cuba, we worked closely with
President Chávez Frías as members of the troika of
that body. That task was characterized by a shared
dedication and fruitful efforts for integration under the
principle of unity and diversity, which allowed us to
move towards the development and well-being of our
peoples.
In bidding farewell to President Hugo Chávez
Frías, I wish to recall the words of the Heads of State
of the Latin American and Caribbean States meeting
at the first CELAC summit in Santiago last January:
“Everything that we do for unity will not only be borne
out by history but also become the brightest legacy that
we could leave for future generations”.
Mr. Khalil (Egypt): We learned with great sadness
and profound grief of the passing away of Mr. Hugo
Chávez Frías, late President of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela. Mr. Chávez Frías served his country with
passion, devotion and commitment.
As President of Venezuela for 14 years, Mr. Chávez
Frías has left a lasting impression on his country
and the world. He will be remembered for his bold
assertion of autonomy and independence for the
peoples of developing nations. His courage, formidable

10

communication skills and personal ability to connect
with the people in his country and abroad will be
missed. Egypt and the Arab world will never forget
his principled position with regard to the question of
Palestine and the occupied Arab territories.
We will always remember Mr. Hugo Chávez Frías
as an exceptional leader and an international figure
who advocated the principles of social equality, justice
and independence. Egypt wishes to extend its sincere
condolences and sympathy to the family of Mr. Chávez
Frías and to the Government and the people of Venezuela
on this great loss. The legacy of President Chávez Frías
will endure. It will inspire the people of Venezuela and
those of the global South in their ongoing quest for
freedom, dignity and development. May God Almighty
bless his soul and reward him for all that he has done
for his people and this world.
Ms. Potter (Seychelles): On this sad occasion, I
would like, on behalf of the Government and the people
of Seychelles, to express our solidarity and support to
the family of President Chávez and to the Government
and the people of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
in their moment of great loss and bereavement. The
loss of a leader like President Chávez is one not only
for Venezuela, but for the whole of Latin America and
beyond. President Chávez will be remembered for his
utmost dedication to the concerns of his country and
people, but he will be particularly remembered for
being a real man of the people and a strong advocate
of the less fortunate. His legacy will continue to guide
and inspire present and future generations alike. My
country, the Seychelles, will continue to deepen the
relations of friendship and respect that our two peoples
have always enjoyed. May his soul rest in peace.
(spoke in Spanish)
May the good fight continue in the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): As
a woman in politics, I have learned that we must not
merely interpret leaders’ ideas. What we must do is
freely choose to take them up as shining lights before
us — lights in the darkness of mediocrity, indifference
and forgetfulness. Out of respect and affection, and
for the sake of consistency, I will not read out my own
words to have them inscribed in the archives of history.
What I want to do today is to share with the Assembly
the words of a man who made history — words that he

13-25742

A/67/PV.67

spoke to his people and our peoples at various times
throughout his life.
‘‘Weeping tears,” as José Martí said. That is what
we all share today — tears for our great homeland and
for humanity.
“Look to the streets. How can you remain indifferent
before this great river of bones, this great river of
dreams, this great river of blood, this great river?”
I have recalled again and again this week those
beautiful words by the great Cuban poet and poet of the
Americas, Nicolás Guillén. I have meditated again and
again on the meaning and feeling expressed in every
one of his words. This very river of bones, dreams and
blood has shown its mighty grandeur in these difficult
times of ours.
My President, Cristina Fernández de Kirchner,
said, in her farewell to her friend, “Men like Chávez
do not die; they are sown like seeds.” Men like Chávez
are sown like seeds throughout Latin America and the
Caribbean. Bolívar said that the great dream of South
America has not yet arrived. Two centuries have passed
since then, and our day has come. It has arrived, we have
arrived, and we will be victorious. In a world marked
by violence and war, both as threats and as realities, in
South America we say no. In the Caribbean, we say no.
In Latin America, we say no. We must strengthen our
Latin American and Caribbean land to create a world
of peace and show by example, in this world of war,
misery, violence and invasions, how to build a world
through democracy and the most eloquent words we
can utter — words from our very souls and from the
spirit of the warriors who we are.
We have embarked on a new path in our relations.
We have been able to turn the page in a different way,
recognizing and respecting our differences and opening
up new horizons. We must take the utmost care of all
that we have achieved. We cannot give a foothold to
those who would have our differences divide us. The
cornerstone of liberty in South America, as Bolívar
said, has been laid. That is the key that allows us to
understand the changing times, which started in South
America and are being extended to all of America.
United by the bonds forged in heaven, all of America
is a nation.
Men like Chávez are sown like seeds throughout
the world. I am convinced that a new day has dawned.
The geopolitical map is radically different from that

13-25742

of the late twentieth century or the early twenty-first.
We are forging as one a new world, a multipolar world
in which we each have our own national character,
goals and geostrategic sphere; where we do not enclose
ourselves within our borders but participate actively in
building a new global system.
The unipolar world is no more. Our duty is to usher
in the birth of a new, multipolar world that is balanced
in the political, economic, social, cultural spheres. It
demands a new world order in which the true interests
of the people prevail and capital is not prioritized to
the exclusion of everything else. It means radically
changing the rules of the game. Now more than ever,
we must redistribute humanity throughout the globe.
To do so, a spirit of rebellion must live within all of
us, so that we can continue to make progress and keep
from getting bogged down, because our trials are not
the result of nature playing a dirty trick on us. They are
the direct result of the injustice that reigns in the world
and that has had the greatest impact on the poor and on
our peoples, who bear the least responsibility for the
litany of disasters.
This is the dream of world peace, our dream of a
world without the shame of hunger, sickness or illiteracy.
Our extreme need requires us to grow not only roots,
but also wings to fly. The challenge is great, as is our
determination to not allow ourselves to be swallowed
up by the dark forces that seek to concentrate wealth
in the hands of the few at the expense of millions of
human beings. We will rise above those gravediggers to
strive for the dawn of a new history for this planet — a
multipolar world, free and new, a world of peace.
Men like Chávez are scattered like seeds among
the peoples of the world because there are times when
the course of history is revealed and shows once again
the path that people must take. There are times that
reveal this and make it clear; that lead to commitment
and reveal the destiny that we must live out in order to
weigh the past and see with greater clarity the liberation
that lies ahead.
“I am not much in the habit of weeping, but
when I do, I weep with my whole being and my
sorrow overflows into a confession — a confession
that expresses the infinite pain in my heart when I
received the terrible news of the physical departure
of that great man Nestor Kirchner, my comrade,
friend and brother.”

11

A/67/PV.67

That is what President Chávez said on 27 November 2010
on the death of our President Nestor Kirchner. In that
same spirit, the Government and people of Argentina
are not saying farewell to this symbol of equality or
to the dream of liberation. With profound emotion and
commitment, the Government and people of Argentina
say to him and the Venezuelan people: forever onward
to victory, Comandante President; forever onward to
victory, our friend and comrade Hugo Chávez Frías.
Mr. García González (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): We are brought together today by a great
individual who departed this world more than a week
ago, but who has left us a precious legacy to cherish.
Hugo Chávez Frías, President of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela, showed outstanding leadership and by all
accounts will enter humankind’s history books. In this
posthumous tribute, we join our voices with those of
millions of human beings around the world in support of
the brotherly Venezuelan people and their Government
at this very difficult time. At the same time, we remind
them that in the international concert of nations they
enjoy the backing of those who represent it here.
As representative of El Salvador to the United
Nations, I recall and appreciate Chávez’s devotion to
his people and the commitment he always embraced
to achieving the dream of Bolívar: unity, liberty and
harmony among the peoples of the Americas. In that
context, I would like to convey the respect in which
the Salvadoran Government holds this event, which
has moved us all. I recall the words of our President,
Mauricio Funes Cartagena, who said that Venezuela
is losing not only a President but a patriot, a man of
transformative thoughts and deeds who governed for
his people and changed the reality of inequality and
exclusion that the Venezuelan people suffered under
before he took office.
We are all aware of Venezuela’s progress in the
social field, particularly for the more than 3 million
Venezuelans who have emerged from extreme poverty
and the 5 million who no longer live in conditions of
poverty. Among his achievements, we should also
emphasize the reduction in deaths from malnutrition
and the access to food that the population now
enjoys, all thanks to the programmes that President
Chávez launched with so much dynamism and vision.
Throughout his rule, we also all witnessed his great
human sensitivity and solidarity with the neediest
peoples and lands. In El Salvador, for example, we
remember him for all the help he gave to the families

12

affected by the 2001 earthquakes, especially in the
municipality of Comasagua La Libertad, where the
town was rebuilt thanks to the friendly, supportive
hand he extended.
Beyond that specific attention, our country has
always viewed the Administration of Venezuela’s
President as a Government on the side of the
development, well-being and growth of Latin America.
We have always succeeded in maintaining harmonious
ties that have helped us realize numerous cooperative
projects to benefit our peoples. Our Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Hugo Martínez Bonilla, has also lamented his
passing, saying that this was a sad day for Venezuela
and for our continent, and that El Salvador expressed its
solidarity in this time of mourning with the Venezuelan
nation, with which we are united by historic ties of
brotherhood. May those words stand as a tribute of
gratitude for all the actions that will live forever for the
Salvadoran people.
The tribute we pay to Hugo Chávez, who fought
fiercely for his life, is given not in farewell but in
recognition of his leadership, which will transcend the
generations. We reiterate our most sincere condolences
to our Venezuelan brothers and sisters, and wish them
strength for the sad times they are enduring. At the
same time, we thank them for having shared with all of
the Americas this great patriot, who always preached
justice and truth. May President Hugo Rafael Chávez
Frías rest in peace. He will always live in our hearts.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to welcome
the presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Venezuela with us at this meeting.
There is an Arab proverb that says that everyone
receives what destiny has in store for him and that a
man’s name is an indicator of his personality. In the
mid-nineteenth century, the great writer Victor Hugo
wrote of poverty in Les Misérables, an eloquent novel
known throughout the world. One hundred and fifty
years later, fate saw to it that the land of Venezuela
produced another Hugo, who decided to put an end to
misery and wretchedness in his country and to fight
poverty and social injustice around the world. Thus, the
Hugo of Venezuela put into effect the very same great
humanitarian recommendation left to him by that other
Hugo of the mid-nineteenth century.
Fate has claimed the life of Hugo Chávez, the militant
President of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, a

13-25742

A/67/PV.67

great leader who preserved his country’s independence
and the freedom of his people, and who embodied
a legendary steadfastness in the face of external
attempts to exercise hegemony over peoples and States.
He managed to ensure Venezuela’s sovereignty and
prevent interference in its affairs. He dedicated his life
to championing freedom, social justice and sovereign
equality for his people. He took a principled position
against foreign occupation, invasion, aggression and
injustice.
As much as the passing away of President Hugo
Chávez Frías was a loss for the brotherly Government
and people of Venezuela and for the countries and
peoples of Latin America and the Caribbean, it was also
a great loss for the Government and people of Syria.
My country, Syria, will always remember that brilliant
leader and appreciate his support for Arab causes, the
foremost of which is the question of Palestine, and his
position on the question of the occupied Syrian Golan,
as well as his stance on Syria in the face of the terrorism
to which it has been subject and which is supported
by forces of darkness and ignorance and by colonial
countries that no longer make any pretense about
their public support for such reckless terrorism. Those
States are known for their enmity to the aspirations of
the Syrian people to reform, development, dialogue
and total independence and their rejection of foreign
interference in internal affairs.
The memory and achievements of the late President
Chávez Frías will remain alive in the hearts of the
peoples and free men of the world. His dedication
and his career will remain assets for us and for all
humankind. We extend our condolences to his family
and parents, all the people of Venezuela and to the
Permanent Representative of Venezuela to the United
Nations, my dear friend Ambassador Jorge Valero
Briceño.
Mr. Dapkiunas (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): On
behalf of the delegation of the Republic of Belarus, I
would like to express profound and heartfelt condolences
to the people and Government of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela in connection with the passing
away of President Hugo Chávez Frías. Our hearts are
full of sadness and profound grief at the passing away
of a friend and brother of Belarus.
The President of the Republic of Belarus attended
the farewell ceremony for President Hugo Chávez Frías
in Caracas. A three-day official state of mourning

13-25742

was declared in Belarus. Today from the rostrum of
the General Assembly, I am honoured to read out the
address of the President of the Republic of Belarus,
Mr. Alyaksandr Lukashenka:
“Belarus weeps and grieves with the
Venezuelan people in mourning the untimely
death of Hugo Chávez Frías, one of the greatest
statesmen and public figures of the modern age, an
unflinching hero, an ardent patriot and fighter for
independence, an outstanding politician, thinker
and orator, a brilliant and strong lover of life whose
entire life was unreservedly and completely devoted
to serving his fatherland. Under the leadership of
Hugo Chávez Frías, the heir and successor of the
sacred cause of Simon Bolívar, Venezuela cast off
the odious yoke of backwardness and misery and
freed itself from political and economic oppression
by foreign Powers.
“President Chávez confidently led his
fatherland towards freedom and happiness with
a strong and firm hand. For millions of people
he was, and I am sure will always remain, a true
father of the Venezuelan nation, a champion of
the poor, the underprivileged and the repressed,
a beacon of hope and a bulwark of democracy on
the South American continent. In the person of
Hugo Chávez Frías, we have lost a close and good
friend who loved Belarus and always extended us a
helping hand in difficult times. Our joint work for
the good of Belarus and Venezuela and the warm
human relations that always united us throughout
the years will remain some of my fondest memories
throughout my life. The name of the President of
Venezuela, Hugo Chávez Frías, will be written
in gold in the annals of world history, and his
personality and accomplishments now belong to
eternity.
“Today, at this time of pain and grief, we convey
our condolences to those closest to Hugo Chávez
Frías and all the people of Venezuela, and swear
by the memory of that great leader to implement
our joint designs and plans, maintain the policy of
friendship and mutual assistance, and do everything
for the further strengthening of the voluntary
cooperation for the good of both countries. Rest in
peace our friend and brother, Hugo Chávez Frías;
your deeds will live on forever.”

13

A/67/PV.67

Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): Brazil
aligns itself with the statements made today, especially
those of the representatives of the regional and
subregional organizations of our corner of the world.
The Government of Brazil joins the people and
Government of Venezuela and especially the family of
President Hugo Chávez Frías in their mourning. President
Chávez will live on in the memory of our peoples as
the Venezuelan leader who developed the closest ties
with Brazil, heading a process of rapprochement with
our country that is unprecedented in history. Under his
presidency, Venezuela has become a strategic partner
of Brazil and a full member of the Southern Common
Market. At the national level, President Chávez Frías
undertook a process of economic, social and political
advances which helped to significantly reduce social
inequality among Venezuelans. At the regional level,
the Venezuelan leader played an important role in
integration efforts, in particular in creating the Union
of South American Nations and the Community of
Latin American and Caribbean States.
At this time of sadness and pain, the Government
of Brazil wishes to express its full solidarity with the
people and the Government of Venezuela, especially
with the family of President Chávez Frías.
Mr. Jaua Milano (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I speak on behalf of
Interim President Nicolás Maduro Moros, the entire
Bolivarian Government and the Venezuelan people, who
today raise their voices in song, weeping and statements
to honour the memory of President Commander Hugo
Chávez Frías.
We thank those present and all the representatives of
the countries of the world represented in the Assembly
for their words of solidarity in the light of the physical
disappearance of the supreme leader of the Bolivarian
revolution. We deeply thank the Secretary-General, the
President of the General Assembly and the Chairmen of
the Groups of African, Latin American and Caribbean,
Asian-Pacific, Eastern European and Western European
and other States before the United Nations. Our deepest
thanks also go to the representatives of the Non-Aligned
Movement, the Group of 77 and China, the Community
of Latin American and Caribbean States, the Bolivarian
Alliance for the Peoples of Our America, the Union of
South American Nations and the various organizations
who have spoken, as well as all countries that have

14

taken the floor at this event in order to pay tribute to
the memory of President Hugo Chávez Frías.
Today, we pay tribute to an important leader who
understood the historic time in which we live. He
dedicated his life to continuing the freedom movement
of Simón Bolívar not only in our beloved native land by
strengthening an unprecedented revolutionary process,
whose social benefits are known throughout the world,
but also beyond the borders of our fatherland, fostering
the common unity and integrity of Latin America and
the Caribbean, Africa and all peoples of the South. But,
above all, may participants know that they are paying
tribute to a good man, a true Christian and a humanist,
President Hugo Chávez Frías.
For years, however, he was subjected to a systematic
international demonizing campaign by world Powers.
Hugo Chávez Frías entered political life on 4 February
1992, leading a people’s military rebellion brought
about by the surrender of the fatherland to the poverty
and exclusion that Venezuela experienced in the 1990s.
We note in particular that the military rebellion was
launched out of contempt for the political leadership
of the time, which had ordered the military forces to
mercilessly repress the first social rebellion against
neoliberalism in the world, which took place in our
country in February 1989. It claimed hundreds of
victims, including children and the elderly, amounting
to the greatest violation of human rights in our country.
Hugo Chávez Frías became President of Venezuela
in 1999 by popular vote. He was re-elected three times.
He defeated a referendum that sought to revoke his
term in office. He defeated two attempted coups d’état
by imperialists. He defied innumerable assassination
attempts. He never gave in to pressures to renounce his
popular mandate to transform Venezuela into a place
of happiness for the great majority. President Hugo
Chávez Frías survived the attacks of imperialism and
the bourgeoisie. Commander Hugo Chávez Frías died
victorious.
The Government of President Hugo Chávez Frías
has been a landmark in Venezuela’s national and
foreign policies. In the past, our country was embroiled
in the interests of the North and turned into an oil plant.
When he first came to power in 1999, Venezuela was
moving towards the Free Trade Area of the Americas.
The privatization of our oil industry was almost a
reality. Our country blindly followed the positions

13-25742

A/67/PV.67

and the direction of the great Powers in international
forums and negotiations.

it. Now more than ever, that is a commitment to the
memory of President Hugo Chávez Frías.

Fourteen years later, everything has changed.
Venezuelan foreign policy has become the independent,
sovereign and loyal expression of the feeling of the
Venezuelan people and the doctrine of Simón Bolivar,
our liberating father. During the presidency of
Commander Hugo Chávez Frías, Venezuela’s foreign
policy essentially sought to promote the common
integration of peoples and to establish ties so as to
develop the nations of the South and to strengthen their
political independence, sovereignty and inalienable
right to self-determination.

Today, we pay tribute to a great visionary who waged
tireless battles in order to reset the foundations of our
universal relationship, to put the human being above
capital and to ensure truly sustainable development that
does not threaten the future of humankind.

A few months after being elected President of
Venezuela, Hugo Chávez Frías said that his political
programme was
“to put human beings first, as they should be.
Venezuela thereby seeks to help not only itself but
also, as Bolivar’s fatherland has always done, its
brothers of Latin America, the Caribbean, Asia,
Africa and everywhere, in particular the South and
the third world, in pursuit of a much better path for
our peoples. Our life follows that path and we must
devote our life to that path, as so many have done.”
Commander Chávez Frías bequeathed us his
creative effort for the union of the peoples of the
world, built with other regional leaders and achieved
in the Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our
America, the Union of South American Nations and
the Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States. President Chávez Frías in particular worked
to set up the Africa-South America Summit and the
Summit of South American-Arab Countries and to
strengthen the Organization of Petroleum Exporting
Countries. He established Petrocaribe, recognized as
an unprecedented energy cooperation instrument, and
Venezuela’s membership of the Common Market of the
South. He strengthened ties with emerging countries of
the South.
In the context of the United Nations, Venezuela
helped to strengthen the Group of 77 and China and
the Non-Aligned Movement. The latter, in recognition
of the leadership of President Hugo Chávez Frías,
granted Venezuela the presidency of the Movement
for the period 2015-2018. Rest assured that Venezuela
will resolutely shoulder the responsibility that the 121
countries comprising the Movement have entrusted to

13-25742

Among other elements, thanks to the brave thinking
of Hugo Chávez Frías and his bold actions, we broke
the Washington consensus and the thesis of the end
of history and the triumph of capitalism. The peoples
of the South once again hoisted anti-imperialist,
anti-colonial and anti-neoliberal banners and the
redeeming word of socialism began to resonate once
more in world forums as the tangible hope for human
emancipation. How can we forget the statement made
from this rostrum that “it smells of sulphur here” as an
ingenious way of denouncing belligerent imperialism
or the memorable battle against the Free Trade Area of
the Americas, truly crushing the neoliberal economic
model, which sought to thwart the self-determination of
peoples and to subject us to hunger and eternal poverty.
How can one forget his successful effort to ensure that
the revolutionary Cuba of Fidel and Martí, the Cuba of
Latin American dignity, was freed from the disgraceful
neocolonial sanctions imposed on that brotherly people
by the Organization of American States.
In this tribute, as the children of Bolívar and Chávez
Frías, we have come to endorse their crucial proposals
for building another possible world. The time has come
to unite efforts in order to revamp the United Nations.
That is what President Hugo Chávez Frías proposed in
his statements before this body in 2006 and 2009. That
is an urgent necessity for the countries of the South.
We cannot remain insensitive to the deteriorating
living conditions of the Palestinian people, in particular
the women and children living in the occupied
Palestinian territory. Strengthening the Palestinian
State and its entry as a full Member of the United
Nations is a historic debt of the Organization. The
overwhelming will of the General Assembly has called
for an end to the embargo on the heroic Cuban people
for five decades. However, that will is still ignored.
The prevailing relationships today are based
on global financial and economic power, through
which a handful of countries maintain a monopoly on
international credit. Those unjust institutions impair
the sovereignty of the nations of the South and therefore

15

A/67/PV.67

must be transformed. We face an emerging need for
creating our own economic and financial institutions
founded on the principles and values of solidarity and
complementarity.

united movement that would open up a new era for the
United Nations, in which the countries of the South may
genuinely have an impact on global affairs and make
progress towards peace among peoples and nations.

We cannot continue to allow environmental and
climate deterioration; thousands of people to day every
die from hunger, especially in our Mother Africa; or
ethnic groups and ancestral cultures to disappear,
thereby jeopardizing the diverse heritage of humankind.
We are facing a crisis of an exploitative nature with
three fundamental pivots: the exploitation of human
beings, the exploitation of nature and the exploitation
of us, the peoples of the South.

Today we need to advance towards the construction
of a new economy that will make it possible for each
man, woman, boy and girl on the Earth to eat and
be clothed and sheltered. To do that, there is a need
to strengthen the common platform of the South for
economic and social matters. Comandante Chávez
Frías unstintingly worked for those objectives when he
called for consolidating unity within the Group of 77
and China. President Chávez Frías gave his utmost to
achieve a world in which peace, justice, solidarity and
the well-being of the human being prevailed, which he
felt was possible only through socialism.

To fight against those oppressive realities, President
Hugo Chávez Frías proposed the building of a United
Nations that would represent the aspirations of all peoples
and Governments of the world. Only in that way can we
attain peace, justice, solidarity and the development of
the peoples of the world. The United Nations must find
effective and just means for addressing and resolving
global conflicts. Foreign interventions only beget more
violence and more instability. President Chávez Frías
always underscored the fact that the peaceful means
referred to in the Charter of the United Nations must
prevail when the time comes to tackle the solution of
conflicts.
In his statement at UNESCO in 1999, President
Hugo Chávez Frías said:
“I am just a bearer of millions of voices and beating
hearts that dare, in some small way, to search for
the peace we all wish to see. But a true peace, not
the peace of the graveyard, not the peace of a gag
nor the peace of fettered slaves, nor the peace of the
misérables of Victor Hugo — but true peace, life,
education, culture and happiness for all”.
In 2006, here in this Hall, President Chávez
stressed the need for making progress in enlarging the
Security Council both in terms of both permanent and
non-permanent seats, thereby creating opportunities
for developing countries. He said that the Security
Council should adequately represent all the regions
of the world. He also called for the strengthening of
the General Assembly, so that it would recover the
place and importance that it had in the past. He stated
that the voice of the countries of the South should be
increasingly heard in this forum. President Chávez
Frías referred to the need for continuing to bolster the
Non-Aligned Movement and for promoting a sound and

16

Hugo Chávez Frías served the United Nations and
complied with the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs) set forth by it. During his tenure, extreme
poverty in Venezuela was reduced from 26 to 6 per cent,
and he left us a mandate to eradicate it over the next
six years. Hunger and illiteracy were eradicated. We
made progress in the universalization of education, the
active participation of women in all areas of national
life, the protection of childhood and maternity, the
environment and wholesale access to information and
communication technologies. That is part and parcel of
his legacy for the overall social happiness of our people
and his commitment to the human cause.
Comandante Chávez Frías loved the Venezuelan
people, just as he loved all the peoples of the world,
especially the indigenous peoples and those of African
descent. The legacy of President Chávez Frías is a
benchmark for the oppressed peoples and nations of
the world. Those of us who survive him in leading
the political conduct of the Bolivarian revolution are
committed to raising aloft with greater force than ever
the banner of Bolivarian socialism in order to modestly
contribute to a more humane humankind.
The leadership of the Bolivarian revolution
headed by our comrade President-in-charge Nicolás
Maduro Moros wishes to convey to the General
Assembly our resolve to guarantee peace and the
political, economic and social stability of Venezuela,
as well as respect for all the international treaties and
agreements, reaffirming the irrefutable principles
of self-determination, sovereignty and the peaceful
settlement of international conflicts. Nonetheless, we

13-25742

A/67/PV.67

wish to draw attention to the intentions of far-right
groups, often fostered by imperialist forces, to disrupt
the tranquillity of Venezuelan society. The Assembly
should know that we have the democratic institutions
and the political maturity to thwart those attempts.
Only the Venezuelan people may decide in a sovereign
manner at the elections to be convened on 14 April 2013
who will be the President and according to which social
model we wish to live.
We are sure that the model of society set out in the
Constitution of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela of
1999, as further developed by President Hugo Chávez
Frías in the Plan for the Homeland submitted at the
recent elections held on 7 October 2012, which was
adopted by more than 56 per cent of the electorate, will
be ratified. That model of society is underpinned by
five great historic objectives written in his own hand by
Comandante Chávez Frías in his Plan for the Homeland,
which I will read out verbatim:
“First, to defend, expand and consolidate the
most valuable achievement of the past 200 years,
namely, our regained national independence;
“Secondly, to continue building Bolivarian
socialism of the twenty-first century in Venezuela
as an alternative to the savage model of capitalism,
and thereby ensure the greatest possible happiness,
the greatest possible security and the greatest
possible political stability for our people;
“Thirdly, to turn Venezuela into a country that
is a social, economic and political power among the
nascent great Powers of Latin American and the
Caribbean, guaranteeing the building of a zone of
peace in our Americas;
“Fourthly, to contribute to the development
of a new international geopolitics in which a
multicentric and multipolar world would take
shape, making it possible to strike a balance in the
universe and to guarantee planet-wide peace.
“Fifthly, to contribute to preserving life on the
planet and the salvation of the human race”.
That is the political will and testament of
Comandante Hugo Chávez Frías.
To echo the slogan that our people are chanting
today in the streets, factories, schools and universities,
and fields, and to the four winds of the entire immensity

13-25742

of Venezuela: “Chávez lives on! The struggle continues!
Onward to victory!”
The Acting President: We have thus concluded
the tribute to the memory of His Excellency Mr. Hugo
Chávez Frías, late President of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The Acting President: I now draw the attention
of the General Assembly to a note by the SecretaryGeneral, contained in document A/67/784, circulated
under sub-item (g) of agenda item 20, “Report of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Environment
Programme on its twelfth special session”.
Members will recall that the Assembly concluded
the consideration of sub-item (g) of agenda item 20 at
its 61st plenary meeting, on 21 December 2012. In order
for the Assembly to take action on the document, it will
be necessary to reopen consideration of sub-item (g)
or agenda item 20. May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to reopen sub-item (g) of agenda
item 20?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Members will further recall
that, at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 21 September 2012,
the General Assembly decided to allocate agenda item
20 and its sub-items (a) to (i) to the Second Committee.
In order to enable the General Assembly to take
action expeditiously on the document, may I also take
it that the Assembly wishes to consider sub-item (g) of
agenda item 20 directly in plenary meeting and proceed
immediately to its consideration?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 20 (continued)
Sustainable development
(g) Report of the Governing Council of the
United Nations Environment Programme
on its twelfth special session
Note by the Secretary-General (A/67/784)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
action on the draft resolution contained in the annex

17

A/67/PV.67

to document A/67/784. The draft resolution is being
presented as follow-up to paragraph 88 (a) of resolution
66/288, and more specifically to paragraph 4 (b) of
resolution 67/213, through which the General Assembly
mandated the Governing Council of the United Nations
Environment Programme to make a recommendation
on its designation to reflect its universal character.
Pursuant to that mandate, the first universal
membership session of the United Nations Environment
Programme Governing Council adopted decision
27/2, through which Member States decided on the
recommended designation and the transmission of
a draft resolution to be considered by the General
Assembly. The text, adopted as an annex to decision
27/2, is before the General Assembly today.
I should like to clarify that the draft resolution
recommended for adoption by the Governing Council is
not presented in the context of the report of the Council.
The Governing Council’s report will be transmitted to
the Assembly at its sixty-eighth session through the
Economic and Social Council, for consideration by the
Second Committee in accordance with resolution 2997
(XXVII).
The Assembly will now take action on the draft
resolution contained in the annex to document
A/67/784, entitled “Change of the designation of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Environment
Programme”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
the draft resolution contained in the annex to document
A/67/784?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
67/251).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of position on the resolution just
adopted, may I remind delegations that explanations of
vote or position are limited to 10 minutes and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): The United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20) was a
milestone in moving sustainable development forward.
The many processes launched by Rio+20 will ensure
that we have both the substantive tools — the sustainable
development goals (SDGs) — and the institutional
framework — the high-level political forum and the
strengthened United Nations Environment Programme

18

(UNEP) — to guide our enhanced efforts towards
sustainable development.
Brazil is pleased to see the several Rio+20 processes
moving forward, with the beginning of the open-ended
working group on the SDGs, the ongoing consultations
on the high-level political forum, and the establishment
of the Expert Committee on a Sustainable Development
Financing Strategy, the workshops on technology
transfer and today, in particular, the implementation
of paragraph 88 of the Rio+20 outcome document
(resolution 66/288, annex) on the strengthening of
UNEP.
For Brazil, strengthening UNEP was one of the main
outcomes of the Rio+20 Conference. We recognize that
we cannot achieve sustainable development without
a strong environmental pillar. We commend in this
regard the decision of the universal Governing Council
of UNEP to implement the agreement reached by our
heads of State and Government in Rio last year. We
also welcome the recommendation made by the UNEP
Governing Council to change its designation in order to
reflect its universal character. We note, however, that
the change of name is only part of the broader agreement
reached in Nairobi last month. In that regard, we would
like to offer the following comments on the direct
submission of the draft decisions of the Governing
Council to the plenary of the General Assembly for
consideration.
We would like to recall that, in accordance with
resolution 67/213, the report of the first universal
session of the Governing Council was due for
consideration by the General Assembly at its sixtyeighth session, in the fall. We would have preferred for
normal practices to be respected, which would entail
consideration of the report by the Economic and Social
Council and subsequently by the Second Committee
of the General Assembly. The recommendation on the
change of designation would then be reflected in the
draft resolution submitted annually by the Group of 77
and China on the report of UNEP at the sixty-eighth
session of the General Assembly.
Bearing this in mind, we stress that the adoption
today of the recommendation contained in the annex to
the Secretary-General’s note (A/67/784) must not set a
precedent, which would undermine the normal practice
of consideration of the renamed Governing Council
report from now on.

13-25742

A/67/PV.67

Mrs. Irman (Indonesia): First of all, on behalf
of the Government and the people of the Republic of
Indonesia, I extend our deepest condolences to the
Government and the people of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela on the passing of His Excellency Mr. Hugo
Chávez Frías, President of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela.
On the consideration of the note by the SecretaryGeneral (A/67/784) circulated under sub-item (g) of
agenda item 20, we would like to raise our concerns as
a matter of principle.
First, with regard to the procedural matter, we are
convened in this plenary meeting under sub-item (g)
of agenda item 20, entitled “Report of the Governing
Council of the United Nations Environment Programme
on its twelfth special session”, as a result of a decision
taken by the Governing Council of the United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP) at its 2012 meeting.
In this regard, I fail to see how the note that being
considered today, the annex of which contains the
decision of the Governing Council of UNEP taken just
last month (resolution 67/251), could be procedurally
relevant.
Secondly, with regard to the subject matter, the
decision to change the designation of the Governing
Council of UNEP and its relation to the follow-up of
the outcome document (resolution 66/288, annex)
of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development, which is stipulated in resolution 67/213,
I would like to reiterate in its entirety the provision
contained in paragraph 4 (b) of the resolution. This

13-25742

means that it is not acceptable to pick and choose
one element of the whole decision of the twentyseventh Governing Council of UNEP for adoption. It
is our preference that the entire decision to implement
paragraph 66 of the Rio+20 outcome document be
reflected.
Ms. Vu Minh Thuy (Viet Nam): I would like to
take the floor to state that we are pleased to see the
adoption of resolution 67/251, changing the designation
of the Governing Council of the United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP) to the United
Nations Environment Assembly of the United Nations
Environment Programme.
Through our negotiation process at the United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development,
Member States reached an agreement to strengthen
the role and enhance the status of UNEP as the
leading global environmental authority that sets the
global environmental agenda. We see the resolution
adopted today as an exercise of that commitment,
with the confidence that the new designation of the
United Nations Environment Assembly of UNEP will
strengthen the governance of that body and enhance its
responsiveness and accountability to Member States.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly wishes to conclude its consideration
of sub-item (g) of agenda item 20?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 6.25 p.m.

19
