S/PV.8180

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8180th meeting

Tuesday, 13 February 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Alotaibi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kuwait)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Alemu
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Umarov
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Kuzmin
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni
Mr. Hickey
Ms. Tachco

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-04094 (E)
*1804094*

S/PV.8180

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security caused
by terrorist acts
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
a briefing by Ambassador Gustavo Meza-Cuadra,
Permanent Representative of Peru, in his capacity as
the Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Meza-Cuadra.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): In my
capacity as Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism
(CTC), I have the honour to update the Council on the
implementation of resolution 2341 (2017) concerning
the protection of critical infrastructure from terrorist
attacks as requested therein.
I wish to begin by thanking the Kuwaiti presidency
for including this topic on the Council’s agenda.
(spoke in English)
As recognized by the Council, it is increasingly
important to ensure the protection of critical
infrastructure from terrorist attacks for the benefit of
the national security, public safety and economy of
States concerned, as well as the well-being and welfare
of their people. Resolution 2341 (2017) therefore calls
on Member States to consider developing or further
improving their strategies for reducing risks to critical
infrastructure from terrorist attacks. That includes,
inter alia, assessing and raising awareness of the relevant
risks, taking preparedness measures, including effective
responses to such attacks, promoting interoperability in
security and consequence management, and facilitating
the effective interaction of all stakeholders involved.
The resolution also encourages all States to make
concerted and coordinated efforts, including through
international cooperation, to improve preparedness for
attacks against critical infrastructure. International
cooperation is particularly relevant to effectively
addressing security concerns arising from threats
2/16

13/02/2018

and vulnerabilities related to increasing cross-border
interdependencies of critical infrastructure among
countries and sectors.
The CTC, with the support of the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED),
plays a key role in promoting international cooperation
and identifying related gaps, vulnerabilities, trends and
existing good practices. Its work includes assessment
and analysis, including on trends in the area aimed
at assisting the efforts of all States. In that regard, I
commend CTED for its proactive engagement in that
area since the adoption of resolution 2341 (2017),
in particular on identifying a number of excellent
initiatives, including, inter alia: the European
Programme for Critical Infrastructure Protection; the
Declaration on the Protection of Critical Infrastructure
from Emerging Threats, issued by the States members of
the Inter-American Committee Against Terrorism of the
Organization of American States; the Commonwealth
of Independent States Anti-Terrorism Center and the
assistance provided to their respective member States
by the Collective Security Treaty Organization and
the Regional Anti-Terrorist Structure of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization.
The Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe has also published the Good Practices Guide on
Non-Nuclear Critical Energy Infrastructure Protection
from Terrorist Attacks Focusing on Threats Emanating
from Cyberspace. The Global Counterterrorism Forum
has also developed a set of good practices concerning
the protection of soft targets in the context of counterterrorism. CTED is developing an initiative aimed at
raising awareness of the requirements under resolution
2341 (2017), and accordingly enhancing States’
capacities within the framework of the Working Group
on the Protection of Critical Infrastructure including
Vulnerable Targets, Internet and Tourism Security of
the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force with
a view to developing a comprehensive compendium
of good practices concerning the protection of critical
infrastructure. CTED has also engaged with the private
sector on the issue. It notably co-chaired the related
work of the World Economic Forum and promoted the
need to protect critical infrastructure both in Davos
and in the context of the work of the CTED-Asia
Information and Communication Technology CounterTerrorism Dialogue.
There is a need to further encourage all States to
identify what constitutes critical infrastructure in their
18-04094

13/02/2018

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

respective national contexts. States should also develop
national strategies for reducing risks and incorporate
those strategies into their national counter-terrorism
plans. There is a need to enhance overall international
cooperation through the exchange of information,
knowledge and good practices, and of ideas and
research concerning critical-infrastructure protection.
States bear the responsibility for the protection of
critical infrastructure, but private owners of such
infrastructure and soft targets must also address their
security needs and reduce vulnerabilities. It is also
vital that Government and the private sector share
information on threats, vulnerability and measures to
mitigate risks. There is a need to initiate and strengthen
joint training and exercises for law enforcement aimed
at strengthening their preparedness and enhancing
response capacity, communication networks and earlywarning mechanisms.
I should stress the importance of including
other relevant Security Council resolutions, such as
resolution 2309 (2016), on civil aviation, and resolution
2322 (2016), on international judicial cooperation, in
our work to protect critical infrastructure. Many States
continue to face significant challenges in their efforts
to implement the relevant Security Council resolutions,
including resolution 2341 (2017). It is therefore
important that our recommendations be taken up by our
implementation partners and integrated into their work
and technical assistance programmes.
The Committee and CTED will continue to assess
States’ implementation of resolution 2341 (2017) so as
to support their work to prevent such attacks and to
cooperate closely with their key partners through the
regular exchange of information.
The President (spoke in Arabic):
Ambassador Meza-Cuadra for his briefing.

I

thank

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Ms. Tachco (United States of America): I thank
Ambassador Meza-Cuadra for his briefing, as well as
his leadership as the Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counterterrorism. We very much appreciate his work.
Over the past year, deadly terrorist attacks have
killed hundreds of innocent civilians and injured
countless others throughout the world, in places like
the Intercontinental Hotel in Kabul, Las Ramblas in

S/PV. 8180

Barcelona, the Al-Rawda Mosque in the Sinai and the
Save the Children Office in Jalalabad, to name just
a few. Although we continue to destroy the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) on and off the battle
fields of Iraq and Syria and shut down Al-Qaida and
ISIS networks around the world, terrorists continue to
evolve and adapt.
The ability of the terrorist networks to exploit
weaknesses in our defences both at critical infrastructure
sites and soft targets all around the world make it clear
that much more must be done. That is why the United
States strongly supported the adoption of resolution
2341 (2017) a year ago and called upon all States to
make concerted and coordinated efforts, including
through international cooperation to raise awareness
and expand knowledge of the danger of terrorist attacks
against critical infrastructure. It is clear that Al-Qaida
and ISIS operatives, including returning foreign
terrorist fighters and home-grown terrorists, continue
to plot against critical infrastructure, such as airports,
power plants and Government facilities, despite nearly
two decades of international efforts since 11 September
2001. We must better address those threats.
However, we must also not forget that such
operatives continue to attack soft targets, such as
sporting venues, theatres and hotels, because they
have historically received far less attention than
critical infrastructure, and we all have paid dearly for
it. That is why we must continue to do more to assess
and raise awareness of the actual risks, while taking
appropriate preparedness measures, promoting better
interoperability, not only within Governments and
between Governments but also with the public and
private sectors, and ensuring resilience to attacks. We
must continue to look to the United Nations, regional
and international organizations and Member States
to develop and share good practices, and take all
appropriate measures to manage the risk of terrorist
attacks on critical infrastructure and soft targets.
For instance, since the adoption of resolution
2341 (2017) a year ago, the Global Counterterrorism
Forum has published the Antalya Memorandum on
the Protection of Soft Targets in a Counter-terrorism
Context. The Antalya Memorandum contains good
practices for both Government and industry on how to
increase awareness and preparedness for attacks against
the public spaces where we gather to dine, shop, tour
and conduct business. Those good practices reflect the
collective expertise of more than 60 countries and 150

18-040943/16

S/PV.8180

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

public and private practitioners from law enforcement
intelligence agencies, emergency management and the
private sector and are applicable globally to inform
and guide Government and industry in developing and
refining policies and practices for soft target protection.
In the United States we have incorporated the Antalya
good practices into our domestic soft target security
programmes. We encourage others to do the same and
continue to collaborate with international partners on
how to implement most effectively these good practices
as a means of promoting greater global preparedness
for those types of attacks.
We also pleased that both resolution 2395 (2017),
renewing the mandate of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED), and
resolution 2396 (2017) on returning and relocating
foreign terrorist fighters reaffirm resolution 2341 (2017)
and the importance of addressing risks associated with
critical infrastructure and other particularly vulnerable
targets from terrorist attack. We will be looking to CTED
and other United Nations and international bodies such
as the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism,
INTERPOL and the International Organization for
Migration to assist Member States in improving their
efforts to implement those resolutions and facilitate
needed technical assistance.
In the United States and many other countries,
private companies own most of the critical
infrastructure. Protecting such infrastructure is
therefore a collaborative effort between the private
and public sectors. In April the United States will be
hosting in Japan under the auspices of the Asia-Pacific
Economic Cooperation forum a workshop on protecting
soft targets from terrorist attack, which highlights the
importance of fostering public-private partnerships.
Resolution 2341 (2017) represented a significant
step forward in the global response to protecting critical
infrastructure from the threat of terrorist attack. Now
we must take concrete steps towards increasing our
vigilance and adaptability to the evolving threat to
better protect our citizens from future terrorist attacks.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, I would like to thank Ambassador
Gustavo Meza-Cuadra, Chair of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, established by resolution 1373 (2001), for
his informative briefing, which shed light on the current
status of the implementation of resolution 2341 (2017),
on the protection of critical infrastructure from terrorist
4/16

13/02/2018

attacks. We sincerely thank Kuwait’s presidency for
including such a relevant and important issue on the
Security Council’s agenda in February.
Terrorism in all its forms and manifestations is
one of the most serious threats to international peace
and security. The Republic of Equatorial Guinea
is extremely concerned about and supports the
protection of critical infrastructure from potential
terrorist attacks. The Government of His Excellency
Mr. Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, President of the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea, is one of the principal
investors in development and infrastructure projects of
all kinds in Central Africa, which are key to making
progress in achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals in the subregion. We therefore understand and
acknowledge the crucial importance of protecting
critical infrastructure that guarantees the distribution
of drinking water and food, access to education, health
sources of renewable energy, air, maritime and land
transportation and financial services that sustain the
economy and well-being of our people.
In that regard, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
endorses resolution 2341 (2017), which calls for
the establishment of suitable national, subregional
and continental mechanisms for cooperation,
information-sharing and public-private partnerships
for planning, preventing, managing crises and deterring
potential attacks on the critical infrastructure of the
countries. Similarly, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
is encouraged by regional initiatives that are supported
by the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, as outlined in the briefing we just heard.
Nonetheless, we must point out the lack of African
initiatives listed. We would therefore encourage greater
cooperation with the African Union and the subregional
and regional economic communities, where — as we
all know — particularly complex vulnerabilities exist
with regard to maintaining the progress made towards
achieving the Millennium Development Goals, which
should lay the foundation for reaching the Sustainable
Development Goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, and the African Union Agenda 2063.
We understand that the implementation of
resolution 2341 (2017) complements the objectives
of the Committee and of other Council resolutions,
including resolutions 1373 (2001), 2309 (2016), on civil
aviation, and 2322 (2016), on international cooperation,
and that mechanisms to implement the resolutions must
18-04094

13/02/2018

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

be incorporated into national and regional counterterrorism strategies. The Republic of Equatorial
Guinea is committed, to the extent possible and in
line with its national laws, to working to ensure the
implementation and application of the resolutions. In
order to implement effective strategies, we call on the
international community to support the development
of initiatives to protect critical infrastructure in Africa
and the rest of the world, in particular in the most
vulnerable countries. We also call on it to participate in
initiatives that ensure that representatives of all social
and economic sectors take part in programmes that
help us to better understand terrorist threats, prevent
terrorist acts and detect suspicious activities.
Let me conclude by thanking the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate for its cooperation
and excellent work; the Monitoring Team on the
implementation of resolution 1267 (1999) of 15 October
1999; the International Criminal Police Organization;
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, and
all other bodies of the United Nations. Together, all of
those organizations carry out an essential function in
helping Member States to develop strategic capabilities
to protect their infrastructure from terrorist attacks.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China appreciates the Kuwaiti initiative to convene
this debate on counter-terrorism and the protection of
critical infrastructure against terrorist attacks. The
delegation of China thanks Ambassador Meza-Cuadra
for his briefing.
Terrorism is the common enemy of all humankind.
Faced with the threats of terrorism, all countries have
a shared destiny. The international community should
embrace the concept of a community with a shared
future, closely follow new trends and characteristics in
the evolution of such threats, enhance cooperation and
jointly respond to terrorist threats.
First of all, in the face of all forms of terrorist threats,
the international community should uphold a unified
standard and enhance counter-terrorism synergy. All
countries should adopt a zero-tolerance policy without
differentiation, regardless of terrorist locations,
justifications, target countries or tactics. Terrorists
must be met with resolute measures. International
counter-terrorism efforts must fully respect the
sovereignty of countries concerned. Affected countries
should assume the primary responsibility to combat

S/PV. 8180

terrorism. International cooperation in the field of
counter-terrorism must be in keeping with the purposes
and principles of Charter of the United Nations and
promote the leading role of the United Nations and the
Security Council.
Secondly, the international community should
jointly respond to and address the root causes that
breed terrorism. The international community should
help States Members of the United Nations to achieve
socioeconomic development, alleviate and eradicate
poverty and conduct dialogue on an equal footing
among civilizations and religions. We should refrain
from linking terrorism with any specific ethnicity or
religion, build a new form of international relations
and construct a community with a shared future for the
benefit of humankind.
Thirdly, all countries must take concrete measures
to stop the movement of terrorist fighters and curb the
spread of terrorist and extremist ideologies. Currently,
a major challenge is the movement and return of
terrorist fighters who have launched many attacks on
infrastructure in their countries of origin, transit and
destination. All countries should enhance border control
and enforcement cooperation. The counter-terrorism
bodies of the United Nations and relevant international
organizations should play an important role in that
effort. On the basis of respecting the sovereignty
of Member States, the United Nations and relevant
international bodies must respond to the specific needs
of Member States and enhance the capacity-building
of those countries and their ability to respond to the
movement of terrorist fighters. The international
community should also follow the new trends and
evolution of the terrorist threat and scale up efforts to
counter the use of the internet for the spread of terrorist
ideologies and the commission of terrorist attacks.
Fourthly, concrete measures should be adopted to
implement Council resolution 2341 (2017) and other
relevant resolutions so as to protect key infrastructure
from terrorist attacks. Member States should implement
relevant Council resolutions, identify relevant security
policies and take concrete measures with regard to any
potential terrorist attack on key infrastructure as a
high-risk factor, as well as establish early-warning and
emergency-response mechanisms. All countries should
shoulder the responsibility of ensuring the safety and
security of their own infrastructure, enhance domestic
legislation and bring to justice perpetrators of terrorist
attacks on infrastructure. The international community

18-040945/16

S/PV.8180

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

13/02/2018

should enhance international cooperation in the field
of protecting key infrastructure and help developing
countries to scale up their capacity-building.

water, electricity, telecommunication and internet,
transportation, banking and finance, is too ghastly
to contemplate.

Over the past few years, the violent terrorist
elements in eastern Turkistan — represented by the
Eastern Turkistan Islamic Movement (ETIM) — have
planned and carried out a number of terrorist attacks
in China. They have also posed a serious threat to
countries in the Middle East and Central Asia. Fighting
the violent terrorist forces of ETIM should be part of
international counter-terrorism efforts. Such forces
should be met with resolute measures.

Of course, the airline industry has often been the
primary target of terrorists, and a series of measures
have already been put in place to enhance aviation
security. However, the airline industry remains
vulnerable to terrorist attacks and there is therefore a
need for greater international cooperation in closing
any loopholes that could be exploited by terrorists.

As a very important member of the international
counter-terrorism alliance, China has actively
participated in recent years in multilateral cooperation
mechanisms, such as the United Nations and the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization, and have made
important contribution to international counterterrorism efforts. Beginning in 2017 and for the next
five years, China will support INTERPOL in carrying
out three joint global initiatives annually to combat
terrorism and organized cybercrime.
China supports the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counterterrorism, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate and the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities in their efforts to enhance cooperation with
the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, and
will provide counter-terrorism supplies and capacitybuilding assistance to developing countries, within the
scope of their capabilities. China stands ready to work
together with all countries to jointly respond to the
threat of terrorism and to maintain peace and stability.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to express
appreciation to Ambassador Meza-Cuadra for his
briefing on the implementation of resolution 2341
(2017), on the protection of critical infrastructure from
terrorist attacks, one year after its adoption. We found
the briefing to be very comprehensive and informative.
With the growing threats of terrorism and violent
extremism, the vulnerability of critical infrastructure
to terrorist attacks has indeed been a source of great
concern. The devastating economic and security impact
of such attacks on some of the infrastructures that we
normally take for granted in our daily lives, such as
6/16

All countries big or small are indeed vulnerable
to these kinds of threats. As we live in a volatile
neighbourhood that is facing threats of terrorism and
violent extremism, attacks against critical infrastructure
by terrorists are not remote possibilities for us. They
are real threats and they have already happened in our
region. That is why Ethiopia supported the adoption
of resolution 2341 (2017) and has been working to
implement the provisions of the resolution.
We all know that terrorists and other criminals
have developed the capacity to launch coordinated
and sophisticated attacks on critical infrastructure.
Public institutions, private businesses, factories and
industries, roads and bridges, shopping malls, sport
centres, among others, have increasingly become
targets of attack aimed at disrupting normal economic
activities. Cyberterrorism to cause damage to computer
systems and telecommunication infrastructures has
also become a real danger.
The protection of critical infrastructure can be said
to have been partly addressed by international treaties
and conventions related to civil aviation, maritime
security and nuclear weapons. However, there had not
been any resolution dedicated to this issue prior to
the adoption of resolution 2341 (2017), which was an
important step to effectively counter terrorist attacks
against critical infrastructure. Resolution 2341 (2017)
remains a very important instrument as it recognizes
all those threats and the need for ensuring the reliability
and resilience of critical infrastructure, as well as the
need to protect it from terrorist attacks for the benefit
of national security, public safety, the economy of the
concerned States and the welfare of their population.
The resolution directed the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), with the support of the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED),
to continue, as appropriate, within their respective
mandates, to examine Member States’ efforts to
18-04094

13/02/2018

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

protect critical infrastructure from terrorist attacks
as relevant to the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001), with the aim of identifying good practices,
gaps and vulnerabilities in this field. Accordingly, we
note that CTED has included this approach under its
assessment in its comprehensive visits. For instance, as
one of the countries that was visited after the adoption
of resolution 2341 (2017), we witnessed how CTED
assessed Ethiopia’s legal and institutional frameworks
and administrative measures in its efforts aimed at
protecting critical infrastructure from terrorist threats.
From our work in the CTC, we have also seen from
the reports of different comprehensive visits how CTED
was trying to include this subject in their assessments.
In this regard, we appreciate the work of CTED in
supporting Member States to develop or further
improve their strategies for reducing risks to critical
infrastructure from terrorist attacks and in assessing
and raising awareness of the relevant risks and in taking
preparedness measures, including effective responses
to such attacks.
The resolution also encouraged the CTC, with
the support of CTED and the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force (CTITF), to continue
working together to facilitate technical assistance and
capacity-building and to raise awareness in the field
of protecting critical infrastructure from terrorist
attacks, in particular by strengthening its dialogue
with States and relevant international, regional and
subregional organizations and working closely with
relevant bilateral and multilateral technical-assistance
providers, including by sharing information. We hope
to see more steps taken along these lines.
In this vein, the collaboration among relevant
entities at the United Nations, including the Office of
Counter-Terrorism and CTED, and the designing of
tailor-made programmes on the protection of critical
infrastructure by CTITF in line with the potential
threats and risks Member States face could certainly
be very helpful. It is our firm believe that in addition to
what Member states do on their own, it is also through
effective international cooperation that the protection,
security and resilience of critical infrastructure can
be enhanced.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Ambassador of Peru
and Chair of the Counter-Terrorism Committee for his
briefing. On behalf of France, I would like to take this

S/PV. 8180

opportunity to wish him every success for the next two
years at the head of this important committee.
We had the opportunity in the Security Council last
week (see S/PV. 8178) to discuss the fact that, despite
its military defeat in Iraq and the Levant, Da’esh
continues to pose a serious threat to international peace
and security, as exemplified by the series of terrorist
attacks that continue to dominate the news. The list of
Security Council statements to the press is sad proof of
that reality. Several terrorist attacks have demonstrated
in the past how critical infrastructure, in particular, can
be a prime target for terrorists. This is an issue that
may sound technical, but in reality it is very close to
the daily lives of all our fellow citizens. I would like to
make two main points.
First, I would like to recall that the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2341 (2017) exactly a year
ago was the first time that this threat had been
underscored at the international level. We welcome
the efforts of the Counter-Terrorism Committee and
its Executive Directorate (CTED) to assist States in
the implementation of this important resolution and to
facilitate international cooperation in the field of critical
infrastructure protection. In particular, resolution
2341 (2017) highlighted two key messages. First, the
resolution underlines the importance of prevention
and preparedness with respect to potential threats, and
the need to identify early on the main challenges and
vulnerabilities in critical infrastructure protection, and
to develop a targeted strategy to be put in place in the
event of an attack. Secondly, it stresses the importance
of cooperation, whether it be inter-agency or inter-State,
in order to guarantee an appropriate level of protection,
which includes the exchange of information, knowledge
and experience. Due to the very nature of the activities
carried out by these critical infrastructures, close
cooperation with the private sector is also essential.
My second comment relates to France’s
arrangements in this area. The protection of the
population, together with guaranteeing the continuity
of the nation’s essential functions, remains a strategic
priority for France. That is why, at the national level,
France is constantly adapting its system to protect
critical infrastructures as required by resolution
2341 (2017). Our safety system for activities of vital
importance, which was set up in 2006, now covers
12 sectors of activity, including transport, health and
communications, in particular, and now includes nearly
250 operators of vital importance in the public and

18-040947/16

S/PV.8180

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

private sectors. It aims to strengthen the protection of
critical infrastructure both physically and in cyberspace.
France also continues to support regional initiatives
with its European partners. Given the interdependence
of the critical infrastructures of European countries,
their protection requires increased cooperation
between members of the European Union. This is why
France has made a major contribution to European
efforts to develop the Programme for European Critical
Infrastructure, which is a project also supported
by CTED. We also welcome the publication by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
with the support of CTED, of a practical guide on the
protection of non-nuclear energy infrastructure.
This debate on critical infrastructure is a very
concrete and operational illustration of the diversity
and complexity of the challenges we face. In the fight
against terrorism, which must be tackled on all fronts,
we have no other options than enhanced international
cooperation. France will naturally continue to play its
full part in these efforts.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I thank the
representative of Peru for his briefing in his
capacity as Chair of the Security Council CounterTerrorism Committee.
As we heard from Under-Secretary-General
Voronkov last week (see S/PV.8178), military successes
have left Da’esh weakened and fragmented. But we
must remain vigilant, as Da’esh affiliates continue to
demonstrate resilience, foreign terrorist fighters seek
to return home from the battlefield or try to join new
theatres elsewhere around the globe, and individuals
and small cells continue to pose a threat. Critical
infrastructure remains an attractive target to these
groups, which is why the United Kingdom supported
the adoption of resolution 2341 (2017) last year and
why that resolution remains the important part of the
Security Council’s counter-terrorism efforts.
A central feature of that resolution is to highlight
States’ responsibilities to develop and continuously
improve their strategies for protecting critical
infrastructure from terrorist attacks, and I am glad that
the representative of Peru emphasized this point in his
briefing to the Council today. The United Kingdom’s
national security strategy recognizes the importance
of securing our critical infrastructure from all risks,
including terrorism, and is fully aligned with our
counter-terrorism strategy. That alignment is important
8/16

13/02/2018

because risks to critical infrastructure can come from
criminality or natural hazards as well as from terrorist
attacks. Our security is enhanced if we develop plans
that help us prepare for and respond to multiple
eventualities and if we ensure that there is coherence
between all stakeholders, from first responders through
counter-terrorism agencies to those responsible for
managing major incidents and emergencies.
Civil aviation, in particular, remains a target for
terrorism because of the potential for iconic attacks
and widespread fear and disruption. Guarding against
that risk, therefore, remains a key priority for the
United Kingdom.
Building on our work here in the Council, where we
adopted resolution 2309 (2016), the United Kingdom is
investing in new technology that will enhance aviation
security, and we worked closely with the International
Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) on its Global
Aviation Security Plan, which was adopted in October.
The plan sets out a range of tasks for ICAO States and
industry that will help protect civil aviation from a
range of threats to security, including terrorism. We
were pleased that the Security Council welcomed
ICAO’s Plan in its recent resolution 2396 (2017), and
we reiterate that resolution’s call to ICAO, States, the
civil aviation industry and all other stakeholders to
implement the Plan in full.
I want to emphasize the importance of developing
strong partnerships between States and with private
industry in order to help us counter the terrorist threat
to our critical infrastructure. Here in the Council
we regularly affirm the importance of enhancing
cooperation between States to counter terrorism, but
it is a point that bears repeating once again. In an
increasingly globalized world, our infrastructure relies
ever more heavily on networks and supply chains that
are transnational in nature. To protect it, we have to
continue and increase our sharing of information
and expertise.
But, as we heard in the statement made by the
representative of Peru just now, partnerships with the
private sector are also vital. The private sector often
owns or manages parts of our critical infrastructure,
or the data and technology that underpin it. It therefore
has a duty to protect those assets, and Governments
have a duty to make sure that it does so responsibly, and
with sufficient understanding of the risks it faces. The
United Kingdom’s Centre for the Protection of National
18-04094

13/02/2018

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Infrastructure is a good example of how that can work.
The Centre is a governmental technical authority
that provides resources, guidance and expert advice
to businesses to help guard against external threats,
whether they come from international or domestic
terrorism or from other sources. The Centre works with
private industry to keep it up to date on threats, and helps
it to implement appropriate and proportionate protective
strategies that include a combination of physical,
personnel and people, and cybersecurity measures. In
his statement, the Permanent Representative of Peru
highlighted the importance of ensuring that States
define the infrastructure that is most critical to them so
that their resources can be prioritized most effectively.
The United Kingdom endorses that principle and
therefore ensures that the assistance of the Centre for
the Protection of National Infrastructure is targeted to
the most crucial elements of our infrastructure, whose
loss or compromise would have the greatest impact.
In conclusion, we must continue to ensure that our
infrastructure is protected against evolving terrorist
threats, and resolution 2341 (2017) remains a positive
step in support of our common defence.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are pleased to welcome the new Chair
of the Security Council Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), Mr. Gustavo Mesa-Cuadra Velásquez,
Permanent Representative of Peru. We are grateful to
him for his very detailed report.
Today the threat of terrorism has expanded on a
huge scale, including geographically. Terrorists take
advantage of gaps in our border control systems to
travel across frontiers; they use modern technologies
to recruit followers and search for sources of income;
they exploit captured enterprises in conflict zones and
increasingly invest in legitimate businesses, as we
discussed a few days ago (see S/PV.8178). However,
infrastructure facilities — airports, oil refineries,
communication networks, banks — continue to be
extremely attractive targets for terrorists. The situation
is complicated by the fact that the elements of critical
infrastructure are deeply interconnected, and they
frequently operate in more than one jurisdiction. We
firmly believe that in these circumstances, the exchange
of information and best practices between specialized
international and regional platforms, under the central
coordinating role of the United Nations, is particularly
essential, and we welcome the work of the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)

S/PV. 8180

in that regard. As Mr. Mesa-Cuadra rightly noted, the
interaction of the CTC and CTED with organizations
such as the Collective Security Treaty Organization,
the Anti-Terrorism Centre of the Commonwealth of
Independent States and the Regional Anti-Terrorist
Structure of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization.
The Security Council has in its arsenal a whole range
of decisions aimed at protecting critical infrastructure
from the threats of terrorism, centred around its
founding anti-terrorism resolution 1373 (2001). In our
view, the premise, affirmed in this toolkit, that it is
States that have the primary responsibility in the fight
against terrorism and, correspondingly, in protecting
their lands and infrastructure from terrorist threats, is
of fundamental importance.
For our part, we prioritize issues related to improving
the legal framework and implementing practical tasks
for protecting critical infrastructure. One of the main
targets of terrorist attacks in Russia are fuel and energy
facilities. In that regard, as long ago as 2011 we created
special commissions responsible for inspecting energy
infrastructure facilities for anti-terrorism protection.
We conduct joint counter-terrorism exercises and
training sessions on a regular basis, including with the
participation of the private sector. After the March 2010
terrorist attacks in the Moscow metro, we established
a complex programme for the transport security of
the population, under which transport infrastructure
facilities are equipped with modern protection devices.
Incidentally, according to our data, as many as 70
percent of terrorist attacks around the world occur
either on transportation or through the use of vehicles.
Besides this, in 2012 we established our Centre
for Cyber Incident Response in Information Systems
of Government Authorities. We are ready to share the
experience we have accumulated in implementing these
and other anti-terrorism security initiatives with the
CTC and all interested partners.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank the Kuwaiti
presidency of the Council for organizing today’s meeting.
I would also like to express our gratitude to Mr. Gustavo
Mesa-Cuadra Velásquez, Permanent Representative of
Peru and Chair of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), for his briefing on implementing resolution 2341
(2017), on the protection of critical infrastructure from
terrorist attacks. We have full confidence that under his
leadership, the CTC and its Executive Directorate will
have a far-reaching impact.

18-040949/16

S/PV.8180

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

As a result of the serious damage done in 2017 to
the terrorist organization of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant, that structure and its affiliated groups
are currently changing their strategy and tactics for
conducting criminal activities. It is expected that there
will be a transition from open armed confrontations to
covert targeted terrorist attacks, including on critical
infrastructure facilities, in the form of both physical
and cyberattacks. Such threats are becoming more
dangerous as we consider the increasing digitalization
of national economies and the fact that many critical
infrastructure facilities and bodies are linked to a
single information network.
Close interaction is essential between public
and private entities in the protection of critical
infrastructure. Likewise, the role of international and
regional organizations — including the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), INTERPOL, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization, the Conference on
Interaction and Confidence-building Measures in
Asia, the Collective Security Treaty Organization,
the Commonwealth of Independent States, the Central
Asian Regional Information and Coordination Centre
and NATO — is just as important.
Nuclear security is currently one of the most
important responsibilities of Member States at the
national, regional and global levels. Kazakhstan, as
a staunch supporter of the movement for a nuclearfree world, attaches special importance to ensuring
reliable control over the use, storage and trafficking
of nuclear materials, the physical protection of nuclear
facilities and preventing nuclear materials and related
technologies from falling into the hands of terrorists.
We also underscore the importance of improving
the legal framework. As an active signatory to all
international conventions in that field, we urge other
countries to also observe them in good faith and with
strong political will. In addition, the President of
Kazakhstan, Mr. Nursultan Nazarbayev, at the opening
ceremony of the IAEA Low Enriched Uranium Bank,
held in Kazakhstan in August 2017, proposed to resume
the Summit on Nuclear Safety and Security by holding
such a high-level meeting in Astana, our capital.
With the start of the functioning of the Astana
International Financial Centre, preventive measures
are being taken to protect financial and banking system
infrastructure from cyberterrorism. Every effort
10/16

13/02/2018

is being made to rigorously prevent the theft of data
and money, as well as any disruption of the normal
operations of information and communication systems.
Kazakhstan is implementing large-scale measures
to neutralize incitement and risks by strengthening
its national security, thereby preventing all forms
of extremism and terrorism. The legislative norms
regarding arms turnovers and security and migration
have been updated. At the same time, measures on
criminal punishment for terrorists and extremists have
been made more stringent.
Taking into account the recommendations of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
the decisions and resolutions of the Council, including
resolution 2341 (2017), as well as the positive
experience of foreign countries, we have accordingly
developed the draft State programme to counter
religious extremism and terrorism in Kazakhstan for
the period 2018 to 2022, which is presently awaiting
approval. The new programme envisages measures for
the active involvement of the non-governmental sector
in the prevention of religious extremism and terrorism.
With that in mind, Kazakhstan strongly supports
the following important steps; first, the implementation
of the provisions of the International Convention
for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism,
adopted by the General Assembly on 13 April 2005
through resolution 59/290; secondly, enhanced
coordination of State policies and actions aimed at
countering cyberterrorism as one of the threats to the
security of critical infrastructure; thirdly, a greater
exchange of best practices for the physical protection
of critical infrastructure; and the development of an
effective mechanism for mutual early warning and
information-sharing on possible criminal plans by
terrorists to commit attacks.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm Kazakhstan’s
commitment to the fight against international terrorism,
including by implementing relevant United Nations
resolutions, particularly resolution 2341 (2017).
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
I take the floor briefly once again, in my national
capacity, to associate myself with my colleagues who
have acknowledged the importance of convening this
meeting in accordance with resolution 2341 (2017), on
protecting critical infrastructure from terrorist attacks.
Peru welcomes and supports the efforts of the United
Nations and the Security Council in that important
18-04094

13/02/2018

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

area, including the establishment of a specific CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force.
We consider it of the utmost importance to
evaluate the efforts of Member States to protect their
infrastructure against terrorist acts, as well as to
develop preventive measures within the framework
of their national strategies and policies. We also
believe it is important to work on rebuilding damaged
infrastructure. In our experience, that is key to
effectively fight terrorism and build sustainable peace.
We would like to recall, that between 1980 and
1992 — the worst years of terrorism suffered in
Peru — the economic damages amounted to more
than $20 billion. To put that number into context: the
gross domestic product of Peru stood at $36 billion,
while poverty exceeded 60 per cent of the population.
Peruvians have now closed that sad chapter, with the
economy having grown substantially, to almost eight
times what it was at that time, and poverty having been
reduced to 20 per cent. However, the lesson that we as
Peruvians have learned from those dark times is that we
must always remain vigilant over terrorism and never
let our guard down.
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): The
Kingdom of the Netherlands would like to thank the
Permanent Representative of Peru, in his capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001), concerning Counter-Terrorism,
for his briefing on terrorism and critical infrastructure.
Today marks exactly one year since the adoption
of resolution 2341 (2017). Financial networks, energy
facilities and food distribution systems do not only form
the pillars of our countries, they are vital to the welfare
of our societies. Much of those networks and systems
transcend borders. As such, critical infrastructure
serves to underline our vulnerability and the close
linkages between our countries and our national
security. I would like to focus on three important
aspects in my intervention, namely, the protection of
soft targets, public-private partnerships and further
multilateral action.
First, protecting our critical infrastructure is vital
to enhancing our security. In that regard, protecting
soft targets is a specific concern. We have all been
shocked by terrorist attacks on concert halls, markets
and hotels. Those attacks have a huge impact on our
societies. As we will not change our way of life or give
in on our freedoms, we have to enhance our resilience.

S/PV. 8180

Enhancing resilience starts with appropriate risk
assessments based on solid risk analyses. Developing
those assessments requires the involvement of all the
relevant stakeholders. The Government should play a
facilitating role in that, but it is up to the private sector
to assume its responsibility as well.
That brings me to my second point: in many
countries, the majority of critical infrastructure
is privately owned. In the Netherlands that figure
is as much as 90 per cent, making public-private
partnerships essential. We need to involve private
partners in sharing knowledge and shaping our policy.
In the Netherlands, therefore, we have set up so-called
information-sharing and analysis centres across 11
sectors, including finance, energy and cybersecurity.
With regard to the latter, the scale of insecurity caused
by the proliferation of significant cyberincidents will
demand increased action from all stakeholders. To
that end, our national cybersecurity centre facilitates
sharing information between critical infrastructure
partners, including from the private sector, to mitigate
the impact of cyberincidents.
My third, and final, point is on multilateral action.
Even though protecting critical infrastructure is a
national competence, the United Nations and other
multilateral organizations have an important supporting
role to play. The Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate plays a central role in mapping
countries’ capacities to protect critical infrastructure
and identifying possible gaps. The Office of CounterTerrorism is key for coordinating subsequent capacitybuilding by the United Nations. Other organizations
are equally important. For example, in the context of
the European Union (EU), the Netherlands and the EU,
together with public and private partners, organized a
tabletop exercise to practice a possible disruption of
electricity networks.
Like the representatives of Peru, the United States
and others who spoke before us, I would also like to
highlight the work done by the Global Counterterrorism
Forum (GCTF). Last September, the GCTF launched
the Antalya memorandum on the protection of soft
targets in a counter-terrorism context. That initiative,
led by the United States and Turkey, offers publicly
available and ready-to-use good practices to include
in national policies. As co-Chair of the GCTF, we are
grateful to the various United Nations entities that have
contributed to the development of these good practices.

18-0409411/16

S/PV.8180

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

In conclusion, we welcome the progress made in
implementing resolution 2341 (2017) and encourage
further cooperation between Member States and
between multilateral organizations. Only by working
together can we increase our national and global security.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I thank you, Mr. President,
for having organized today’s important briefing on the
protection of critical infrastructure against terrorist
attacks. We also appreciate the excellent presentation
by His Excellency Mr. Gustavo Meza-Cuadra, Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism.
We commend Ukraine’s leadership last year
on this issue in the Security Council. Let me also
stress the importance in this area of the efforts and
engagement of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate. This briefing concerning the
implementation of resolution 2341 (2017), on critical
infrastructure, gives Council members another
opportunity this month to send a strong message about
the crucial nature of international cooperation in the
fight against terrorism.
I believe that we need to focus on three things that
we believe are of significance and that together can
serve as safeguards against potential threats.
The first aspect is preparation. It is essential that
plans for the protection of our critical infrastructure be
comprehensively elaborated, targeted, maintained and
tested. We took due note of the call made on States in
resolution 2341 (2017) to develop their own strategies
to prepare and respond to any attack.
Poland’s approach to reducing the risk to our
infrastructure assumes all types of risks. That requires
the development of plans that can be used to respond to
many types of disruption and threats to people’s lives.
That approach has helped not only to reduce risk but
also to improve responsiveness.
Secondly, and equally important, is the issue
of protection. The threat to some elements of our
national infrastructure may be theoretical; however,
there are some areas, in different countries, where the
probability of a threat is always high. One of these
areas is transport networks. Both surface and air
transportation are under serious and enduring threat
from international terrorism. That is why strengthening
critical infrastructure protection must be done in
cooperation among States.
12/16

13/02/2018

Finally, I would like to focus on partnership. The
critical infrastructure that we need to protect is not solely
owned by the private sector and therefore forms part
of complex supply chains and international networks.
While Governments have an obligation to ensure
that industry is managing this risk comprehensively,
private companies are responsible for ensuring that the
infrastructure is protected and that essential services
are provided.
As resolution 2341 (2017) stresses, stronger
international partnerships are needed most when the
functioning of infrastructure relies on cross-border
networks and supply chains. It is the operators of
critical infrastructure who bear the responsibility for
its protection. The Government supports their efforts
through detaining and counteracting, reacting and
prosecuting acts of a terrorist nature. Everyone has a
role to play in this respect.
To conclude, let me highlight that there must be
accountability for all acts of terrorism. The perpetrators,
organizers and sponsors of terrorist attacks must
be held responsible. As reflected in resolution 2341
(2017), measures to counter terrorism must be taken
in accordance with international law, including human
rights law.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful to the
Permanent Representative of Peru, Mr. Gustavo MezaCuadra, for the briefing he provided in his capacity as
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counterterrorism. We wish him every success in his work in
heading up the work of the Committee.
We stress the importance of the holding of this
briefing, which comes one year after the adoption of
resolution 2341 (2017). Sharing our experience and
knowledge is key when it comes to providing a high
level of protection for critical infrastructure and to
strengthening international efforts to increase resilience
to terrorist attacks.
Today’s global society is part of a complex
worldwide network that relies on critical infrastructure,
inter alia, and where citizens depend on institutions and
basic services for their health, security, education and
economic well-being.
Some days ago we mentioned that today’s terrorist
scenarios are no longer local or regional but are now
18-04094

13/02/2018

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

a global problem. This has required us to develop
practices that on occasion have had grave consequences.
For that reason, the international community must
stand ready to strengthen its exchanges of information
and build capacity and, more importantly, step up its
international cooperation.
The transnational nature of terrorism requires a
coordinated response from all States and stakeholders
in the international community. We believe that the
adoption of resolution 2341 (2017) represented a
comprehesnsive response to this global phenomenon.
The resolution stresses the importance of each
country identifying and developing strategies that
enables it to eliminate the risks posed by terrorism
to its critical infrastructure. It also urges States with
the capacity to do so to provide the relevant assistance
through technical assistance and the transfer of
technology, within the framework of respect for
sovereignty, territorial integrity and the political
independence of States, in line with the Charter of the
United Nations.
Capacity-building to provide assistance in risk
assessment, improving, monitoring and establishing
measures for protection, and responding to threats
should be a constant. For that reason, we believe that
it is key for us, inter alia, to work to prevent the risk
of nuclear terrorism through the total elimination of
nuclear weapons and increasing cooperation in the use
of nuclear energy for peaceful means, such as electricity
generation and nuclear technology in medicine.
We also must enhance cooperation in managing and
guarding nuclear waste. We must also take the measures
necessary to protect the sea, land and air transport
sectors as well as deal with possible threats to sea and
air transport through the implementation of appropriate
security measures. We must also build public awareness
on cyberthreats and their potential consequences.
We also must focus more on preventive security
through ongoing risk management that, in addition to
being based on actually countering terrorism, is also
focused on deterrence. We must collectively strengthen
our security while focusing on prevention.
As the world becomes more and more
interconnected owing to the increased flows of
persons, capital, commerce and information, we are all
the more vulnerable to attacks carried out by terrorists
who use technology to spread fear in new ways. Given

S/PV. 8180

these changes in these practices, it is vital to engage
in contingency planning and ensure that we protect
infrastructure systems, which are critical components
of our economic development. In that regard, we
reiterate that all efforts by the Security Council and the
Organization towards the elimination of terrorism must
count on the maximum support from their members.
Finally, I highlight the need for cooperation in order
to bring those responsible for committing terrorist
acts to justice so that they can be duly investigated,
prosecuted and punished.
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): Let me start by
thanking Ambassador Meza-Cuadra for his briefing
in his capacity as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counterterrorism.
As we said last year when adopting resolution 2341
(2017) (see S/PV.7882), objects of critical infrastructure
have long been attractive targets for terrorist attacks,
with potentially devastating consequences. Attacks on
so-called soft targets have also been a highly visible
feature of the tactics of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant. For that reason, we welcomed the initiative of
the Ukrainian presidency of the Security Council to put
this item on our agenda last year. It is appropriate that we
now take stock of where we are in the implementation
of resolution 2341 (2017).
We live in a period marked by rapid change. Our
modern societies are complex, interconnected and
technologically advanced. However, the advances
that are making our societies better able to meet the
needs of our citizens also render them vulnerable. In
interconnected societies and an interconnected world,
the consequent effects of a terrorist attack are hard
to predict.
We must therefore recognize the need to build
resilience into our thinking on critical infrastructure.
The protection of critical infrastructure in Sweden
is based on two pillars: first, to improve awareness,
build resilience and prevent, respond to and recover
from incidents and crises; and, secondly, to increase
cooperation, including public-private cooperation, as
well as international collaboration.
Connected societies require connected systemwide perspectives when it comes to the protection
of critical infrastructure. The sheer range of actors
alone necessitates robust legislation and platforms for

18-0409413/16

S/PV.8180

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

cooperation. The Swedish Civil Contingencies Agency
developed the Action Plan for the Protection of Vital
Societal Functions and Critical Infrastructure in
order to raise awareness, build resilience and prevent
attacks, as well as increase cooperation among the
relevant stakeholders.
We also need to ensure day-to-day cooperation
among the various entities that are responsible for
vital societal functions. Sweden’s Counter-Terrorism
Cooperation Council brings together more than a dozen
national agencies, from a wide range of areas, with
the aim of jointly increasing our national capacity to
counter terrorism. Exercises and scenario-training are
one important way of ensuring effective coordination
across the different agencies. We are currently
conducting a large-scale multisectoral cooperation
exercise to clearly identify areas of responsibility,
reporting lines and processes for coordination in the
event of a civil crisis.
Determining what constitutes critical infrastructure
is a national matter, but it cannot be treated in isolation.
Interconnectedness across borders, jurisdictions,
systems and networks is a fact of life. The ongoing
threat from terrorism underlines the need to continue
the interaction between counter-terrorism actors
and those working on crisis management. Within the
United Nations, the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED), the Office of CounterTerrorism and the members of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force play important roles in such
efforts. CTED’s country visits are an important tool to
help Member States to address such issues together and
to inform capacity-building needs.
In addition, it is important to enhance dialogue
with international organizations, such as the
International Maritime Organization, the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, INTERPOL,
the International Atomic Energy Agency, the World
Customs Organization and others whose work
is important to the maintenance of international
critical infrastructure.
The approach of the European Union may offer some
examples of how to approach the issue from a regional
perspective. The European Programme for Critical
Infrastructure Protection provides a framework for
cooperation. It establishes a procedure for identifying
and designating European critical infrastructure and for
a common approach to assessing the need to improve
14/16

13/02/2018

their protection. The tools and assessment within the
European Programme could be duplicated in other
sectors and regions.
In coordination with other members, including
through the global partnership of the Group of Seven
and other multilateral initiatives, Sweden is also
engaged in international cooperation to reduce the
threat of terrorists gaining access to weapons and
materials of mass destruction. In the field of nuclear
security, Sweden and the Swedish Radiation Safety
Authority have implemented numerous projects since
1992 in order to secure nuclear power plants and other
facilities in Eastern Europe and Central Asia that store
and use nuclear and radioactive materials.
By definition, terrorist attacks are unpredictable.
The increasingly decentralized nature of the terrorist
threat and the increased incidence of attacks using
simple means that create widespread disruption,
including of critical infrastructure, call for increased
vigilance, preparedness and cooperation.
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke
in French): Allow me to thank Ambassador Gustavo
Meza-Cuadra, Permanent Representative of Peru
and Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism,
for his briefing on protecting critical infrastructure
against terrorist attacks.
The current situation of widespread cross-border
terrorism represents a major challenge facing us all. In
that regard, my delegation appreciates your initiative,
Mr. President, to include this item on the agenda of
our work.
In adopting resolution 2341 (2017), the Security
Council gauged the scale of the damage caused by
terrorist acts to critical infrastructure, in particular
ports, airports, nuclear facilities, hospitals, schools and
transport systems. The transnational nature of terrorist
acts calls for States to be more vigilant and requires
a comprehensive, coordinated and effective response.
The protection of critical infrastructure must also be
paid particular attention by States in order to protect
the lives of their people. That is why my delegation
reiterates the need for every State to increase its level
of vigilance, raise awareness among its population and
to equip itself with the appropriate means of prevention
and protection.
18-04094

13/02/2018

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

S/PV. 8180

Côte d’Ivoire remains convinced that the effective
and more comprehensive implementation of the various
legal counter-terrorism instruments could effectively
contribute to protecting critical infrastructure. At
the regional level, strengthening cross-border efforts
is therefore desirable by pooling counter-terrorism
tools and by sharing information, experiences and
best practices.

terrorism poses to our countries’ critical infrastructure.
Our States must constantly coordinate their policies to
combat the terrorist threat, whose human and material
toll is increasingly heavy. This scourge must never
triumph over our determination.

Protecting critical infrastructure is at the heart
of the counter-terrorism programme in Côte d’Ivoire.
In 2015, the National Assembly of Côte d’Ivoire
adopted a law on the suppression of terrorism. Côte
d’Ivoire has also signed and ratified the main counterterrorism legal instruments at the regional and
international levels. Following the sad terrorist attack
in Côte d’Ivoire’s coastal town of Grand Bassam in
March 2016, my country’s authorities bolstered its
counter-terrorism arsenal by taking steps to increase
the level of vigilance in order to prevent any further
terrorist attacks, including by stepping up intelligence,
strengthening the operational capacity of our counterterrorism units, increasing material resources, training
and international cooperation, and by raising awareness
among the population on how to act in the case of a
terrorist attack.

At the outset, I would like to join other representatives
in thanking Ambassador Gustavo Meza-Cuadra, Chair
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), for his
valuable briefing on the most recent updates regarding
the implementation of resolution 2341 (2017), on
protecting critical infrastructure from terrorist attacks.
I wish him every success as Chair of the CTC.

In order to ensure better surveillance at sensitive
sites, my country’s authorities have emphasized
prevention focused on two major areas, namely,
intelligence and operations. Specific intelligence
services have been established within different forces
and benefit from the support of some of our bilateral
partners. At the operational level, the Government of
Côte d’Ivoire has set up specialized units within various
contingents of the Defence and Security Forces of Côte
d’Ivoire whose task is to intervene in any terrorist
attack. The units regularly receive appropriate training
and the necessary material resources.
Also with regard to training, with France’s support,
Côte d’Ivoire will host a region-wide school in July
to train military and civilian officers on counterterrorism. Furthermore, Côte d’Ivoire authorities have
taken measures to prevent the financing of terrorist
groups and have established a counter-terrorism action
plan for the country.
Côte d’Ivoire world like to reaffirm once again that
it is willing to work with all its bilateral and multilateral
partners to ensure that counter-terrorism efforts are
successful, in particular as they pertain to the risk

The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Kuwait.

I would like to focus in my statement on three main
issues: first, the need to protect critical infrastructure;
secondly, relevant United Nations efforts; and,
thirdly, international cooperation in the protection of
critical infrastructure.
First, it is imperative to protect critical
infrastructure from terrorist attacks, as it constitutes
an easy and attractive target for terrorist groups, which
are increasingly developing their capacity and modus
operandi. Critical infrastructure is important because it
is part of our daily lives. Among other things, it includes
public facilities such as energy and water supply
networks; schools and hospitals; air, maritime and
rail transportation systems; and telecommunications
networks. The targeting of infrastructure could result
in heavy losses and lead to consequences with a direct
impact on us as users. It is also important to note that it
is the responsibility of every State to define the concept
of critical infrastructure and determine the best ways
to protect it.
Kuwait is among the States whose infrastructure
has been targeted by terrorists, including an attack
on a religious site in 2015 that resulted in a number
of deaths and injuries and was intended to sow strife
within Kuwaiti society. Consequently, we have sought
to heighten our prevention efforts by enacting a number
of laws pertaining to preventing terrorist attacks
on critical infrastructure, in line with the relevant
Security Council resolutions. That includes legislation
on combating cybercrimes that penalizes anyone who
sets up a website on behalf of a terrorist organization
or individual, posts information about them online or
through other information technology means, whether

18-0409415/16

S/PV.8180

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

under a real or fictitious name, facilitates communication
with a terrorist organization or its members, promotes
their ideology or facilitates their funding, or transmits
information on the making of explosives or any device
used in a terrorist act.
Secondly, it is imperative to adopt common
measures to prevent and address terrorism, including
denying terrorists’ access to any means of carrying
out their attacks, in line with the second pillar of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We
also support the actions and efforts of the CTC, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
and the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force.
We urge Member States to continue working together
to facilitate technical assistance, capacity-building
and awareness-raising on the protection of critical
infrastructure, including by engaging with other
regional and international organizations to exchange
best practices.
Thirdly, we stress the need to encourage
international
cooperation
among
States
and
international organizations, including INTERPOL and
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in order
to exchange information and expertise and implement
joint programmes to combat terrorism and to improve
protection for critical infrastructure. We encourage
Member States to make use of the programmes provided
by the United Nations and its specialized agencies, as
well as those of all other international organizations.
We also stress the need for the implementation of
resolution 2286 (2016), which calls for the protection
of medical infrastructure, facilities and humanitarian
personnel and their means of transportation during
times of war. We also call for implementing resolution
2309 (2016), on the protection of civil aviation, and

16/16

13/02/2018

resolution 2322 (2016), on international cooperation
in counter-terrorism, and any other relevant Security
Council resolution.
The State of Kuwait today hosted a ministerial
conference of the Global Coalition against Da’esh,
during which more than 70 States and four organizations
took part in establishing counter-terrorism strategies
and plans. At this first conference of its kind since
the defeat of Da’esh in Iraq, participants adopted the
Kuwait declaration, which includes a number of the
Global Coalition’s guiding principles.
The interdependence of critical infrastructure
makes it more vulnerable to terrorist attacks. Such
attacks using information and communication
technology might also undermine the stability not just of
the country concerned, but also neighbouring countries.
It is therefore important to step up cooperation among
Governments and between the private and public
sectors. Governments must also adopt emergency
preparedness plans.
In conclusion, we reiterate our principled and
firm position in condemnation of all terrorist attacks
against innocent people and critical infrastructure
in violation of international humanitarian law, the
Geneva Conventions and the relevant Security Council
resolutions. We look forward to further cooperating
and coordinating with Member States and the United
Nations to combat this phenomenon and reduce the
threat it poses to international peace and security.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 4.40 p.m.

18-04094
