S/2012/688

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
6 September 2012
Original: English

Letter dated 6 September 2012 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), I have the honour to
transmit the attached letter, dated 21 August 2012, from the Deputy Secretary
General of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, Mr. Alexander Vershbow,
transmitting the report on the international security presence in Kosovo, covering
the period from 1 April to 30 June 2012 (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and the annex thereto
to the attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

12-50100 (E) 130912

*1250100*

S/2012/688

Annex
In accordance with paragraph 20 of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), I
attach herewith a report on the operations of the Kosovo Force covering the period
from 1 April to 30 June 2012 (see enclosure).
I would appreciate your making this report available to the members of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Alexander Vershbow

2

12-50100

S/2012/688

Enclosure
Report to the United Nations on the operations of the Kosovo Force
Introduction
1.
The present report on the Kosovo Force (KFOR) is provided in accordance
with United Nations Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) and covers the period
from 1 April to 30 June 2012.
2.
As at 30 June 2012, the total number of KFOR troops in theatre was
approximately 5,500. This included the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
Operational Reserve Force Battalion still deployed in the northern part of Kosovo.
Security situation and operations
3.
The overall security situation in theatre remained calm, but the northern part of
Kosovo was tense. During the reporting period, KFOR continued to contribute to
both the provision of a safe and secure environment and the improvement of
freedom of movement in Kosovo north of the Ibar River. KFOR continued to use
situational awareness to deploy manoeuvre forces and reserves rapidly to deter
violence and manage crisis situations. While joint logistic convoys of KFOR and the
European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX) driving towards boundary crossing
points 1 and 31 have generally been successful, EULEX convoys continue to be
sporadically blocked in the northern part of Kosovo.
4.
From 4 April 2012, a number of small-scale inter-ethnic incidents occurred
across Kosovo that contributed to an increase in tension among the local population.
Media alleged that there had been an ethnic motivation for the 8 April 2012 killing
of a Kosovo Albanian citizen of North Mitrovica, in an ethnically mixed
neighbourhood and traditional flashpoint of inter-ethnic violence. In order to
prevent a further escalation of tension, both local Kosovo authorities and Kosovo
Serb representatives in Mitrovica requested KFOR support. This led to the
deployment of additional forces 1 to North Mitrovica.
5.
The situation along the Administrative Boundary Line remains calm, with
minor incidents being addressed at the regular meetings of the Joint Implementation
Commission.
6.
On 6 and 20 May 2012, Serbian parliamentary and presidential elections were
conducted in Kosovo under the supervision of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). KFOR increased its deterrent presence in areas
where the potential for clashes was high, and postured its forces to pre-empt or
respond to potential incidents throughout Kosovo. In addition, KFOR patrolled in
the vicinity of sensitive areas to reassure the population and potentially prevent
actions on the part of individuals, groups or organizations opposed to the elections,
thus decreasing the risk of inter-ethnic clashes. No significant incidents were
reported during the conduct of the elections. The close cooperation among OSCE,
EULEX, Kosovo authorities and KFOR proved to be very effective in preventing
major incidents and reducing the risk of violence.

__________________
1 One KFOR tactical manoeuvre company in addition to the KFOR Multinational Specialized Unit.

12-50100

3

S/2012/688

7.
In order to re-establish freedom of movement on the main supply road “BuLL”, 2
KFOR took action to remove the permanent roadblock in Rudare on 1 June 2012.
During this one-day operation, KFOR personnel and vehicles were engaged on several
occasions by locals armed with stones and firearms. KFOR responded with the
deployment of CS gas (tear gas) and anti-riot assets. Three KFOR soldiers were
wounded by gunshots. On 16 June 2012, at the request of EULEX, KFOR conducted an
operation to close the unauthorized boundary crossing points near DOG 31 (Brnjak),
obliging Kosovo Serbs travelling between the northern part of Kosovo and central
Serbia to use the authorized boundary crossing point of DOG 31. Kosovo Serbs
protested in a non-violent manner, and the operation was concluded without incident.
8.
As at 1 June 2012, new regulations regarding vehicle licence plates in Kosovo
were being implemented as part of a Belgrade-Pristina agreement on freedom of
movement. South of the Ibar River, the Kosovo Police continue to confiscate the old
Serbian-issued licence plates. In the northern part of Kosovo, vehicles with old licence
plates are currently allowed to cross; however, EULEX is informing drivers using gates
1 and 31 about the new requirement that vehicles display Kosovo-registered plates.
9.
This year’s Serb celebrations of the anniversary of the battle of Kosovo Polje
(1389) on Saint Vitus Day (Vidovdan Day) were larger than in recent years. The
annual two-week Vidovdan march commenced on 14 June 2012 at the Saint Sava
Church in Belgrade and culminated on 28 June 2012 with a peaceful ceremony at
the Gazimestan Monument in Kosovo. Approximately 3,000 Serbs attended the
Gazimestan ceremony. There are conflicting reports concerning two incidents that
occurred in Merdare and in the vicinity of the Victory Hotel in Pristina, although
exact details are difficult to determine, as KFOR forces were not present on the
ground. Throughout the commemoration period, KFOR maintained a deterrent
presence in areas where the potential for clashes was high, and postured its forces to
pre-empt or respond to potential incidents.
10. The transfer of responsibility for the security of the Dević Monastery from
KFOR to the Kosovo Police was successfully completed on 1 June 2012. The Dević
Monastery was the seventh property with designated special status to have completed
the unfixing process since March 2010. The two remaining sites to be handed over to
the Kosovo Police are the Dečani Monastery and the Peć Patriarchate.
Summary
11. During the reporting period, KFOR, in coordination with EULEX, Kosovo
authorities and the Kosovo Police, continued to contribute to maintaining a secure
environment and to ensuring freedom of movement in Kosovo. The situation in the
northern part of Kosovo remained volatile, and several temporary roadblocks
continued to hamper the freedom of movement of the local population, as well as
EULEX logistic convoys. The May 2012 Serbian presidential and parliamentary
elections were conducted under the supervision of OSCE without major incident.
The close cooperation among OSCE, EULEX, the Kosovo Police and KFOR (in its
third responder capacity) proved to be highly effective. KFOR continues to closely
monitor the security situation on the ground and to maintain its deterrent posture to
react quickly and decisively, as required.
__________________
2 Main supply road connection between Mitrovica, Leposavić and gate 1.

4

12-50100
