A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly

Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/46
9 February 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 18
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) (A/49/615)]
49/46.

Questions of American Samoa, Anguilla, Bermuda, the
British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, Guam,
Montserrat, Tokelau, the Turks and Caicos Islands and
the United States Virgin Islands
A
GENERAL

The General Assembly,
Having considered the questions of American Samoa, Anguilla, Bermuda,
the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, Guam, Montserrat, Tokelau, the
Turks and Caicos Islands and the United States Virgin Islands,
Having examined the relevant chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, 1/
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
and all resolutions and decisions of the United Nations relating to those
Territories, including, in particular, those resolutions adopted by the

____________
1/

95-76669

A/49/23 (Part VI), chap. IX.

/...

A/RES/49/46
Page 2

General Assembly at its forty-eighth session on the individual Territories
covered by the present resolution,
Recalling also its resolution 1541 (XV) of 15 December 1960, containing
the principles which should guide Member States in determining whether or not
an obligation exists to transmit the information called for under Article 73 e
of the Charter of the United Nations,
Conscious of the need to ensure the full and speedy implementation of
the Declaration in respect of those Territories, in view of the target set by
the United Nations to eradicate colonialism by the year 2000,
Noting the decision of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland as administering Power to effect a policy change aimed at enhancing
its relations with its Caribbean dependent Territories,
Noting with satisfaction the participation of New Zealand in the work of
the Special Committee,
Aware of the special circumstances of the geographical location and
economic conditions of each Territory, and bearing in mind the necessity of
promoting economic stability and diversifying and strengthening further the
economies of the respective Territories as a matter of priority,
Conscious of the particular vulnerability of the small Territories to
natural disasters and environmental degradation, and, in this connection,
bearing in mind deliberations in all related international conferences
including the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, at
which Agenda 21 2/ was adopted, the World Conference on Natural Disaster
Reduction and the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small
Island Developing States,
Aware also of the usefulness both to the Territories and to the Special
Committee of the participation of representatives of the Non-Self-Governing
Territories in the work of the Special Committee,
Expressing its conviction that referendums and other forms of popular
consultation on the future status of the Non-Self-Governing Territories are an
appropriate means of ascertaining the wishes of the peoples in those
Territories with regard to their future political status,
Mindful that United Nations visiting missions provide the most effective
means of ascertaining the situation in the Non-Self-Governing Territories, and
considering that the possibility of sending further visiting missions to those
Territories at an appropriate time and in consultation with the administering
Powers should be kept under review,
Noting with appreciation the contribution to the development of some
Territories by specialized agencies and other organizations of the United
___________
2/
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3-14 June 1992 (A/CONF.151/26/Rev.1 (Vol. I and
Vol. I/Corr.1, Vol. II, Vol. III and Vol. III/Corr.1)) (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigenda), vol. I: Resolutions adopted
by the Conference, resolution 1, annex II.
/...

A/RES/49/46
Page 3

Nations system, in particular the United Nations Development Programme, as
well as regional institutions such as the Caribbean Development Bank,
Bearing in mind the fragile economy of the small Territories and their
vulnerability to natural disasters and environmental degradation, and
recalling its resolutions and the report of the Pacific Regional Seminar to
Review the Political, Economic and Social Conditions in the Small Island NonSelf-Governing Territories, 3/ held at Port Moresby from 8 to 10 June 1993, in
connection with the plan of action of the International Decade for the
Eradication of Colonialism, 4/ as well as the position taken by the
territorial Governments, contained in the report of the Seminar,
1.
Approves the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to American Samoa,
Anguilla, Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, Guam,
Montserrat, Tokelau, the Turks and Caicos Islands and the United States Virgin
Islands;
2.
Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of those Territories
to self-determination and independence in conformity with the Charter of the
United Nations and General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), containing the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
3.
Reaffirms also that it is ultimately for the people of those
Territories themselves to determine freely their future political status in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter, the Declaration and
the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, and, in that connection,
calls upon the administering Powers, in cooperation with the territorial
Governments, to facilitate programmes of political education in the
Territories in order to foster an awareness among the people of the
possibilities open to them in the exercise of their right to
self-determination, in conformity with the legitimate political status options
clearly defined in resolution 1541 (XV);
4.
Reiterates that it is the responsibility of the administering
Powers to create such conditions in the Territories as will enable their
people to exercise freely and without interference their inalienable right to
self-determination and independence;
5.
Calls upon the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, as an administering Power, to give due consideration to any proposals
made by the Territories under its administration in the framework of its
review of policy and management of its Caribbean dependent Territories, as
well as of any future policy changes affecting them;
6.
Requests the administering Powers to encourage and facilitate the
participation of elected representatives of the Non-Self-Governing Territories
under their administration and other appropriate authorities or personalities
______________
3/

A/AC.109/1159.

4/

A/46/634/Rev.1.
/...

A/RES/49/46
Page 4

duly mandated by those representatives in the work of the Special
Committee and its Subcommittee on Small Territories, Petitions, Information
and Assistance, as well as in the work of its seminars;
7.
Reiterates the view that factors such as territorial size,
geographical location, size of population and limited natural resources should
in no way serve as a pretext to delay the speedy exercise by the peoples of
those Territories of their inalienable right to self-determination;
8.
Reaffirms the responsibility of the administering Powers under the
Charter to promote the economic and social development and to preserve the
cultural identity of those Territories, and recommends that priority should
continue to be given, in consultation with the territorial Governments
concerned, to the strengthening and diversification of their respective
economies;
9.
Urges the administering Powers, in cooperation with the
territorial Governments concerned, to take or continue to take effective
measures to safeguard and guarantee the inalienable right of the peoples of
those Territories to own, develop or dispose of the natural resources of those
Territories, including marine resources, and to establish and maintain control
over the future development of those resources;
10.
Also urges the administering Powers to take all necessary measures
to protect and conserve the environment of the Territories under their
administration against any environmental degradation, and requests the
specialized agencies concerned to continue to monitor environmental
conditions;
11.
Calls upon the administering Powers, in cooperation with the
respective territorial Governments, to continue to take all necessary measures
to counter problems related to drug trafficking, money laundering and other
offences;
12.
Urges the administering Powers to foster or continue to foster
close relations between the Territories and other island communities in their
respective regions and to promote cooperation between the respective
territorial Governments and regional institutions, as well as the specialized
agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system;
13.
Also urges the administering Powers to cooperate or continue to
cooperate with the Special Committee in its work by providing timely and
up-to-date information for each Territory under their administration, in
accordance with Article 73 e of the Charter, and by facilitating the dispatch
of visiting missions to secure firsthand information thereon and to ascertain
the wishes and aspirations of the inhabitants;
14.
Appeals to the administering Powers to continue or to resume their
participation in future meetings and activities of the Special Committee and
to ensure the participation in the work of the Special Committee of
representatives of the Non-Self-Governing Territories;
15.
Urges Member States to contribute to the efforts of the United
Nations to achieve the eradication of colonialism by the year 2000, and calls
upon them to continue to give their full support to the action of the Special
Committee towards the attainment of that objective;
/...

A/RES/49/46
Page 5

16.
Invites the specialized agencies and other organizations of the
United Nations system to initiate or to continue to take all necessary
measures to accelerate progress in the social and economic life of the
Territories;
17.
Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations of the
United Nations system, in formulating their assistance programmes, to take due
account of the text entitled "Challenges and opportunities: a strategic
framework", which was adopted unanimously by the Meeting of Governmental
Experts of Island Developing Countries and Donor Countries and
Organizations; 5/
18.
Requests the Special Committee to continue the examination of the
question of the small Territories and to recommend to the General Assembly the
most suitable steps to be taken to enable the populations of those Territories
to exercise their right to self-determination and independence, and to report
thereon to the Assembly at its fiftieth session.
83rd plenary meeting
9 December 1994
B
INDIVIDUAL TERRITORIES
I.

American Samoa

The General Assembly,
Referring to resolution A above,
Noting that efforts in American Samoa are currently aimed at increasing
the production of food crops for local consumption,
Noting also the efforts of the Governor to reduce government spending
and the Territory’s budget deficit,
Noting further that American Samoa is one of two Territories of the
United States of America in which employers are allowed to pay workers less
than the mainland minimum wage to ensure compatibility with the prevailing
cost of living,
Noting that the Territory, similar to isolated communities with limited
funds, continues to experience a shortage of qualified medical personnel,
Aware that one third of the population is dependent on village-based
water systems which often lack basic sanitary conditions,
Recalling the dispatch in 1981 of a United Nations visiting mission to
the Territory,
________________
5/

A/CONF.147/5-TD/B/AC.46/4, chap. II.
/...

A/RES/49/46
Page 6

1.
Calls upon the administering Power, in cooperation with the
territorial Government, to continue to promote the economic and social
development of the Territory in order to alleviate its financial problems;
2.
Also calls upon the administering Power, in cooperation with
relevant regional and international institutions, to assist the Territory in
increasing its agricultural output;
3.
Urges the administering Power, in cooperation with the territorial
Government, to ensure that salaries paid to employees are on a par with the
cost of living in the Territory;
4.
Requests the administering Power, in cooperation with the
territorial Government, to continue its efforts to assist in alleviating the
shortage of medical personnel in the Territory;
5.
Also requests the administering Power, in cooperation with the
territorial Government, to continue to extend adequate water services with
appropriate sanitary conditions to the whole population of the Territory and,
in this framework, to study the feasibility of making the Government’s central
water system available to all;
6.
Notes that a period of thirteen years has elapsed since a United
Nations mission visited the Territory and again calls upon the administering
Power to facilitate such a mission as early as possible.
II.

Anguilla

The General Assembly,
Referring to resolution A above,
Having heard the statement of the representative of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as the administering Power, 6/
Aware that the educational system in Anguilla is facing severe problems,
including overcrowding and insufficient equipment and supplies in the schools,
as well as a high percentage of undertrained teachers and the loss of teachers
to the private sector and to other parts of the civil service,
Aware also of the inability of the educational system in Anguilla to
alleviate the problem of scarcity of skilled national personnel, particularly
in the fields of economic management and tourism, and that educational reform
is of paramount importance to the achievement of the long-term economic goals
of the Territory,
Noting that the Government is placing great emphasis on manpower
development and training,

_____________
6/

A/C.4/49/SR.5.
/...

A/RES/49/46
Page 7

Noting also that the Government’s Public Sector Investment Programme for
1991-1995 is expected to be financed by external donors through grants and
concessional loans,
Aware that the exploitation of deep-sea resources would help reduce the
risk of depleting the Territory’s own fishing resources as a result of
overfishing,
Recalling the dispatch of a United Nations visiting mission to the
Territory in 1984,
1.
Requests the administering Power, in considering, adopting and/or
implementing policy decisions likely to affect its dependent Territories, to
continue to grant the highest attention to the interests, needs and wishes of
the territorial Government and the people of Anguilla;
2.
Calls upon national, regional and international institutions
specializing in the field of education to grant Anguilla funds and equipment
and to make available to the Territory teacher-training courses, to enable it
to overcome its educational problems;
3.
Calls upon all countries, institutions and organizations endowed
with expertise in manpower training to grant Anguilla assistance in this
field;
4.
Invites the international donor community to contribute generously
to the Government’s Public Sector Investment Programme for 1991-1995 and to
grant the Territory all possible assistance to enable it to reach the main
development objectives established by the Executive Council of the Territory;
5.
Requests all countries and organizations with deep-sea fishing
experience to facilitate the acquisition by the fishing sector of the
Territory of larger boats and fishing equipment and to provide the Territory’s
fishermen with deep-sea fishing training programmes;
6.
Notes that a period of ten years has elapsed since a United
Nations mission visited Anguilla and again calls upon the administering Power
to facilitate the dispatch of such a mission as early as possible.
III.

Bermuda

The General Assembly,
Referring to resolution A above,
Having heard the statement of the representative of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as the administering Power, 6/
Bearing in mind the general elections held in the Territory in
November 1993 and the proposed referendum on Bermuda’s independence to be held
in 1994,
Noting the negative effects of the international recession on the
economy of Bermuda,

/...

A/RES/49/46
Page 8

Noting also the recent review of the criminal justice system in the
Territory,
Noting with concern the incidence of crime in the secondary schools, and
noting also the planned restructuring of the public school system,
Expressing the view that the removal of military bases and installations
from the Territory could expedite the full implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Noting that the Territory has never been visited by a United Nations
visiting mission,
1.
Expresses the view that the referendum on the future status of
Bermuda is an appropriate means for the people of the Territory to decide
their own future;
2.
Notes with satisfaction that the economy of the Territory has
begun to recover and that the territorial Government continues to place
emphasis on the general good management of the economy of Bermuda;
3.
Calls upon the administering Power to ensure that the criminal
justice system is fair to all inhabitants of the Territory;
4.
Notes the plans of the territorial Government to restructure the
entire educational system with a view to facilitating wider access to higher
education and to training more Bermudian students in the skills required to
satisfy the employment needs of the Territory;
5.
Notes also the decision by Canada, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America to close their
respective military bases in Bermuda in 1995;
6.
Again calls upon the administering Power to facilitate the dispatch
of a United Nations visiting mission to the Territory as early as possible.
IV.

British Virgin Islands

The General Assembly,
Referring to resolution A above,
Having heard the statement of the representative of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as the administering Power, 6/
Noting the request of the Territory for a review of its Constitution,
and noting also the appointment by the administering Power of the
Constitutional Review Commission,
Also noting the measures taken by the territorial Government to develop
the agricultural, industrial, educational and communications sectors,
Further noting the desire of the Territory for membership in the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and other regional and
international organizations,
/...

A/RES/49/46
Page 9

Noting that the Territory’s unmet manpower requirements continue to be a
critical constraint to its economic growth,
Recognizing the measures being taken by the territorial Government to
prevent drug trafficking and money laundering,
1.
Requests the administering Power to take into account the wishes
and interests of the Government and the people of the Territory in connection
with the constitutional review;
2.
Also requests the administering Power and all financial
institutions to continue to provide assistance to the Territory in order to
enable it to mitigate the effects of the international economic recession and
to pursue its development programmes;
3.
Reiterates its call upon the administering Power to facilitate the
admission of the Territory to associate membership in the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, as well as its participation in other
regional and international organizations;
4.
Calls upon the United Nations Development Programme to continue
its technical assistance to the British Virgin Islands, bearing in mind the
vulnerability of the Territory to external economic factors and the scarcity
of skilled workers in the Territory;
5.
Calls upon all countries and organizations with expertise in the
development of skilled labour to assist the territorial Government in every
possible way in the implementation of its educational and manpower training
programmes;
6.
Notes with satisfaction the measures being taken by the
territorial Government to prevent drug trafficking and money laundering, and
urges the administering Power to continue its assistance to the Territory in
those endeavours;
7.
Notes that a period of eighteen years has elapsed since a United
Nations mission visited the Territory and again calls upon the administering
Power to facilitate the dispatch of such a mission as early as possible.
V.

Cayman Islands

The General Assembly,
Referring to resolution A above,
Having heard the statement of the representative of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as the administering Power, 6/
Noting that an amended Constitution was brought into force in the Cayman
Islands on 1 February 1994,
Aware of the economic priorities established by the territorial
Government,

/...

A/RES/49/46
Page 10

Noting that there is an urgent need for the training of nationals in the
technical, vocational, managerial and professional fields,
Noting also the actions taken by the territorial Government to implement
its localization programme to promote increased participation of the local
population in the decision-making process in the Cayman Islands,
Noting further the Territory’s dependence on imported agricultural
products,
Noting with concern the vulnerability of the Territory to drug
trafficking and related activities,
Noting with satisfaction the efforts of the territorial Government, the
Governments of other countries of the region and the administering Power to
prevent and repress illicit activities such as money laundering, funds
smuggling, false invoicing and other related frauds, as well as the use of and
trafficking in illegal drugs,
Recalling the dispatch in 1977 of a United Nations visiting mission to
the Territory,
1.
Requests the administering Power to provide the territorial
Government with all required expertise to enable it to achieve its economic
aims;
2.
Urges the administering Power, in consultation with the
territorial Government, to continue to facilitate the expansion of the current
programme of securing employment for the local population, in particular at
the decision-making level;
3.
Calls upon the administering Power, in consultation with the
territorial Government, to continue to promote the agricultural development of
the Cayman Islands;
4.
Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations of the
United Nations system to continue and increase their programmes of assistance
to the Territory with a view to strengthening, developing and diversifying its
economy;
5.
Also calls upon the administering Power, in cooperation with the
territorial Government, to continue to take all necessary measures to counter
problems related to money laundering, funds smuggling and other related
crimes, as well as drug trafficking;
6.
Notes that a period of seventeen years has elapsed since a United
Nations mission visited the Territory and again calls upon the administering
Power to facilitate the dispatch of such a mission as early as possible.
VI.

Guam

The General Assembly,
Referring to resolution A above,

/...

A/RES/49/46
Page 11

Recalling that in a referendum held in 1987, the people of Guam endorsed
a draft Commonwealth Act that would establish a new framework for relations
between the Territory and the administering Power, providing internal selfgovernment for Guam and recognition of the right of the indigenous Chamorro
people to self-determination for the Territory,
Aware of the continued negotiations between the administering Power and
the territorial Government on the draft Guam Commonwealth Act and on the
future status of the Territory, with particular emphasis on the questions of
the evolution of the relationship between the United States of America and
Guam, self-determination of the Chamorro people and participation of Guam in
international organizations,
Noting the appointment on 3 November 1993 by the administering Power of
a Special Representative for Guam Commonwealth Issues,
Cognizant that the administering Power continues to implement its
programme of transferring surplus federal land to the Government of Guam,
Noting that the people of the Territory have called for a reform in the
programme of the administering Power with respect to the thorough and
expeditious transfer of property to the people of Guam,
Conscious that immigration into Guam has resulted in the indigenous
Chamorros becoming a minority in their homeland,
Aware of the potential for diversifying and developing the economy of
Guam through commercial fishing and agriculture and other viable activities,
Noting with concern the escalating crime rate in the Territory,
Recalling the dispatch in 1979 of a United Nations visiting mission to
the Territory,
1.
Calls upon the administering Power to continue to conduct
expeditiously its negotiations with the territorial Government on the draft
Guam Commonwealth Act and on the future status of the Territory;
2.
Expresses the hope that the appointment by the administering Power
of a Special Representative for Guam Commonwealth Issues will facilitate the
ongoing discussions on the political status of Guam;
3.
Requests the administering Power, in cooperation with the
territorial Government, to continue to expedite the transfer of land to the
people of the Territory and to take the necessary steps to safeguard their
property rights;
4.
Also requests the administering Power to continue to recognize and
respect the political rights and the cultural and ethnic identity of the
Chamorro people and to take all necessary measures to respond to the concerns
of the territorial Government with regard to the immigration issue;
5.
Further requests the administering Power to continue to support
appropriate measures by the territorial Government aimed at promoting growth
in commercial fishing and agriculture and other viable activities;

/...

A/RES/49/46
Page 12

6.
Urges the administering Power to continue to assist the
territorial Government in crime prevention;
7.
Notes that a period of fifteen years has elapsed since the last
United Nations mission visited the Territory and again calls upon the
administering Power to facilitate the dispatch of such a mission as early as
possible.
VII.

Montserrat

The General Assembly,
Referring to resolution A above,
Having heard the statement of the representative of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as the administering Power, 6/
Noting the position of the territorial Government that while
independence is both desirable and inevitable, it should be preceded by
economic and financial viability sufficient to sustain Montserrat as an
independent State,
Expressing concern at the high incidence of drug trafficking and money
laundering in the Territory,
Taking into account the membership of Montserrat in regional and
international bodies and the outstanding request of the Territory for
readmission to associate membership in the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization,
Aware of the territorial Government’s policy to continue to train and
develop local human resources,
Aware also of the territorial Government’s policy to achieve optimal
self-sufficiency in food production within five years,
Recalling that the last United Nations Visiting Mission to the Territory
took place in 1982,
1.
Requests the administering Power to work towards promoting the
economic and social development of the Territory with a view to its attaining
self-determination and independence;
2.
Notes the expressed preference of the territorial Government for
independence within a political union with the Organization of Eastern
Caribbean States;
3.
Requests the administering Power and competent regional and
international organizations, as well as countries in a position to do so, to
grant the Government of Montserrat every assistance it requires to achieve its
stated goal of improving the efficiency and productivity of the public service
through training at all levels;
4.
Reiterates its call upon the administering Power, in cooperation
with the territorial Government, to take, as a matter of urgency, the
/...

A/RES/49/46
Page 13

necessary steps to facilitate the readmission of Montserrat as an associate
member of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization;
5.
Urges the specialized agencies and other organizations of the
United Nations system, as well as regional and other multilateral financial
institutions, to continue to expand their assistance to the Territory in the
strengthening, development and diversification of the economy of Montserrat in
accordance with its medium-term and long-term development plans;
6.
Urges the administering Power to continue its assistance to the
Territory in the prevention of drug trafficking and money laundering;
7.
Notes that a period of twelve years has elapsed since a United
Nations mission visited the Territory and calls upon the administering Power
to facilitate the dispatch of a visiting mission to Montserrat as early as
possible.
VIII.

Turks and Caicos Islands

The General Assembly,
Referring to resolution A above,
Having heard the statement of the representative of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as the administering Power, 6/
Noting recent changes to the Constitution of the Territory and the
intention of the territorial Government to continue to campaign for further
constitutional changes,
Noting also the different views expressed by the elected representatives
of the Turks and Caicos Islands on the question of the future status of the
Territory,
Aware of the decision of the administering Power to implement a policy
change aimed at establishing better dialogue, coordination and cooperation
between itself and its Caribbean dependent Territories,
Noting the emergency measures taken by the territorial Government to cut
the budget deficit and government spending,
Noting also the commitment of the territorial Government to reform the
public service to achieve greater efficiency and to implement its policy of
localization of employment,
Noting further the territorial Government’s expressed need for
development assistance to achieve its stated goal of economic independence by
the year 1996,
Noting the territorial Government’s decision to establish an investment
bank in order to attract substantial investments world wide for much-needed
projects,

/...

A/RES/49/46
Page 14

Noting also that 90 per cent of the food consumed in the Territory is
imported and that the Government has exerted efforts to improve the
agriculture and fisheries sectors,
Aware of the efforts of the territorial Government to develop a
management plan to control all marine resources exploitation,
Aware also of the tourism policy of the territorial Government to
establish national standards for the tourism industry,
Noting the number of unqualified teachers and the number of expatriate
staff in the educational system of the Territory,
Noting with interest the statement made and the information on the
overall political, economic and social situation in the Turks and Caicos
Islands, provided in March 1993 by an elected member of the Territory’s
Legislative Council to the Subcommittee on Small Territories, Petitions,
Information and Assistance of the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
1.
Reiterates that it is ultimately for the people of the Territory
themselves to determine their own future through the exercise of their right
to self-determination and independence;
2.
Invites the administering Power, in implementing policy changes
concerning its dependent Territories, to continue to take fully into account
the wishes and interests of the Government and people of the Turks and Caicos
Islands;
3.
Calls upon the territorial Government to continue to promote
alternative employment opportunities for those civil servants whose employment
will be terminated as a result of the public service reform and the planned
reduction of employees in the service;
4.
Also calls upon the territorial Government to initiate a
comprehensive training programme to ensure that the employment of expatriates
in the Territory’s labour force is not prejudicial to the recruitment of
suitably qualified and available islanders;
5.
Calls upon the specialized agencies and other institutions of the
United Nations system to explore concrete ways of assisting the Turks and
Caicos Government to reach its stated goal of achieving economic independence
by 1996;
6.
Notes with satisfaction the increase in aid, particularly
financial assistance, granted to the territorial Government by the Government
of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and invites the
latter to maintain this level of assistance;
7.
Calls upon all national, regional, interregional and international
financial institutions, including the International Monetary Fund and the
World Bank, to take all necessary steps to assist the Government of the Turks
and Caicos Islands in the establishment and/or operation of its investment
bank;

/...

A/RES/49/46
Page 15

8.
Urges the administering Power and the relevant regional and
international organizations to assist the territorial Government in increasing
the efficiency of the agricultural and fisheries sectors;
9.
Also urges the administering Power and the relevant regional and
international organizations to support the efforts of the territorial
Government to address the problem of environmental pollution and degradation;
10.
Calls upon all countries and organizations with experience in the
training of teachers to extend generous assistance to the Territory in this
field, with particular emphasis on the training of its nationals;
11.
Draws the attention of the administering Power to the statement
made and the information on the political, economic and social situation in
the Territory, provided in March 1993 by an elected member of the Territory’s
Legislative Council to the Subcommittee on Small Territories, Petitions,
Information and Assistance of the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples ;
12.
Notes that a period of fourteen years has elapsed since a United
Nations mission visited the Territory and again calls upon the administering
Power to facilitate the dispatch of such a mission as early as possible.
IX.

United States Virgin Islands

The General Assembly,
Referring to resolution A above,
Bearing in mind the results of the referendum on political status of the
Territory held on 11 October 1993,
Noting the continuing interest of the territorial Government in seeking
associate membership in the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States and
observer status in the Caribbean Community and its inability, for financial
reasons, to participate in the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and the World Health Organization,
Aware of serious fiscal problems of the territorial Government and of
the measures it is implementing to decrease the budget deficit,
Noting the necessity of further diversifying the Territory’s economy,
Noting also that the question of the transfer of Water Island to the
Territory is still under consideration,
Noting further that in 1993 the territorial Government purchased the
assets of the West Indian Company, which had significant property and
development interests in the Charlotte Amalie Harbour,
Noting with concern the escalating crime rate in the Territory,
Recalling the dispatch in 1977 of a United Nations visiting mission to
the Territory,
/...

A/RES/49/46
Page 16

1.
Reiterates its request to the administering Power to facilitate as
appropriate the participation of the Territory in the Organization of Eastern
Caribbean States and the Caribbean Community, as well as in various
international and regional organizations, in accordance with the policy of the
administering Power and the terms of reference of such organizations;
2.
Requests the administering Power to assist the territorial
Government in its efforts to balance the budget and to diversify the
Territory’s economy;
3.
Invites the administering Power, as a matter of urgency, to
facilitate the transfer of Water Island to the territorial Government;
4.
Notes the purchase by the territorial Government of the assets of
the West Indian Company in the Territory;
5.
Requests the administering Power to continue to assist the
territorial Government in crime prevention;
6.
Notes that a period of seventeen years has elapsed since a United
Nations mission visited the Territory and again calls upon the administering
Power to facilitate the dispatch of such a mission as early as possible.
83rd plenary meeting
9 December 1994
