S/PV.9287

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9287

th meeting
Monday, 20 March 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Afonso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Mozambique)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Montalvo Sosa
Mr. De Rivière
Ms. Koumby Missambo
Mr. Agyeman
Mrs. Shino
Ms. Gatt
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Mr. Kariuki
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-08029 (E)
*2308029*

S/PV.9287

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

reaching most points on Earth. The Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea again did not issue airspace or
maritime safety notifications. Unannounced launches
represent a serious risk to international civil aviation
and maritime traffic.

The meeting was called to order at 10.30 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of the Republic of Korea to participate
in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Miroslav
Jenča, Assistant Secretary-General for Europe, Central
Asia and the Americas, Departments of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs and Peace Operations, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Jenča.
Mr. Jenča: According to its official news agency,
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea conducted
what it described as an intercontinental ballistic missile
launching drill on 16 March. The Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea announced that the ballistic missile,
which it designated as a Hwasong-17, flew a distance of
1,000 km and to an altitude of 6,045 km.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea also
launched a short-range ballistic missile on Sunday,
local time. The Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea characterized this launch as being part of a
“drill simulating a nuclear counter-attack”. This was
the fourth event in 11 days in which the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea carried out launches using
ballistic missile technology. The Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea has conducted a total of 14 launches
of such systems in 2023.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea greatly
increased its missile launch activities in 2022, including
approximately 70 launches using ballistic missile
technology. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
characterized these launches as involving systems with
nuclear weapon roles, including so-called “tactical”
nuclear weapons. Most of the systems it tested are
capable of striking countries in the immediate region.
The systems it tested on 16 March and 18 February,
as well as on two occasions last year, are capable of
2/18

20/03/2023

The Secretary-General strongly condemns the
launch of yet another ballistic missile of intercontinental
range by the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, as well as its other launches using ballistic
missile technology.
The Secretary-General reiterates his calls on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to immediately
desist from taking any further destabilizing actions, to
fully comply with its international obligations under
all relevant Security Council resolutions and to resume
dialogue leading to sustainable peace and the complete
and verifiable denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is
actively pursuing its nuclear weapons programme. In
September 2022, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea approved a new law that set out conditions
in which it could use nuclear weapons, including
pre-emptively in certain circumstances. This nuclear
doctrine was reiterated in the official newspaper of the
Workers’ Party of Korea, Rodong Sinmun, on 17 March.
The Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) reported on 6 March that
the Punggye-ri nuclear test site “remains prepared
to support a nuclear test”. The IAEA has continued
to observe activity at the site. It has also observed
construction activities at the Yongbyon nuclear
facilities and indications that the 5-megawatt nuclear
reactor was operating.
A seventh nuclear test would be a flagrant violation
of Security Council resolutions and undermine the
international norm against nuclear testing. The
Secretary-General remains firmly committed to
achieving the goal of a world free of nuclear weapons.
As per our earlier briefings to the Council, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea continues to
implement its five-year military plan unveiled during
the eighth Congress of the Workers’ Party of Korea, in
January 2021. That plan provided for the development
of new solid-propellant intercontinental-range ballistic
missiles; multiple warheads; better warheads; tactical
nuclear weapons; a military reconnaissance satellite;
new unmanned aerial systems; a 15,000 km-range
23-08029

20/03/2023

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

intercontinental ballistic missile; and a hypersonic
gliding-flight warhead.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has
clearly stated its intention to continue pursuing its
nuclear weapons and ballistic missile programmes, in
violation of relevant Security Council resolutions. The
situation on the Korean peninsula continues to head
in the wrong direction. Tensions continue to increase,
with no off-ramps in sight.
The Secretary-General remains deeply concerned
over the divisions that have prevented the international
community from acting on this matter, as well as
on other threats to peace and security around the
world. The Korean peninsula must be an area for
cooperation. Today’s meeting provides an opportunity
to discuss practical measures for achieving a peaceful,
comprehensive, diplomatic and political solution to
the situation on the Korean peninsula. As previously
stated, as the Council considers its options, there are
several practical measures that could reduce tensions.
First, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
must take immediate steps to resume dialogue leading
to sustainable peace and the complete and verifiable
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula. This should
include the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
refraining from carrying out further launches using
ballistic missile technology or nuclear tests.
Secondly, communication channels — in particular
military-to-military channels — must be enhanced.
Reducing confrontational rhetoric will help to
lower political tensions and create space to explore
diplomatic avenues.

S/PV.9287

The President: I thank Mr. Jenča for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Assistant Secretary-General Jenča
for his informative briefing and recommendations to
the Security Council and welcome the representative of
the Republic of Korea to this meeting.
The United States condemns in the strongest possible
terms the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
launches on 15 March of an intercontinental ballistic
missile (ICBM) and on 18 March of short-range ballistic
missiles. One month ago to the day (see S/PV.9264), we
met here to discuss the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s launch of an intercontinental ballistic missile.
We called for Council unity in the face of the country’s
growing threat to international peace and security.
One month later, it launched another ICBM, which it
followed only days later with another ballistic-missile
launch, once again in violation of multiple Security
Council resolutions. Those launches are not only
threatening, destabilizing and unlawful, they allow
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to advance
its development of more sophisticated and dangerous
weapons. The irresponsible, unannounced launches
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea also
pose unacceptable risks to international aviation and
maritime traffic.

Separately, I wish to highlight once more our
concerns regarding the humanitarian situation in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The United
Nations is ready to assist the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea in addressing medical and other basic
needs of vulnerable populations. We reiterate our call
on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to allow
the unimpeded entry of international staff, including
the Resident Coordinator, and of humanitarian supplies,
to enable a timely and effective response.

I know that two members of the Council believe
we should remain silent. But the Council’s silence is
not working. Hoping that the regime of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea will stop of its own accord
is not working. Month after month, those two members
demand that we do the same thing and expect different
results. Our silence in the face of the escalations of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea weakens
the Council’s credibility, jeopardizes the global
non-proliferation regime and emboldens the appetite of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to flout this
organ’s collective mandate. Not only is the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea watching, but the world is
watching. How can we remain silent?

Let me close by reiterating that the unity of the
Security Council on the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea is essential to ease tensions and overcome
the diplomatic impasse. The primary responsibility for
international peace and security rests with the Council.
The Secretariat is its partner in that effort.

A Security Council resolution is the appropriate
reciprocal response for the launch of just one ICBM.
That is not just my opinion. It used to be the consensus
in the Council. The Council unanimously adopted
resolutions in response to the first three ICBM
launches by the Democratic People’s Republic of

23-080293/18

S/PV.9287

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Korea. They not only sent a clear diplomatic message
to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and all
potential proliferators, but mandated concrete actions
that successfully raised the cost for the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to advance its unlawful
programmes for weapons of mass destruction (WMD)
and ballistic missiles.
Now, with the Council’s current posture, we have
seen 10 ICBM launches since the beginning of 2022. In
response to the crisis, the United States has repeatedly
proposed actions that the Council can take. We have
made clear our earnest intentions to negotiate in good
faith. And the vast majority of the Council has joined us
in engagement and our commitment to diplomacy. But
three Member States refused to engage in good-faith
diplomacy over the threat — the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, which has continued to ignore our
multiple offers for dialogue, and China and Russia,
whose obstructionism of the Council is encouraging
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to launch
ballistic missiles with impunity. China and Russia will
say that they are not defending the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, but their actions speak louder than
words. They will say that Council meetings and lawful
defensive exercises are provocative. I will remind them
that Council products are unifying statements and part
of the Council’s responsibility. They are not provocative
actions and have in fact de-escalated missile launches
in the past. And the unprecedented campaign of missile
launches by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
started well before the United States and its allies
restarted our long-standing defensive exercises.
Here is my question. How many times must the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea violate its
Security Council resolution obligations before China
and Russia stop shielding its regime? How often must
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea choose
ammunition over nutrition? How many starving people
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea does it
take? What happens if a missile test fails in mid-flight
and rains debris below? What happens if there is a
nuclear test on China’s doorstep? Please think about
those questions. From my perspective, enough is
enough. The United States implores Council members
to return to the level of cooperation that used to exist
regarding the threat posed by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea.
The Council must send three messages to the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and all
4/18

20/03/2023

proliferators. The first is that the Security Council and
the international community condemn these actions as
a clear threat to international peace and security. The
second is that we reaffirm and must fully implement
the resolutions we unanimously adopted. And the third
is that it is time for the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to abandon its unlawful WMD and ballisticmissile programmes in a complete, verifiable and
irreversible manner, and instead engage in dialogue.
The United States has proposed a draft presidential
statement, the latest of the Council products that we have
penned, to do just that, and I encourage everyone in this
Chamber to join us in these messages towards peace.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Jenča for his briefing and his clear
recommendations to the Security Council.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea remains
defiant and determined to continue with the same
escalatory policy of provocations that we saw last year.
The new missile launches are another blatant violation
of the relevant Security Council resolutions, and that
irrational behaviour is unfortunate, deplorable and
unacceptable. The reckless launches are a direct threat
to maritime and aviation security, as we just heard from
the Assistant Secretary-General, and such provocative
actions endanger global peace and security. They put
people’s lives at risk and are increasing instability and
insecurity on the entire Korean peninsula. We are in a
situation in which the regime of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea has made its choice. It is resolved
to continue to defy the international community,
disrespect international law and show contempt for the
Security Council’s decisions.
The real question here and outside this Chamber,
and out there in public opinion, is what the Security
Council is going to do. In our view, it must stand up,
and in a united voice, make it clear to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea that such a course of action
is dangerous and unsustainable. It must use its authority
and tools to prevent further dangerous escalations,
which, if unaddressed, could lead to disastrous
consequences for the region and the global community.
There is one thing that we are absolutely certain about.
The Security Council cannot remain idle. Its mandate
is not to remain indifferent and its duty is not to remain
silent. This is an acute matter of responsibility, as it is a
serious matter of credibility. The Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea cannot continue violating Security
Council resolutions and the sanction’s regime with
23-08029

20/03/2023

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

S/PV.9287

impunity, as it is doing, while pursuing its weapons
of mass destruction and nuclear and ballistic-missile
programmes, threatening its neighbours and the world.

But, in this case, enough is way too much. Any
other attitude is a disservice to the Council, its role,
peace and security on the peninsula and global security.

Silencing the Council on this crucial issue means
giving Kim Jong Un licence to do more of the same, and
that is exactly what he is doing. We do not see winners
there. There are none, apart from the regime and its
reckless and dangerous policy. We strongly believe that
the Security Council should stand up and collectively
condemn the regime’s violations of its resolutions and
of the safeguards agreements under the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. The regime
must be told in very clear terms that its continued efforts
to threaten peace and security on the Korean peninsula
and within the global community will not be tolerated.
If that is not done, there is no reason for the regime
to change course, as it says publicly. Albania therefore
supports action and supports a Council product, and we
stand ready to engage in whatever is most appropriate,
including the presidential statement proposed by our
United States colleague. We should stop sleepwalking
on this critical issue and not wait for a catastrophe to
wake us up.

Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Jenča for his briefing.

Last Friday, the United States and Albania requested
that an Arria Formula meeting be convened on the
situation of human rights in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. And it was deeply distressing that
the only news we heard coming out of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea is about a military regime
that is sacrificing its people with starvation, poverty,
a lack of health services, slavery, violence, forced
labour, enforced disappearances and extreme measures
of deprivation. The people want food, while the
regime is giving them more weapons, by spending
insane amounts of money on its unlawful activities of
weapons-of-mass-destruction, nuclear and ballisticmissile programmes.
We strongly believe in diplomacy and dialogue. This
is our raison d’être in the Security Council. Although
the regime of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea has not offered much in this regard, we still call
on it to withdraw in a full, transparent, comprehensive
and irreversible way from their weapons-of-massdestruction, nuclear and ballistic-missile programmes
and engage in a meaningful process of dialogue
and diplomacy.
The Security Council can help in this regard, by
standing united, speaking with one strong voice and
sending a clear message: enough is enough.

In the past, each launch of an intercontinental
ballistic missile (ICBM) led to condemnation by the
Security Council and a call to respect its unanimously
adopted resolutions. However, for more than a year
and in the face of the increasing number of launches,
we have remained divided and silent. I say this in
all seriousness: inaction cannot become the norm on
this issue.
Let us remember what is at stake: an ICBM such
as the Hwasong-17 threatens the security of all Council
members. It can strike all continents. It is capable of
carrying the nuclear warheads that North Korea has
and continues to produce. But the ICBM is only part
of the problem. Short-range missiles, such as those
fired yesterday, are mass-produced. The regime has
announced its desire to continue firing them into the
Pacific. Added to this is the unabashed nuclear rhetoric
and the likely preparation for a seventh nuclear test.
Let us be clear, each of these provocations defies
the authority of the Council and violates its resolutions.
Our division provides North Korea with cover. The
question before us is very simple: can the Security
Council accept North Korea becoming a nuclear-weapon
State? France will not resign itself to that because doing
nothing today is to normalize nuclear proliferation. It
is tantamount to accepting that tomorrow crises of
proliferation will multiply elsewhere in the world.
In the face of these provocations, the priority is to
resume dialogue without preconditions. Proposals to
this effect have been made. It is up to the North Korean
authorities to consider them, and the States of the region
to encourage them.
Our objective remains unchanged: the complete,
verifiable and irreversible denuclearization of
North Korea. The Security Council must enforce
its own decisions. That is the minimum. To stop the
escalation, all unanimously adopted international
sanctions must be fully implemented and all forms of
circumvention opposed.
These new provocations require a united and
resolute response from the international community.

23-080295/18

S/PV.9287

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

France will spare no effort to ensure that the Council
lives up to its responsibilities.
Mrs. Shino (Japan): I also thank Assistant
Secretary-General Miroslav Jenča for his briefing.
It was only a month ago that we were in this
Chamber to discuss the unlawful launch of an
intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) by North
Korea that endangered vessels, exposed aircraft in the
area to great risk and terrified Japanese citizens. It is
my greatest regret that we must come to this Chamber
again to discuss the same situation. Once again, North
Korea has launched an ICBM towards us, which landed
just 200 kilometres from Japan. North Korea also
launched another ballistic missile on 19 March local
time. Japan strongly condemns these unlawful and
outrageous acts.
Let us recall what we have been working on. The
very name of the agenda item makes it clear: we are in
this Chamber to ensure the non-proliferation of nuclear
weapons. This is why the Security Council decided
that North Korea shall abandon all nuclear-weapons
programmes, and it is why the Security Council decided
that North Korea shall not launch ballistic missiles or
other means of delivery of nuclear weapons (resolution
1718 (2006)).
North Korea is in violation of the Security Council’s
resolutions. North Korea even publicly states its
intention to exponentially increase its nuclear arsenal.
The ICBM launched this time is also estimated to have
the capability to hit all of Asia, all of Europe, all of
North America, including New York, all of Africa and
even part of South America. Indeed, North Korea has
just publicly announced the launch on 19 March was a
tactical nuclear-attack exercise. North Korea threatens
Japan, the region and beyond with its nuclear arsenal
and means of delivery.
Japan does not believe that the Security Council
should allow North Korea to take the entire international
community hostage; instead, the Security Council
should prevent that. Let us not get ourselves bogged
down in political rhetoric. This is not about finding
a solution to a conflict on which the parties are on
equal footing. It is about preventing the proliferation
of nuclear weapons and standing against the threat they
pose. I urge all Council members to join the call for
nuclear non-proliferation and refuse to provide North
Korea with a loophole.
6/18

20/03/2023

Some people argue that we are trapped in a
negative action-reaction cycle. This is simply not true.
North Korea has continued to develop nuclear weapons
and their means of delivery in accordance with its
five-year military plan. We should not be deceived by
the regime’s attempts to justify its ambition to pursue
nuclear weapons. We should be clear-eyed about this.
The only vicious circle in which all of us in this
Chamber have been trapped is a negative action-inaction
cycle. The Council has long failed to act in response to
provocative actions by North Korea, and North Korea
has taken advantage of the Council’s silence and felt
free to steadily proceed with its unlawful weapons-ofmass-destruction programmes.
It is high time to end this negative action-inaction
cycle. Let us fulfil the heavy responsibility entrusted to
us by all the States Members of the United Nations to
maintain international peace and security.
In this regard, Japan reiterates that, while standing
ready to work with colleagues to adopt more robust
actions, we strongly support the draft presidential
statement proposed by the United States as a
step forward.
Where do we stand — on the side of the rule breaker
or on the side of the rule keeper? We know the correct
answer. Let us do our job.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I also thank
Assistant Secretary-General Jenča for his briefing today
and welcome the participation of the representative of
the Republic of Korea in today’s meeting.
The United Kingdom condemns the launch by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea of a further
intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) on 16 March.
That was the tenth ICBM launch by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea since the start of 2022.
We should make no mistake. That missile was
not designed, built, deployed and launched overnight.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea first
displayed that type in 2020. It has been tested multiple
times since in a long-planned development process, in
defiance of the Council’s decisions and shielded by two
Council members.
Those same members may seek to equate lawful
defensive military exercises with the actions of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. Let us be
clear: defensive exercises are safe when other States
are notified of them in advance and when they operate
23-08029

20/03/2023

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

within defined areas, as South Korean and United
States exercises have done.
We should protect the credibility of the Security
Council by challenging such violations with a firm and
united response. Five years of inaction, forced on the
Council by two members, have left no one safer. Now is
the time for a comprehensive resolution that addresses
international security concerns with new targeted
measures while also setting conditions for renewed
dialogue and facilitating aid.
We should recall that the cost of those illicit launches
is being borne by the North Korean people, whose
Government diverts resources from basic economic
needs towards its illegal weapons programme. We call
on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to allow
United Nations international staff to enter the country.
Sanctions exemptions are in place to support expedited
humanitarian assistance.
We again call on all Member States to fully
implement the existing resolutions, which all Council
members voted in favour of multiple times to counter the
continued development of the prohibited programmes
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
Finally, we call on the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to cease the launches and engage meaningfully
with the offers of dialogue from the United States and
the Republic of Korea. Diplomacy is the only route to
sustained peace on the Korean peninsula.
Ms. Gatt (Malta): I thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Jenča for another important briefing. I welcome
the Permanent Representative of the Republic of Korea
to this meeting.
Over the past week, we have witnessed a series
of deeply concerning ballistic missile launches by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. On Thursday,
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea launched
another intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM),
reportedly a Hwasong-1, with a range capable of
reaching much of the globe. The ICBM launch was
accompanied by an almost daily series of other ballistic
missile launches. The most recent of those took place
only yesterday.
Malta strongly condemns such launches, in open
defiance of Security Council resolutions. We again
recall that resolution 2397 (2017), adopted unanimously
in response to an ICBM launch by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, decided that the Council

S/PV.9287

would take action to place further restrictions on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea if faced with
further launches. At that time, the Council rightly
considered that even one ICBM launch constituted a
threat to regional and international peace and security,
and it responded accordingly. Yet today the Council
stands frozen and forced to not respond to any of the
ICBM launches witnessed over the past year.
The launches are only the most recent in a deeply
concerning pattern of reckless behaviour by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, posing a
significant threat to international peace and security
and undermining global non-proliferation efforts.
Despite its obligations, and with a total disregard
for the concerns voiced by many Member States, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has continued
to develop its ballistic missile and nuclear programme,
with a record number of ballistic missile launches in
2022. Three months into 2023, we are seeing a very
similar pattern.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
recently announced a new doctrine setting out the
conditions in which it could use nuclear weapons,
including pre-emptively. It further announced that
it would exponentially increase its nuclear weapons
arsenal, including tactical weapons, and that it would
also develop another ICBM system and launch its first
military satellite.
The gravity of the situation cannot be overstated. The
Security Council cannot continue to stand by while its
decisions, as defined in a number of its own resolutions,
and credibility are consistently undermined. The
Council has the duty and the responsibility to discuss
and act on threats to international peace and security.
Malta urges the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to engage in meaningful dialogue towards
denuclearization and to adhere to its obligations
under Security Council resolutions. The Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea must completely, verifiably
and irreversibly abandon its nuclear and ballistic
missile programmes and return to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and safeguards
of the International Atomic Energy Agency. We urge
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to sign and
ratify the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty.
Malta’s concern over the humanitarian situation
faced by the population of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea continues. The situation is dire, and

23-080297/18

S/PV.9287

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

serious humanitarian needs continue to be ignored by
the country’s leadership. An estimated 10.7 million
people are undernourished and require emergency
relief. Instead, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea chooses to waste its resources on costly ballistic
missile launches and its illegal weapons programme.
It continues to restrict access to humanitarian actors.
Malta calls on the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to restore access to United Nations and other
humanitarian actors so that its population can receive
the aid that it requires.
Finally, I would like to remind every member
of the Security Council of our shared objective: the
peace and denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
Delay and inaction will push that only further from
realization. The Council must uphold its own decisions
and responsibilities and act now. To that end, Malta
supports a presidential statement.
Mr. Montalvo Sosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
welcome the presence of the Permanent Representative
of the Republic of Korea. I thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Miroslav Jenča for his briefing. I also thank the
Security Council presidency for having convened this
meeting at the request of several countries, including
Ecuador, in the context of further intercontinental
ballistic missile launches by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. Since 2022, that has become a
recurring practice, without a united response from the
Security Council.
As we said on 20 February (see S/PV.9264), such
actions threaten regional and international peace and
security by exacerbating tensions in a complex context
and undermine the credibility of the Security Council’s
efforts. For that reason, Ecuador condemns the recent
launch, which once again defies Security Council
provisions and the international disarmament and
non-proliferation architecture. We therefore also urge
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to resume
its obligations under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons.
I reiterate the appropriateness of implementing
resolution 2397 (2017), adopted unanimously, by which
the Council committed to taking further significant
measures in response to any launch by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. Through the resolution and
those that preceded it, the Council also unanimously
reiterated its concern about the grave hardship to which
the people of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea were being subjected, which it condemned
8/18

20/03/2023

“for pursuing nuclear weapons and ballistic
missiles instead of the welfare of its people while
people in the DPRK have great unmet needs”
(resolution 2397 (2017), para. 23).
As my delegation recalled at the Council’s Arria
Formula meeting last Friday, resolution 2397 (2017)
also reflected the particular impact that those policies
have on food insecurity for women and girls. In view
of the foregoing, Ecuador supports efforts to achieve a
diplomatic and political solution that will allow for the
complete, verifiable and irreversible denuclearization
of the Korean peninsula, and until that happens, we
reiterate the Council’s responsibility to use all the tools
at its disposal to promote compliance with its resolutions
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I thank the
Assistant Secretary-General Miroslav Jenča for his
informative briefing and welcome to this meeting the
delegation of the Republic of Korea.
We are once again struck by the timing of these
meetings. It was one month ago, to the day, when we
were last in this Chamber discussing the launch of
an intercontinental ballistic missile launched by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (see S/PV.9264).
Brazil condemned the launch in its strongest terms
then, and we condemn it again now. We stand equally
ready to condemn future launches, yet it seems clear to
us that something needs to change.
We have three choices. We can resign ourselves
to being back in this Chamber every month to hear
briefings, condemn missile launches and restate our
national positions. That could easily turn into a new
normal for this file: monthly meetings where we hear
technical updates and restate our positions, as we do
for other files.
Alternatively, we could have less meetings and
resign ourselves to doing less. We could decide that
the situation in the region is simply too complex, the
divisions in the Security Council too great and that
there is simply not enough overlap in positions to allow
the Council some space to act. We would meet only
in the event of truly unusual developments, such as a
nuclear test. The rest of the time, amid missile launches
and rising risks of accidents, we would simply hope for
the best.
Both of those options are dangerous in the extreme.
The first normalizes performance, while the second
normalizes inaction. Let me suggest a third.
23-08029

20/03/2023

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

We can accept that the situation is complex and that
there are divisions in the Council, but choose to think
concretely about what can be done within that context
of complexity and division. That will, necessarily,
involve compromises for all. Yet it offers our best hope
for making progress on this file towards our shared
goal of peace, stability and denuclearization.
In the spirit of thinking concretely, let me put
forward a few proposals that we could immediately
work on, as a Council.
The United States Mission has shared a draft
presidential statement. We believe the text provides
a good starting point for negotiations. The Security
Council can work towards a product that reflects the
views of its members, highlighting the need for both
condemnation and sustainable engagement. We urge all
members to engage in good faith discussions around the
proposal so that we can produce a balanced document
that represents to the greatest extent possible the
diversity of views of the Council.
Secondly, we have heard repeated references to
draft resolutions that were proposed in the past but never
adopted. We could and should be holding technical
discussions at the expert level to see how both texts
could be brought together in one document that would
be able to garner consensus. There is agreement on
preserving the authority of the Council, on addressing
the humanitarian situation and on finding a peaceful
political solution to the issues on the peninsula.
Agreement should be possible — let us work towards it.
Thirdly and finally, we should think creatively
about the role that the United Nations itself can play
to bring down tensions, facilitate engagement and help
to establish a process of negotiation that is transparent,
predictable and seen as legitimate by all. The Council,
under its Chapter VI authority, can do much to provide
its good offices and recommend measures of adjustment
that can lay the groundwork for sustained engagement.
The tools of Chapter VI remain woefully underexplored
in this file. We must revisit the Chapter VI toolbox if
we are to find a comprehensive solution to the file.
In conclusion, the situation is urgent, and the
Council must act. Yet action does not always mean
repeating what we have done in the past. Action, in a
context of tension and division, means finding creative
ways to build bridges, reduce tensions and reaffirm
the authority of the Council as the main organ for
promoting peace and security. It should do so using all

S/PV.9287

its tools, including — and indeed especially — those
for the peaceful settlement of disputes.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I will begin by thanking
Assistant Secretary-General Miroslav Jenča for his
briefing to the Council and welcoming the participation
of the Permanent Representative of the Republic
of Korea.
We are three months into the year, and the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has already
launched 11 short-range ballistic missiles and two
intercontinental ballistic missiles, including its most
powerful, the Hwasong-17. That development is a
worrisome reflection of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s intransigence regarding the
Council’s resolutions and its resolve to accomplish its
2023 goals, set out at the sixth plenary meeting of the
eighth Central Committee of the Workers’ Party of
Korea, held earlier this year.
The acts of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to aggressively test, refine and expand its
weapons and nuclear arsenal breaches international law
obligations and the resolutions of the Council. We are
gravely concerned by the situation and firmly deplore the
actions of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
We reiterate our call for a de-escalation of tensions
on the Korean Peninsula and reiterate our demand to
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to comply
with its obligations under relevant Security Council
resolutions, refrain from further ballistic missile
launches and return to compliance with the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, as well as
the International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards.
As we have often said, the instruments of influence
that the Council has wielded thus far, particularly
its existing resolutions and sanctions, have not been
fully successful in stopping the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s weapons programme or eliciting its
cooperation. As a Council, we must therefore reassess
our approach and recommit to our common objectives
to achieve concrete progress in the furtherance of peace
and security on the Korean peninsula.
We believe that a principled and pragmatic approach
based on diplomacy, dialogue and trust-building is
needed to incrementally foster conditions that allow
for constructive engagements between the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and the international
community on its weapons programme. In that regard,
we take note of the practical measures that have been

23-080299/18

S/PV.9287

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

suggested today in the briefing by Assistant SecretaryGeneral Miroslav Jenča.
While different stakeholders may have different
interests on the situation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, it must be obvious that a nuclearized
peninsula is in no one’s interest. We must therefore
work collaboratively to strengthen the unity of the
Council on that matter and act faithfully on behalf of
all Member States who have entrusted us with this
powerful mandate to maintain international peace
and security.
Ms. Koumby Missambo (Gabon) (spoke in
French): I would like to thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Miroslav Jenča for his briefing, and I welcome
presence among us of the Ambassador of the Republic
of Korea.
We are meeting this morning in the wake of the
launch on 16 March by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea of yet another intercontinental
ballistic missile, a Hwasong-17. One of countless other
launches, it was preceded two days earlier by that of
two short-range missiles and followed yesterday by
another short-range ballistic missile. The regularity
of those launches and the growing threat they pose
represent an unprecedented escalation. The military
capability of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea and the increasingly aggressive language that
accompanies its displays of force leave no doubt about
the level of threat, not only on the Korean peninsula
but internationally. The situation should be contained
very quickly in order to avert any risk of intentional
or accidental disaster, especially since if we are to
believe the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
its launches also include tactical cruise missiles. My
country condemns the missile launches and reiterates
its commitment to nuclear non-proliferation as a State
party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons. We also reaffirm the central role of the
Treaty in the international disarmament architecture,
with which the parties must comply.
The Security Council must ensure international
peace and security. The fact that it is being prevented
from doing so is a matter of great concern. Many people
in that region of the world live under a constant threat of
attack or military accident, and that is unacceptable for
either party. We call on all the parties to do everything
possible to return to the negotiating table in order to
find a political solution to the situation. We must reach
a consensus if we are to break the current deadlock,
10/18

20/03/2023

in addition to halting the exceptional increase in arms
production, including of tactical nuclear weapons. The
status quo has led to ever-increasing tensions. The risk
of a confrontation leading to disastrous consequences
increases a little more with each new strike. We cannot
entertain such an outcome in any way.
In conclusion, my country calls on the parties, as
well as countries with influence, to take a decisive step
towards a resumption of negotiations. We must remove
the continuing obstacles to dialogue to enable the parties
to negotiate openly, frankly and sincerely with a view
to ending the nuclear threat on the Korean peninsula.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
We join others in thanking Assistant Secretary-General
Miroslav Jenča for his briefing. The second launch
of an intercontinental ballistic missile this year is a
demonstration of the unfortunate escalation of security
tensions in the region.
Switzerland reiterates that the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s nuclear programme is a threat to
the entire international community. The disastrous
humanitarian consequences that would result from the
use of nuclear weapons must prompt us to redouble
our efforts in favour of non-proliferation, disarmament
and maintaining the nuclear taboo. We have therefore
been following with concern the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s increases both in ballistic-missile
launches and cruise-missile tests, in addition to its
development of increasingly dangerous and expansive
nuclear delivery systems. We are meeting again today
in circumstances similar to those of last month (see
S/PV.9264) and exchanging similar remarks. However,
our meeting and discussion today are still important,
because we cannot ignore our duty and responsibilities
in a number of areas.
First, in the area of nuclear non-proliferation, it is
our collective duty to condemn the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s ballistic-missile tests. Those
launches are in violation of Security Council resolutions
and therefore of international law. Switzerland once
again urges the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
to fulfil its obligations under the Council’s resolutions
and to take concrete steps to abandon its nuclear
weapons, ballistic missiles and related programmes
in a complete, verifiable and irreversible manner. We
also call on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
together with all the other annex 2 states, to sign and
ratify the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty.
We would like to point out that while the obligations
23-08029

20/03/2023

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

under the Council’s resolutions apply primarily to the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, they also apply
to all other States, which are required to ensure and
enforce the effective implementation of the relevant
Council sanctions.
Secondly, with regard to the implementation of
sanctions, Switzerland welcomes the attention the
Council has committed to ensuring that the provision
of humanitarian assistance remains possible. The
Council demonstrated its commitment and unity
in that regard in its adoption of resolution 2664
(2022), which must be implemented. The Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006) plays an
essential role in facilitating humanitarian assistance
through a system of exemptions. That mechanism
now carries a humanitarian exemption applicable to
all sanctions regimes. We therefore hope that once the
severe pandemic-related restrictions on international
humanitarian assistance are lifted by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, that assistance can be
quickly resumed.
Thirdly, the Council has a role to play in encouraging
dialogue, de-escalation and the quest for diplomatic
solutions. While the Council’s prolonged silence on the
issue is a cause for concern and is preventing it from
functioning as a political actor on the Korean peninsula,
there is still a collective and individual will to engage
in and support a dialogue with the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, as we have heard over and over in
previous statements. We welcome the call for using
the good offices of Secretary-General and encourage
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to engage
constructively with the Council and the United Nations
system. That call for dialogue should be based on a
united position of the Council, and Switzerland will
support every effort to achieve that unity. The option of
issuing a presidential statement, in our view, is a way to
achieve that, and we support all members in seeking to
establish a consensus on it.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I thank Assistant Secretary-General Jenča for his
briefing. The tensions and confrontations on the Korean
peninsula are increasing, and China is concerned about
it. We have taken note of the recent launch activities by
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea yesterday
as well as the recent continued military operations in
the region by various countries. The top priority now
is for all the parties to exercise calm and restraint and
to refrain from reciprocal shows of force, in order to

S/PV.9287

prevent the situation from escalating further or getting
out of control altogether.
The reasons for the evolving situation on the
Korean peninsula are not accidental. Back in 2018, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea took a positive
initiative aimed at giving up nuclear weapons in return
for security. However, the United States showed no
goodwill in response, as the principle of action for
action requires, which wasted an important opportunity
for achieving denuclearization on the peninsula. Since
the start of this year, the United States and others
have continued their unprecedented large-scale joint
military exercises on the peninsula and in surrounding
areas, with plans to expand the deployment of strategic
weapons. That method of deterrence and the ratcheting
up of pressure has further entrenched the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s sense of insecurity,
leading to the current elevated tensions. The most
recent statement by the Ministry for Foreign Affairs
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea stressed
that its actions are countermeasures against the hostile
activities of the United States.
The international community must not shy away
from the crux of the peninsula issue. We should draw
lessons from history and remain committed to a
political solution. In that regard, I would like to make
three points.
First, all the parties should exercise restraint,
demonstrate mutual goodwill and seek a solution in
a calm, cool-headed and stable manner, in addition to
forging well-meaning interactions aimed at gradually
building mutual trust. The representative of the United
States just said that the United States had been making
diplomatic efforts to seek a dialogue with the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. However, despite those
claims, the United States has been fabricating tensions
on the peninsula. Such an approach is nothing short of
dangerous and hypocritical. The United States should
instead demonstrate sincerity and take the initiative to
come up with realistic and feasible solutions that respond
directly to the legitimate concerns of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea so as to create favourable
conditions for an improvement in the situation.
Secondly, China supports the Security Council
in playing a constructive role in promoting a political
solution. The discussions held and the actions taken
by the Council should contribute to de-escalation, the
resumption of dialogue and the promotion of unity. The
Council should not simply hold meetings for the sake

23-0802911/18

S/PV.9287

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

of doing so. China has expressed its reservations about
the adoption of a Council resolution or presidential
statement precisely because we do not deem that to be
constructive. On the contrary, we are concerned that
it would only stimulate the already tense situation on
the Korean peninsula. If the United States genuinely
hopes to break through the current deadlock, it should
respond favourably and seriously to the draft resolution
proposed jointly by China and Russia aimed at
alleviating the humanitarian situation. That would send
a positive message in terms of promoting a political
settlement and encouraging the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to resume dialogue, thereby creating
the conditions for easing tensions on the peninsula.
Thirdly, the representative of the United States
said that we must uphold the authority and credibility
of the Security Council. However, the United States
has called for the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to renounce its nuclear weapons under the
banner of non-proliferation, while at the same time
transferring tons of weapons-grade enriched uranium
to a non-nuclear-weapon State. That practice of
double standards is precisely why the credibility of
the Security Council is being seriously undermined.
The cooperation on nuclear submarines between
the United States and its other trilateral partners has
further undermined the international non-proliferation
regime, provoking an arms race and threatening peace
and security in the region. Furthermore, it is not
conducive to the international community persuading
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to abandon
its nuclear weapons programme and to promoting the
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
China calls on the individual countries concerned
to heed the calls of the international community and
the countries of the region to abandon the Cold War
mentality and to cease all bloc politics and political
manipulation. They must sincerely fulfil their
non-proliferation obligations by repealing the decision
on nuclear submarine cooperation and choosing the path
towards a political settlement through concrete actions.
China calls on all the parties concerned to adhere
to a common, comprehensive, collaborative and
sustainable vision of security and to assume their
respective responsibilities. The legitimate concerns of
all sides should be duly addressed through balanced
and meaningful dialogue so as to achieve common
security. China will continue to pursue a dual-track,
synchronized, phased approach and to play its part in
12/18

20/03/2023

the search for a political settlement of the situation on
the Korean peninsula.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Jenča for his briefing and
welcome the participation of the representative of the
Republic of Korea here today.
We join the Secretary-General in condemning, in the
strongest possible terms, the launch of an intercontinental
ballistic missile (ICBM) by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea on 15 March — the tenth of its kind
in 12 months. The missile fell a mere 200 kilometres
from Japanese soil, not only endangering lives but also
putting at risk maritime and aviation traffic. This time
last year, the Council met to discuss the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s first ICBM test launch
following a hiatus of five years (see S/PV.9004). The
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea also launched
a short-range ballistic missile on 19 March local time,
demonstrating an alarming escalation of its testing
programme. It is deeply regrettable that the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea continues that dangerous
and irresponsible behaviour, threatening its neighbours
and challenging global non-proliferation norms. It is
not just a threat to the region but also a threat to all of us
and to our stability. The erosion of the non-proliferation
regime continues to threaten international peace
and security.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea must
respect international law and the Charter of the United
Nations. It must abide by Security Council resolutions
and return to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons. Last year, we urged the Council
to act and not to treat such provocative behaviour as
the norm. Unfortunately, one year later, the escalation
continues, and we are no closer to stability on the
Korean peninsula. The United Arab Emirates calls
on the Security Council to unite in condemning such
actions by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
The United Arab Emirates is grateful for the work of
the Panel of Experts of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), which
has extensively detailed the actions of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to evade sanctions at sea,
as well as reporting on alarming cyberthreat actors
and activities. Today, we must bear in mind the clear
and detailed information reported by the Panel on how
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s nuclear
posture has shifted to be more aggressive, increasing the
risk exponentially. The Democratic People’s Republic
23-08029

20/03/2023

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

of Korea’s recent tests of short-range ballistic and
cruise missiles for so-called tactical nuclear purposes
should raise a red flag here. The Panel of Experts has
also reported that the production of nuclear missile
materials has continued, which is a critical concern for
the Security Council.
Millions of North Koreans continue to suffer from
food insecurity and impoverishment, which has been
exacerbated by the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s coronavirus disease measures. We regret to see
the leaders of North Korea directing the country’s limited
resources towards its illegal weapons programme while
its people are in dire need of humanitarian assistance.
The United Arab Emirates continues to believe that
dialogue is the only way forward on the question of the
Korean peninsula, both for improving the lives of those
suffering and for obtaining true and lasting peace. It
is high time for the Security Council to speak with
one voice to address the situation and for diplomacy
to prevail. We should also encourage the SecretaryGeneral to use his good offices on this file, in parallel
with other de-escalation efforts.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Assistant Secretary-General Jenča
for his briefing.
Our position is well known: Russia opposes any
military activity that threatens the security of the
Korean peninsula and the countries of North-East Asia.
We continue to expect that the current trend towards
escalation will be replaced by a search for a negotiated
de-escalation. In that regard, we call for restraint and
practical steps to resume dialogue.
With regard to the regular discussion of the situation
on the Korean peninsula in the Security Council, we
would like to emphasize once again the need to take
into account all the factors relevant to that situation.
Only that kind of approach, which pays due attention
to both the long-standing issues and the most recent
actions of all the parties involved, will facilitate a truly
constructive discussion.
In that connection, we must once again highlight
the particular responsibility of Washington and its
allies, who have set out to impose sanctions and
forceful pressure on Pyongyang based on the concept
of so-called extended deterrence. That has already led
to a sharp increase in military activity in North-East
Asia, which clearly serves only to deter a political and
diplomatic settlement of the problems of the Korean

S/PV.9287

peninsula and to contradict the declared objectives of
the members of the Council. Yet, we continue to hear
more and more bellicose rhetoric, while the intensity
of the military manoeuvres conducted by the United
States and its allies continues undiminished. Indeed, the
United States-South Korean Freedom Shield exercise
began on 13 March, along with a whole series of field
manoeuvres, and next week we expect to see the first
United States-South Korean Ssangyong exercise in five
years, involving naval and air forces. It is especially
troubling that those exercises are being officially
presented as evidence of “the will of the South KoreanAmerican alliance to achieve peace through strength”.
After hearing such statements, it is clear what
path those countries have embraced and what calls
from the Security Council now for the resumption of
talks are worth. The measures actually taken highlight
the opposite.
We note once again that there is no alternative to a
multilateral political and diplomatic process aimed at
creating a system of peace in North-East Asia that would
take into account the legitimate concerns of all — and I
stress “all” — the States of the region and at providing
them with reliable security assurances. Otherwise, the
situation concerning the Korean peninsula will remain
locked in a vicious circle.
Let us recall that, in the past, Washington and
its allies essentially disregarded the steps taken by
Pyongyang in 2018 and 2019. The implementation
of those measures could have led to a fundamental
improvement in the situation in the subregion. The
subsequent repeated calls by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea for the United States to cease hostile
activities and to refrain from escalating pressure also
went unheeded. It is futile to expect Pyongyang to
respond positively to stepped-up pressure, the threat of
sanctions spirals or empty promises.
The situation on the Korean peninsula cannot be
considered in isolation from other processes in the
Asia-Pacific region either. In parallel with proactive
efforts to step up the military capabilities of the United
States-allied countries of North-East Asia, we note
Washington’s persistent advancement of its unilateral
security doctrine in the Asia-Pacific region, the
establishment of new blocs, such as the unification of
the United States, the United Kingdom and Australia,
also known as AUKUS, whereby nuclear-powered
submarines are transferred to a non-nuclear State.
That has a devastating impact and has resulted in

23-0802913/18

S/PV.9287

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

the emergence of artificial dividing lines in that
part of the world. Such aspirations give rise to clear
concerns — not only for Pyongyang, but also for other
countries of the region.
Obviously, attempts to increase sanctions pressure
on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea do not
help matters either. For many years, we have been
highlighting the need to end this policy, which is a
dead end in form, and inhuman in substance. However,
the negative aggregate effects of international and
unilateral restrictive measures continue to accumulate,
exacerbating the plight of the North Korean population.
We would note, in particular, that unilateral restrictions
not only violate the sovereignty and legitimate interests
of Member States, but also contradict the norms and
rules of international trade and undermine the integrity
of the restrictions agreed upon by the Security Council.
Attempts to provide any degree of legitimacy to such
restrictions through the authority of the Security
Council or the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1718 (2006) are unacceptable.
We recall that Security Council resolutions on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea — and we heard
today calls on the need to comply with them — provide
for a search for a political and diplomatic solution.
Those specific provisions remain unfulfilled. We
note once again that Russia is committed to the full
implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions. In that regard, we draw attention to the
Russian-Chinese plan of action for a comprehensive
settlement of the situation on the Korean peninsula.
The plan spells out concrete measures to be taken in
various areas by the States involved. The RussianChinese draft political and humanitarian resolution of
the Security Council is still on the table. The adoption
of that draft resolution could truly contribute to Council
efforts to resolve the current difficult situation on the
Korean peninsula.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Mozambique.
I wish to start by conveying our thanks to
Mr. Miroslav Jenča for his insightful briefing. We
recognize the presence of the Permanent Representative
of the Republic of Korea in this meeting.
Mozambique expresses its deep concern about the
rising tensions and deteriorating situation in the Korean
peninsula. The prevailing environment of confrontation
in that region poses a serious threat to peace and
14/18

20/03/2023

security — not only in the Korean peninsula, but also
in other regions around the world. As a peace-loving
nation and a defender of harmonious coexistence
between peoples and States, Mozambique is concerned
about the proliferation of nuclear weapons. We call
upon the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
refrain from contributing to the escalation of tensions
and to comply with resolution 2270 (2016).
The maintenance of international peace and
security is the main reason behind the creation of
the United Nations. Preserving peace, harmony and
stability is therefore the shared responsibility of all
States. For that reason, Mozambique cannot accept
acts that, by their nature, pose serious threats to peace
and stability anywhere in the world. We encourage the
promotion of permanent dialogue with the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea so as to alleviate tensions
and curb the nuclear arms race, thus contributing to the
prevention of a nuclear disaster.
Mozambique reiterates its strong support for the
Secretary-General’s vision to secure our common
future, as laid out in his Agenda for Disarmament.
We believe that new technologies must be used for
improving the quality of life of human beings and not
for aggravating humanitarian crises. We believe in
committed solutions to save future generations from
weapons of mass destruction so the world can be a
safer place.
Let me conclude by reiterating Mozambique’s
commitment to all efforts, measures and initiatives
conducive to promoting global peace and security,
particularly in the Korean peninsula, through a credible
dialogue process.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
The representative of the United States has asked
for the floor to make a further statement.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank you, Mr. President, for giving me the
floor a second time. I apologize, but I feel like I have
to correct some of the fallacies that we have just heard
from our Chinese and Russian counterparts.
First, specifically on the assertion that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea abandoned
its nuclear and ballistic missile programme in 2018.
That is not true. The slew of launches that we have
seen demonstrate to all of us that the Democratic
23-08029

20/03/2023

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

S/PV.9287

People’s Republic of Korea has continued to advance
its programme within its own borders, even if it
temporarily stopped testing.

that we have seen them take over the past two years,
including two tests that occurred in the past week and
that all 15 of us should be roundly condemning.

On the trilateral security pact between Australia,
the United Kingdom and the United States, also known
as AUKUS, we have said time and time again — and
reaffirm here in the Chamber — that it does not violate
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
Our Chinese colleagues are once again trying to distract
us from the matter at hand, which is to condemn the
proliferation of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. I find it very interesting that neither China
nor Russia today called on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to cease its testing — not a single
time. I know that they do not agree with these ongoing
tests, but I find really interesting and enlightening
that they refuse to condemn the testing in the Security
Council even as the 13 other members are doing so.

The President: The representative of the United
Kingdom has asked to make a further statement.

I want to say that with regard to the joint draft
resolution on providing humanitarian assistance, such a
draft resolution would reward the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea for refusing to comply with Security
Council resolutions. What its Government is doing is
depriving its own people of the humanitarian assistance
that they need, which would alleviate their suffering
and enable the international community to come in and
provide that assistance, something we are all willing to
do without a resolution.
Turning to the joint military exercises, they are
long-standing, routine and purely defensive in nature.
They support the security of the United States, the
Republic of Korea and peace and stability in the region.
The United States harbours no hostile intentions
where the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is
concerned. We have not sent any missiles flying over the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. No attacks have
been made on the territory of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. However, we remain committed to
the security of the Republic of Korea, which includes
our alliance’s combined defence posture. Our exercises
are not the cause of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea’s launches. We were not conducting exercises
when the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea began
its recent launches at an unprecedented pace.
To be clear, this is about the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. It is not about the United States. It is
about that country’s attacks on peace and security and
on Security Council resolutions that were adopted by
the entire Council. It is about condemning the actions

Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I apologize for
taking the floor once again, and I will try to be brief.
First, I want to address China and Russia’s
raising of the question of the cooperation between
Australia, the United Kingdom and the United States
(AUKUS). North Korea’s illegal nuclear and ballisticmissile programmes violate multiple Security Council
resolutions, and there is therefore simply no comparison
between AUKUS and the destabilizing threat that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea poses to the
region. AUKUS will be conducted in a manner that
is fully consistent with our respective obligations
under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons and the relevant safeguards agreements of the
International Atomic Energy Agency.
Turning to the draft resolution that China and
Russia referred to, proposing a lifting of sanctions,
it would frankly be an incredible response to what is
actually happening on the ground on the peninsula.
The text of the draft resolution is explicitly based on
compliance by the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea with Security Council resolutions. It is written in
black and white. We have all heard that the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea is not complying with
Security Council resolutions. The Council therefore
needs a serious response to a serious situation on
the peninsula, not a draft resolution that rewards the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea for conducting
missile tests.
The President: The representative of China has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I am acutely aware that we have yet another meeting
following this one. However, since the representatives
of the United States and United Kingdom have twice
taken the floor, I feel obliged to respond, and I will
also try to be brief. The representatives of the United
States and the United Kingdom challenged China’s
position on the issue of the peninsula and its reaction
to the recent missile launches by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. China’s position has
been clear and consistent. We have been committed
to maintaining peace and stability on the peninsula,

23-0802915/18

S/PV.9287

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

20/03/2023

promoting its denuclearization and using diplomatic
means and negotiations to resolve the problem. That
position has never changed. And China’s reaction is
unquestionably based on an analysis and judgment
of the current situation. As I said earlier, the United
States and other countries have been carrying out
military exercises on and around the peninsula on an
unprecedented scale since the beginning of the year. A
posture involving that kind of deterrence and pressure
has heightened the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s fear of insecurity and exacerbated tensions.
The representatives of the United States and the United
Kingdom raised a number of questions. To save time, I
will focus on two of them.

United States. If we are talking about the dangers of
nuclear proliferation, nuclear-submarine cooperation
is undoubtedly the elephant in the room. The three
countries’ so-called adherence to the highest nuclear
non-proliferation standards cannot conceal the essence
of their cooperation. What is its real nature? In essence,
the cooperation among the three parties constitutes
the first-ever transfer of highly enriched, weaponsgrade uranium from a nuclear-weapon State to a
non-nuclear-weapon State, which will enable Australia
to easily cross the nuclear threshold. That is a serious
proliferation risk and runs contrary to the objectives
and purposes of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons.

First, concerning the joint military exercises,
I believe we are all aware that there was a period of
time, since the beginning of the year, during which the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea had generally
exercised restraint and refrained from taking excessive
action. However, the United States and others have
frequently conducted various military activities
directed against the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea on the peninsula, increasing the level and scale
of their joint exercises. At this very moment, the United
States and others are conducting the longest and largest
military exercises of recent years. The representative
of the United States said just now that they are entirely
regular, routine and defensive in nature. However, let
us take a look at what all these exercises are practicing.
They include striking targets deep inside the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, decapitation operations
and occupying Pyongyang. Their very names indicate
anything but defensive operations. Are not such shows
of deterrence and force exacerbating tensions on
the peninsula?

I said earlier that the United States has been practicing
double standards with regard to non-proliferation.
On the one hand, it constantly hypes the nuclear
issues involving the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea and Iran and other non-proliferation hotspot
issues, while on the other investing major resources,
exerting tremendous pressure and trying in every way
it can to prevent the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea and Iran from acquiring highly enriched
uranium, including through the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action, prohibiting Iran from producing
highly enriched uranium of more than 3.67 per cent
uranium-235. Twenty years ago, the United States also
brazenly used force against the Saddam regime in Iraq
on a pretext of non-proliferation. However, it has now
abandoned its non-proliferation standards. And for the
sake of its political interests, it is transferring several
tons of highly enriched, weapons-grade uranium,
of more than 90 per cent uranium-235, to Australia.
This has exposed its hypocrisy in ignoring its own
responsibilities and obligations and the concerns of the
international community.

Through its official media, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea recently expressed concern
about the fact that the situation on the peninsula
continues to deteriorate and is verging on the brink of
conflict. It has called on the countries concerned to put
international peace and stability first and stop military
confrontations. We hope that the United States will
effectively heed and respond to the reasonable concerns
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and leave
space for diplomatic efforts.
The second question to focus on was raised by
the representatives of both the United States and the
United Kingdom, that is, the submarine cooperation
between Australia, the United Kingdom and the
16/18

If I were allowed to continue, I could certainly
respond to all the issues raised by the delegations of
the United States and the United Kingdom. However,
due to time constraints, I need to conclude my rebuttal.
I urge the delegations of the United States and the
United Kingdom and other colleagues to seriously
consider the joint proposal of China and Russia, which
is intended to introduce some goodwill and positive
signals so as to create favourable conditions for détente
in or improvement of the situation. If some countries
are really concerned about détente or the relaxation
of tensions on the peninsula, we should treat such a
proposal with the seriousness that it deserves.
23-08029

20/03/2023

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation has asked for the floor to make a further
statement.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): It was also interesting for me to listen to
the views set out by the representative of the United
States of America about Washington and its allies
allegedly not nurturing any hostile plans directed
against the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
Exercises are allegedly being carried out routinely, but
it is also alleged that they are in no way in response
to the launches carried out by the Democratic People’s
Republic. It is unclear why, then, and in response to
what, those exercises are being carried out. This
military activity is unprecedented in nature.
Let us recall that those same exercises — the
Ssangyong exercises — had not been carried out for
five years, so they cannot be labelled routine. At the
same time, with their rhetoric, the United States and its
allies are completely turning everything upside down
with respect to the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, when they say that their policy is not hostile.
Previously, we had heard that NATO itself was merely
a defensive alliance, and that Iraq allegedly possessed
weapons of mass destruction, under which pretext, the
country was transformed into a land on fire.
For, in reality, it will turn out the same way
for the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea:
notwithstanding what is currently being said in
the Security Council Chamber, similar plans are
being laid with respect to the Democratic People’s
Republic. In fact, the Democratic People’s Republic
has been advancing calls for a political and diplomatic
resolution, but they have been completely disregarded.
The Security Council cannot simply be a one-sided
game, where we only hear from one side of the street.
The Russian-Chinese draft resolution and the proposals
that we submit to the Security Council are specifically
geared towards arriving at a political settlement. It is a
diplomatic path consisting of constructive steps, which
Washington is constantly trying to block.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Hwang (Republic of Korea): I would like to
begin by thanking the President for convening today’s
important meeting. My gratitude also goes to Assistant
Secretary-General Jenča for his briefing.

S/PV.9287

The Republic of Korea condemns, in the strongest
possible terms, the continued ballistic-missile launches
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
including its intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM)
launch on 16 March, and the subsequent ballisticmissile launch on 19 March local time, which clearly
constitute flagrant violations of multiple Security
Council resolutions. The Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea launched a so-called Hwasong-17 ICBM just a
few hours before my President’s flight to Japan, which
was a deliberate attempt to sabotage a critical milestone
in future-oriented Korea-Japan bilateral relations. The
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has launched a
total of 10 ICBMs since February 2022, which means
that we have witnessed ICBM launches almost every
month since then.
However, at this crucial juncture, the Security
Council remains silent due to the intransigence
stemming from the vetoes wielded by two permanent
members last May (see S/PV.9048), despite the support
of all of the other 13 Council members. In the General
Assembly debate last June, precipitated by those
vetoes, we witnessed an overwhelming convergence on
the international community’s position on this matter:
that the Security Council should take action in unity
(see A/76/PV.77 and A/76/PV.78). Unfortunately, the
Council is still turning a blind eye to the Democratic
People’s Republic’s repeated brazen violations.
Indeed, we are living with the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s dangerous missile provocations
on a near-daily basis. In this regard, I have noticed,
including today, that several misguided narratives
floating around the United Nations both contribute
to the Council’s inaction and blur the focus of the
international community. I would therefore like to
clarify the following three points.
First, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
argues that its continued ballistic-missile provocations
are mainly triggered by the Republic of Korea-United
States military exercises. This narrative simply does
not hold water. The combined defence-and-deterrence
posture of the Republic of Korea and the United
States, including our joint exercises, is in response to
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s military
threat. Such defensive measures are the least of all
duties of a responsible Government.
Moreover, Pyongyang has conducted six nuclear
tests and launched more than 200 ballistic missiles
over the last several decades, according to its own

23-0802917/18

S/PV.9287

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

plan, regardless of our military exercises or our policy
towards the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
even during the period of our so-called Sunshine
Policy. This is largely because the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea is obsessed with the advancement
of its nuclear capabilities to sustain its very weak
regime, despite the severe and ongoing suffering of its
own people.
The Council’s failure to respond to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s serious provocation in
May further emboldened the country. Last September,
Pyongyang promulgated its new law on its nuclearweapon policy, which allows for pre-emptive use of
nuclear weapons on a dangerously arbitrary basis.
In January 2023, Pyongyang declared it would mass
produce tactical nuclear weapons and exponentially
increase its nuclear arsenal. It has also declared its
intention to pursue new types of ICBMs.
Moreover, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea announced today that it conducted a nuclear
counter-attack-simulation drill, threatening to use
tactical nuclear weapons against the Republic of
Korea. This palpably demonstrates that the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea declares its nuclear policies
and conducts dangerous tests according to its own
playbook. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
is simply fine-tuning the timing of its provocations,
considering relevant circumstances to fit its excuses.
Secondly, according to another false narrative,
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s socalled positive measures in 2018–2019 had not been
reciprocated. This is simply not true either. The
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s nuclear and
missile programmes violate numerous Security Council
resolutions, and in this sense the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s self-declared moratorium of nuclear
and ICBM tests did not amount to a demonstration of
so-called good will, but an obligation that it had always
been required to fulfil.
Pyongyang has neither provided the full picture
of its nuclear programme, which could serve as the
first step for verification, nor attempted to freeze its

18/18

20/03/2023

nuclear activities, even for a short period of time. The
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has only taken
a few easily reversible measures, such as destroying
the entrances of the tunnels of its nuclear-test sites, and
they have in fact reversed those measures.
Thirdly, some argue for a so-called balanced
implementation of both sanctions and dialogue in the
relevant Security Council resolutions. However, it
is none other than the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea that does not respond and, in fact, further
outrightly rejects the continued calls by the international
community for dialogue and diplomacy, including the
Republic of Korea’s “Audacious Initiative”, as well
as the call by the United States for dialogue without
any preconditions.
Some even argue that sanctions are ineffective.
However, sanctions must be fully implemented by all,
including permanent members of the Security Council,
in order to be effective. The implementation of the
existing Security Council resolutions is an obligation
conferred on all States Members of the Organization
by the Charter of the United Nations. The Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea is now playing for time
to further advance its unlawful nuclear and ballistic
missile programmes, taking full advantage of the
weakened implementation of the sanctions and the
paralysed Security Council.
We have vividly witnessed the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s record number of 10 ICBM launches
in a year, in violation of the enforcement measures
decided by this organ. Pyongyang’s belligerent policy,
menace to the functioning of the Security Council
and brazen mockery of the United Nations itself
must finally come to an end, and it must be held
accountable by the Council for its continued breach of
international obligations.
The Republic of Korea reiterates its commitment
to engaging in diplomacy with the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. We strongly urge the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to stop its very dangerous
behaviour and respond positively to dialogue.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

23-08029
