TWENTY-EIGHTH

YEAR
s ,y p>*,! ;-‘I ”>7,’
2 .; _. 3
th

MEETING:
NEW

11 DECEMBER 1973

-. _ I” ._.r - 2

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 758) . . , . , . . . . . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda

.. . .. . .... .. .. . ... ....,.,.. .,... .. . . . .

The situation in Namibia:
(al Letter dated 4 December 1973 from the Permanent Representatives of
Guinea, Kenya and the Sudan to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/l 1145);
fb) Report by the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 323 (1972) concerning the question of Namibia (S/10921 and
Corr.1) . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . .

SlPV.1758

41

SEVENTEEN

HUNDRED

AND FIFTY-EIGHTH

Held in New York on Tuesday,
fiesiden t: Mr. HUANG Hua (China).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l758)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in Namibia :
Letter dated 4 December 1973 from the Permanent
Representatives of Guinea, Kenya and the Sudan to
the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/ 11145);
lb) Report by the Secretary-General on the implementation
of
Security
Council
resolution
323 (1972) concerning the question of Namibia
(S/10921 and Corr.1)

1973, at 3.30 p.m.

the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT (translation from Chinese):I should
like to inform membersof the Council that, in addition, I
have just receiveda letter, dated 11 December1973, from
the representativeof SaudiArabia containing a requestto
participate in the Council’sdiscussion
of the item inscribed
on the agenda,without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Council’sprovisional
rulesof procedure.If I hearno objection, I shalltake it that
the Council agreesto invite the representativeof Saudi
Arabia to participate in the discussionwithout the right to
vote, and I shallask him to take the placereservedfor him
at the side of the Council Chamberon the understanding
that he will be invited to take a placeat the Council table
whenit is histurn to speak.
At the invitation of the President,Mr. J. Baroody (Saudi
Arabia) took the place reservedfor him at the sideof the
CouncilChamber.
3. The PRESIDENT (translationfrom Chinese):In accordancewith the decisiontaken at the 1756th meeting,I now
invite the President and the delegation of the United
Nations Council for Namibiato take placesat the Council
table.

The meeting was called to order at 4.05 p. m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Namibia:
(a) Letter dated 4 December 1973 from the Permanent
Representatives of Guinea, Kenya and the Sudan to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/l 1145);
(bj Report by the Secretary-General
on the implementation of Security Council resolution 323 (1972)
concerning the question of Namibia (S/10921 and
Corr.ll)
1. The PRESIDENT (translation from Chinese): In accordance with the Council’s previous decisions, I shall now, with
the consent of the Council, invite the representatives of the
Niger, Nigeria and Somalia to take places at the side of the
Council Chamber in order to participate in the discussion,
without the right to vote, on the usual understanding that
they will be invited to take a place at the Council table
when it is their turn to address the Council.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. Diallo (Niger),
Mr. E. Ogbu (Nigeria) and Mr. H. Nur Emi (Somalia) took
1 See Official Records of the Security
Council,
Year, Supplement
for April, May and Jtme 1973.

11 December

MEETING

Twenty-eighth

At the invitation of the President,Mr. P J. l? Lusaka
(Presidentof the United Nations Councilfor Namibiajand
Mr. P. Mikanagu (Burundi) and Mr. M Sidik (Indonesia),
the delegationof the United Nations Councilfor Namibia,
took placesat the Counciltable.

4. The PRESIDENT (translationfrom CXnese): The first
speakeron the list is the representativeof Nigeria.I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and make his
statement.
5. Mr. OGBU (Nigeria): I would like to express the
gratitude of my delegationfor the permissionto participate
in the Council’s consideration of the report of the
Secretary-General[S/10921 and Corr.I]. Allow me also,
Mr. President,to offer you the sinceregood wishesof my
delegation on your assumptionof the presidencyof the
Council for this month. My delegationis confident that,
under your able guidance, the Security Council will
continue to promote the course of peace generally and
bring decisiveprogressin Namibia.
6. On Monday, 10 December1973, the United Nations
celebrated the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Universal

11. Since its establishment, and particularly in the last two
years, the Council, under the dynamic leadership of my
brother and friend, Ambassador Paul Lusaka, has heard a
number of statements, freely made, by those who are fully
knowledgeable about the reasoning and actions of the racist
regime and by survivors of the brutalities perpetrated by
the South African police. Details of several new administrative, political and military measures of a repressive
nature, intended to entrench the already illegal occupation
of the Territory still further, have been received and
recorded. The spontaneous reaction of the Namibian people
in the face of numerous arrests and other acts aimed at
destroying the national unity and territorial integrity of
Namibia have similarly been catalogued.

Declaration of Human Bights. During this celebration,
statements were made on behalf of some Member States,
including those whose actions could not possibly be
considered as .a confirmation of their respect for the
provisions of this historic document which sets out the
rights of man in his relation to his fellow men ail over the
world, irrespective of race, religion or colour of skin. It is
appropriate, therefore, that the Security Council should in
the same week discuss the report of the Secretary-General
which informs the Council of the outcome of the celebrated contacts with South Africa.
‘7. Members of this Council will clearly recall that by its
resolution 309 (1972), unanimously adopted on 4 February
1972, it invited the Secretary-General, in consultation and
close co.operation with a group of Security Council
members composed of the representatives of Argentina,
Somalia and Yugoslavia, to initiate as soon as possible
contacts with all parties concerned with the problem of
Namibia, with a view to establishing the necessary conditions so as to enable the people of Namibia, freely and with
strict regard to the principles of human equality, to exercise
their right of self-determination and independence in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations. On the
same day, this Council decided [resolution 310 (1972/j
that the continued occupation of Namibia by the Government of South Africa, in defiance of the relevant resolutions of the United Nations and the Charter, created
conditions detrimental to the maintenance of peace and
security in the region. The same resolution therefore called
upon the Government of South Africa to withdraw
immediately its police and military forces, as well as its
civilian personnel, from the Territory of Namibia. I recall at
this stage that resolution 309 (1972) was adopted without
the affirmative votes of France and the United Kingdom.

12. In 1972 and 1973, for example, the regime established
the so-called “advisory council”, in spite of nation-wide
rejection of the idea, and nominated “advisory councillors”. In February 1973, the South African mockery of a
parliament extended its policy of “Bantustanization”
or
Balkanization into Namibia by creating a separate “selfgoverning homeland” in the East Caprivi Strip. In adopting
the relevant Development of Self-Government for Native
Nations in South West Africa Amendment Act of 1968, the
South African Government stated arrogantly that “it is the
firm and irrevocable intention of the Government to lead
the individual nations in South West Africa (Namibia) and
the East Caprivi Strip to self-government and independence”.
13. The leader of the Opposition, alarmed by the recklessness of the Government in adopting such measures while at
the same time conducting negotiations with the representatives of the United Nations, drew attention to the
insincerity the Government was demonstrating. Vorster, of
course, did not view it from that honourable standpoint. In
May 1973 Ovamboland was proclaimed a “self-governing
region”. The people, of course, rejected that act by
successfully boycotting the mockery of elections that were
planned to fill the 56.member Legislative Assembly.

8. Since the adoption of these resolutions, the SecretaryGeneral has made several attempts, although the futility of
this was clear to many Members of the Organization, to
reason with the Government of South Africa on the
importance of its peaceful withdrawal from the Territory of
Namibia. The report of the Secretary-General, which is
before the Council, today clearly states that a study of the
statements made by the representative of the Government
of South Africa during his contacts was still far from
coinciding with the aims of the resolutions I have just
referred to. The Government of South Africa has refused to
provide complete and unequivocal clarification of its policy
with regard to self-determination and independence for
Namibia, as envisaged in the provisions of Security Council
resolution 323 (1972).

14. The documents of the Council for Namibia contain
accounts of numerous other repressive acts against
Namibians, including non-black Namibians, who support
the just cause of the Namibians. Surely the records of the
Security Council must contain catalogues of these illegal
acts and inhuman atrocities inflicted on the people of
Namibia because of their struggle for independence in
accordance with the provisions of General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV).
15. Questions have been asked since the decision of the
General Assembly which terminated the Mandate of South
Africa over Namibia as to why South Africa continues its
policies in that Territory in the face of the clear illegality of
its position in Namibia. South Africa’s persistence in its
policy in Namibia, I submit, is, of course, only possible
because of the support it receives from certain Western
countries. This is the continuation of a deliberate policy
started in 1950, when the United Nations made its first real
contact with the Government of South Africa concerning
this international Territory. Namibia is today, for all
practical purposes, the exclusive colonial preserve of the
United States of America, the United Kingdom, France, the

9. The Secretary-General’s report further highlights doubts
as to whether the contacts should be continued. He warns
the Council that if it should be decided that the contacts
should be continued, it should be borne in mind that time
and protracted discussions would be required for* any
progress to be made.
10. The report was issued seven years after the General
Assembly, in resolution 2145 (XXI), had resolved to terminate South Africa’s Mandate over the Territory and had
established a United Nations Council for Namibia to
administer the Territory for an interim period until the
final status of Namibia had been determined.
2

Federal Republic of Germany and Japan, with their two
colonial representatives-South
Africa and Portugal,

doggedly to its apartheid policy already condemnedbY
variousresofutionsof this Counciland other organsof the
United Nations asinhuman.If my delegationrejectsthese
suggestions
by South Africa, it doesso becauseit finds it
intolerable that in 1973 South Africa should have the
United Nations acceptits presencein Namibiafor a further
10 years after its Mandate was terminated by the same
Organizationsevenyearsearlier.

16. A closer examination of the ample information in the
documents of the United Nations Council for Namibia,
particularly the latest report of the Council to the General
Assembly,* will provide ample evidence of the extent to
which these Member States provide material support to the
south African regime in Namibia. Their voting habits will
show the political support given to the South African racist
regime by these same States.

22. The Council remainsthe appropriateorgan of the
United Nations capableof restoringdignity to the Organization by taking effective action that will ensure the
immediate withdrawal of the South African authorities
from the Territory of Namibia.If the Security Councilhas
hitherto been unable to take meaningfulaction, a considerable share of the responsibilitymust go to those
membersof the Council which have refusedto recognize
the illegality of South Africa’s presencein Namibiaand
have continued to protect South Africa with a view to
holding on to their shareof the profits resultingfrom the
economicplunder of the Territory.

17. Since the start of these contacts, a large number of
mining companies from the United States of America have
started new prospecting activities in Namibia, The United
Kingdom has never accepted the termination of South
Africa’s Mandate over Namibia. It therefore continues to
deal with South
Africa over Namibia. France supplies
sophisticated weapons which are far beyond the normal
needs of a State enjoying internal peace and willing to live
in peace with its neighbours. Japan is fast making a dubious
name for itself on the continent of Africa for its apparent
insensitivity to the political aspirations of the people of
Africa in general and Namibians in particular. It is hoped
that the Federal Republic of Germany will see fit to
consider its involvement in Namibia within the context of
the greatest good for the greatest number of Namibians as a
whole, instead of adopting a narrow and parochial outlook
based upon that of its nationals or descendants of its
nationals in the Territory.

23. It is said by well-informed sourcesthat because
countries of the third world are not protected by the
nuclear stalematewhich has been established
in Europe,
Western strategists have deducedthat there is a new
freedom of action for the useof conventionalweaponsin
the third world. Consequently,the situationin that areais
becomingincreasinglyunstable.WesternGovernmentshave
consequently reshapedtheir defencesystemswith greater
emphasison counter-insurgencymeasuresin order to
protect their interests built up on the basisof unfair
agreements.History has provided ample evidence that
attempts to subduepeople by military might cannot but
leadto disastrousconsequences.
In the caseof Namibia,the
best way to guaranteetheseinterestsis to deal with the
authentic representativesof Namibians.

18. Three of these Powers which are members of the
Security Council and were the principal Allied Powers that
allocated the Mandate to South Africa were offered by
South Africa in 1950 partnership in a proposed four-Power
agreement embodying the provisions of the so-called
“sacred trust”. It was proposed that the three Powers
should be the depositories for information about South
Africa’s administration. Although the proposal was rejected
then, these same Powers are today enjoying the advantages
the South African proposal intended to have recognized in
an international agreement to replace the Mandate.

24. They are ready now, andhave beenready to assume
the responsibility of determiningtheir future in their own
land. We appealedand warnedPortugalfrom thesesame
chambersbefore, regardingGuinea-Bissau.
25. These Powersshould now reshapetheir international
policiesto respondto theseappealsand shouldturn away
from anachronisticpoliciesdesignedto guaranteewasteful
luxury for themselvesand perpetualpoverty, hunger and
disease
for usin the third world.

19. In the 23 years that have elapsed since then, South
Africa’s neighbours have become convinced that South
Africa is incapable of sincere negotiations on its immediate
withdrawal
from Namibia; yet South Africa must realize
that withdrawal is inevitable, and that it must take Place
soon.
20. The report of the Secretary-General
another suggestion from the rdgime that

26. The Security Council shouldterminatethe Contacts
between the Secretary-Generaland the South African
regime.It shouldtake all appropriatemeasures
in the light
of South Africa’s flagrant defianceof its internationallegal
obligation and prevent South Africa from further use of
Namibianterritory for aggressive
purposes.

contains Yet

6‘ ‘ . . . it might not take longer than 10 Years for the
population of South West Africa to reach the stage where
it will be ready to exercise its right to selfand Corr.1, para. 14.1
determination. t “[S/1092I
21, It must be rememberedthat for South Africa the
concept of self-determinationfor Namibianscannotbe any
different from what motivates the Pretoria
regimeto cling

27. The Security Council should also call upon the
Secretary-Generalto strengthenthe Unit that dealswith the
questionof Namibiawith aview to collectinganddistributmg data on the resourceswhich are beingplunderedby
south
Africa and the role played by Member States in
encouragingthe regimeto persistin its policies.

of the
Session, Supplement NO. 24.

28. The Security Council should invite the SecretarYGeneralto keep in constantcontact with the Governments

2 official

Records

General

Assembly, Twentwighth
3

gether all types of generalized terrorism, repression, wanton
torture and imprisonment of our people.

of Member States that are known to maintain diplomatic
and economic relations with the regime in Pretoria with a
view to the immediate suspension of those relations.

39. We have our misgivings and apprehensions concerning
this exercise, knowing the racist regime as.we do, but have
chosen not to be obstructionist
if there were any
possibility of resolving this problem peacefully; for we are
the victims, the oppressed, the exploited, the dehumanized
and disenfranchised. Therefore, we are the ones who will
eagerly grasp the ray of hope appearing on the horizon.

29. My delegation cannot aa:e@ a situation in which, in
the words of the Chairman of the Organisation of African
Unity for this year, South Africa would be allowed to
remain the only colonial Power to betray the international
trust conferred on it under the trusteeship system.
30. The PRESIDENT (translation from Chirzese): It will
be recalled that at its 1757th meeting the Security Council
decided to extend an invitation, under rule 39 of the
provisional rules of procedure, to Mr. Mishake Muyongo, as
requested in the letter from the representatives of Guinea,
Kenya and the Sudan [S/11 1531. I understand that
Mr. Muyongo is now ready to make a statement; accordwith the consent of the Council, I invite
QlY,
Mr. Muyongo to take a seat at the Council table in
accordance with that decision and to make his statement.

40. Equally, it must be added here that the African and
other freedom-loving countries have shown their earnest
desire for the solution of this perennial question of
Namibia, by allowing the Secretary-General to try to
mediate as an independent and impartial organ of the
United Nations, uniquely eligible and equipped to render a
face-saving device to South Africa, which could have been
embarrassed otherwise, to make concessions to both the
General Assembly and the Security Council, which are
political bodies whose resolutions it ignored with impunity.

31. Mr. MUYONGO:
Allow me at the outset to express
our gratitude to the members of the Council for according
us this opportunity to address the Council in the debate on
Namibia. We have had occasion more than once to appear
before this august body of the United Nations, both here
and in Africa, to state the position of our people
concerning the burning issue of Namibia, which has
haunted the United Nations since its inception.

41. Instead, the racist regime used the contacts to hoodwink and deceive the United Nations, on the one hand, and
to consolidate its illegal occupation of Namibia, on the
other. In fact, it is reported that most, if not all, of the
people who made representations to both Mr. Waldheim
and Mr. Escher either lost their jobs or were arrested.
42. Moreover, the situation deteriorated markedly during
and since the contacts. Contrary to the undertakings made
to the Secretary-General, freedom of movement and political activity is not allowed in Namibia. Those who engage
in political activity are victimized; for example, three
Youth League leaders of the South West Africa People’s
Organization (SWAPO) were paraded through kangaroo
courts and sentenced to eight years’ imprisonment. What
was their crime? Their only crime was freedom of speech
and assembly-those rights promised by the South Africans
in the report we are now discussing. Over 20 are kept in
prison in Windhoek and over 80 in concentration camps in
Ovamboland for this same crime.

32. Before I continue, Sir, allow me to congratulate you
on your assumption of the high office of President of the
Security Council for the month of December. We are
particularly satisfied that this debate on Namibia is taking
place under your leadership.
33. We have made our position clear on several occasions
concerning the dialogue between the South African racist
regime and the Secretary-General to establish the necessary
conditions that would enable Namibians to exercise their
right to self-determination and independence. In our view,
this entails the following:
34. As a first step, the South African army and paramilitary police should be withdrawn
to South Africa to
create an atmosphere of peace and tranquillity, which are
essential elements for negotiation.
35. Secondly, all the apartheid
phernalia should be abolished.

laws

43. Yesterday afternoon [1757th meeting], the President
of the United Nations Council for Namibia, Ambassador
Lusaka, read out a letter in a very moving and touching way
from Namibian women describing the crimes I have
mentioned. We cannot add more to what that letter
expressed.

and other para-

44. These, then, are the results of the contacts. Therefore,
we reiterate our earlier call to end this harmful contact. AS
we mentioned in the Fourth Committee at its meeting on
26 October 1973,s during the debate on Namibia, we
wonder about the wisdom of merely stockpiling resolutions
regarding Namibia. It is our humble but firm belief that alI
reasonable resolutions have already been adopted both by
this Council and the General Assembly. What is called for
now is their vigorous implementation. In this case, the
Charter of the United Nations provides for the necessary
action with a view to giving effect to its decisions. Namibia%

36. Thirdly, all political prisoners and other victims of
South Africa’s illegal colonial occupation should be released
and rehabilitated to human dignity and decency. I say
“dignity and decency” because when one is in a South
African prison one is stripped of all human dignity and
decency.
37. Fourthly, all Namibians should be able to leave and
return safely without fear of reprisals or persecution.
38. Fifthly, as a token of sincerity and good faith, the
Pretoria regime should, at the minimum, halt the further
implementation of the Bantustan scheme and cease alto-

3 Ibid,, Twenty-eighth Session, Fourth
meeting.
4

committee,

1046th

for their part, will continue the struggle until final victory is
achieved.

by the Allied Powers to King George at Versailles, whence
South Africa, by virtue of that transfer, became the
administering Power. The terms of the Mandate stipulated
that it was incumbent upon South Africa to train the
people of South West Africa to attain indeperidence.

45. In conclusion, we should like to express our thanks
and appreciation to the representatives who have intervened
during this debate on Namibia. Finally, we should like to
express our appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
sincere efforts to create the necessary conditions so as to
enable the people of Namibia to achieve freedom and
independence.

52. Over half a century has passed during which all the
mandated Territories created by the Allied Powers have
been liberated. Colonies were liberated, not to mention
mandated Territories. And they were classified A, B. C,
D-I do not know whether there was a D. They were all
liberated. What about Kenya? Tanganyika at one time
belonged to the Germans. Look at it sitting there with us
like a lion. Why should South Africa still shilly-shally in
carrying out the terms of the Mandate entrusted to it? In
other words, we would like to ask why South Africa has
not yet fulfilled its responsibility in preparing the people of
Namibia for independence? Is it that South Africa lacks
the know-how?
Let them tell us; then we will find
someone who will know how to prepare the people of that
Territory for independence.

46. The PRESIDENT (translation from Chinese): I now
invite the representative of’saudi Arabia to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
47. Mr. BAROODY
(Saudi Arabia): Mr. President, it
heartens me to see you in the chair as President of the
Security Council, hailing as you do from a country which is
the heir of one of the earliest world civilizations. But your
people did not rest on past laurels, for, indeed, within less
than a quarter of a century, by singleness of purpose and a
high sense of individual as well as collective duty, they
re-emerged on the world scene as an illuminated model to
other States struggling to achieve social justice and national
unity. Your country, Sir, should be a striking example to all
those African peoples that still find themselves under the
yoke of foreign rule.

53. Or is it that South Africa has no intention of liberating
the Namibians? For heaven’s sake, whom is the South
African Government fooling? Not us; nor, I believe, itself.
Then why, why, why, and a hundred times why does the
South African Government not come out and tell us that it
wants to maintain its control over Namibia for economic
and perhaps strategic reasons? And why do not those
States which clandestinely, if not overtly-and
sometimes
overtly-support South Africa avow to us in turn that they
feel that it is in their own interests to maintain the status
quo? Let us be frank with one another.

48. I do not wish to let this occasion pass without
referring to your predecessor, our good friend Ambassador
Jankowitsch, who, in spite of his relatively young age, ably
assumed the duties of guiding the deliberations of the
Council as befitted a son of Austria, one of the most
civilized countries of Europe.

54. If the reason for maintaining South African rule over
Namibia is economic, let South Africa come and tell US so.
We can perhaps safeguard its economic interests. It is very
well known that many of the erstwhile metropolitan
Powers-or colonial Powers-call
them what you w&-after
the colonies were liberated benefited from the liberation of
those colonies. There was no more strife between the
people of the erstwhile colonies and the people of the
metropolitan Powers.

49. I should be remiss if I failed to allude to the country
of my good friend, Sir Laurence McIntyre. I was indeed
exhilirated, when in a reception he recently gave, I shook
hands with the Minister of Education of a new country
formerly known as the Territory of Papua, whose people
were placed by the United Nations under the tutelage of
the Australian Government, and in a reIativeIy short time
the Australian Government, to its great honour, succeeded
in preparing the Papuans for self-rule and independence.
Such an achievement must be attributed to the high sense
of responsibility which Australia clearly manifested from
the day it was entrusted with such a noble task as preparing
the Papuan people for full-fledged statehood. New Zealand
should also be praised for the good work done in training
another people which was placed under its tutelage.

55. If the reason is strategic, remedies could also be found.
I hear from a reliable colleague that it seems there are no
natural barriers between South Africa and Namibia. Many
neighbouring countries have no natural barriers; they do
not have the Alps or the Pamirs,or whatever geographical
hurdles,if we may calI them that, to separatethem from
one another. And they work out treaties for the preservation of the rightsof States.

50. Now, I put the following question to the members of
the Council and to none other than the representative of
South Africa, my good friend Ambassador von Hirschberg:
Are the people of Namibia politically less developed than
the people of Papua? Answer the question. Are they or are
they not? Of course not, We all concur, and I am sure that
in his heart-if not with his tongue-he concurs.

56. Somebody toid me that South Africa is afraid of
guerrillas from Namibia. Well, guerrillas will make it
difficult for South Africa if the Namibian people are not
given independence;but once the Namibians are given
independence
why should there be guerrillas? There would
be no reasonfor them. You seehow easy it is to find
excuseswhena country is on the sideof the aggressor.

51. Why is it, then, that South Africa obdurately maintains its rule over a Territory
which was peculiarly
transferred to it by King George V in his capacity as Head
of the Commonwealth,
of which South Africa was a
member. The Mandate over South West Africa was granted

57. I shouldbe indeed frank and tell the Council that the
manner in which it has been handling this question is
becomingludicrous-to put it mildly. Let us not go to the
5

very genesis. It is said that Baroody always takes US through
the annals of history. Today I shall not do so, although I
have been seized of this question in the United Nations
actively for the last 15 years or so. It was in 1965 that I had
a project which it was my privilege to present to my
and I negotiated privately with
African brothers,
Mr. Miiller, the Foreign Minister of South Africa. I do not
know whether at one time South Africa toyed with the idea
of appointing co-administrators from neutral countries to
accelerate the independence of South West Africa, now
called Namibia. But then what happened? I will let you
know in time.

62. Fifthly, the Security Council delegated our illustrious
Secretary-General to visit Mr. Vorster, who promised
nothing palpable. I read the report-“nothing
palpable”,
nothing you could touch. Put Vaseline on a fish and try to
hold that fish. I do now know where he imported the
Vaseline from, Maybe the United Kingdom. I am sure not
from France or from the Federal Republic of Germany. He
seems to be German-“Vorster”.
But our Secretary-General
could make no headway with him, except to tell US in his
report what Mr. Vorster did and what he told him and what
pious hopes could, perhaps, he hoped, be instilled in our
African brothers.

58. But let me resume. First, some major Powers concurred in cutting off the umbilical cord that tied Namibia
to the United Nations and which could have put Namibia
under the Trusteeship Council until the Namibians attained
independence. That was a mistake. But never mind-it
belongs to the past.

63. Sixthly, reams of documents have been printed and
distributed. I can assure you, there will not be much paper
left. There is not only an energy crunch but also a shortage
of paper. I am not being sarcastic. This is a fact, thoughit
sounds sarcastic. These procedures-because there is not
only one procedure-have made a mockery of us all, have
made a mockery of the Council and of the United Nations.

59. Secondly, the self-same Powers encouraged the creation of what came to be known as the Council for Namibia,
as if by creating a glorified committee-and that is what the
Council is-outside Namibia, presto! the Namibian people
would be liberated. Time and again I have to recall what
Clemenceau once said at Versailles: “If you want to kill any
item, create a committee and refer that item to the
committee”. There it lies buried. But who encouraged the
creation of that Council? None other than our erstwhile
colleague Ambassador Goldberg. Of course, he did not do it
out of his head; he must have received instructions from
those who formulate policy. Give those Africans a Council.
And my good African friends got drunk with the word
“Council”! Security Council, Trusteeship Council. And the
Council for Namibia? Did you know, you Namibians
sitting there, that you fell for it? What has the Council
done so far in concrete terms? Oh, somebody will say that
I should spare the feelings of our African brothers. But why
should I? If I have been taken in, I should be told that I
have been taken in, so that I may mend my ways.

64. And then we come to the super-Powers, or major
Powers-call them what you will. I tried at one time several
years ago to find out whether the super-Powers could do
something about the situation. After all, they are members
of the Security Council and peace is entrusted to them, and
war also is their responsibility. I was told-and I am not
going to mention the occasion-that they were not prepared
to have a confrontation on account of the Namibian
people. In the light of this, my friends from Namibia, what
the major Powers have been giving us is only lollipops-and
lollipops are bad for your teeth. You have beautiful teeth,
good teeth. Lollipops-that is what we have been given on
behalf of those who should know better amongst the major
Powers. I would not say the super-Powers, because, after
all, in fairness to the United States and the Soviet Union,
this matter was not their immediate responsibility, but the
responsibility of the United Kingdom. Is South Africa still a
member of the Commonwealth? I think it is. No? All
right, it is not. But morally, they are responsible, for, after
all, it was the late King George V who transferred the
Mandate to South Africa.

60. Thirdly, those self-same Powers that have interests in
South Africa spoke of sanctions and boycotts. These have
so far proved to be of academic value. They also proved to
be of academic value in Southern Rhodesia. You know,
they get better prices for the tobacco when they age it, I
don’t smoke, but I am told so on good authority. So if the
Southern Rhodesians cannot sell the tobacco now, they will
sell it next year at better prices. What a sham and what a
shame!

65. What is the remedy? I read my notes. The reason I did
not jot more notes about the remedy is that we should
explore with one another ways and means for liberating the
people of Namibia.
66. There are several avenues. The worst one of them I
shall mention first: to ask the members of the Organization
of African Unity, as of now, to draft an army for the
liberation of the Namibians. But this is the worst solution.
We are here to resolve our differences by peaceful means.
But I mention this first because if South Africa is
impervious to reason, and continues to be so, then what is
the answer?

61. Fourthly, the Security Council appointed a High
Commissioner. I tried to look to see how high he was. I
found he was like me, an ordinary person, and a Comrnissioner without a commission. He was neither high, the poor
man, nor did he have a commission. He was there just in
order to beguile the Africans. A High Commissioner. We
had High Commissioners in the Mandates of the Middle
East. I never respected them. I always rebelled against
them, until finally they came down. But the poor man is
our High Commissioner; he is one of us, not from
somewhere else. He is one of our colleagues. And what was
the High Commissioner supposed to do? To preside over
the implementation of decisions which remain, unfortunately, ink on paper.

67. There are, however, other solutions. If the Government of Mr. Vorster becomes amenable to logic and good
sense, and if they are afraid that they will lose economically, we can assure them that the Namibians, once
they have a sovereign State, will strengthen their economic
ties with South Africa; we will take steps to prevail upon
them to pursue an open-door policy in trade between South
Africa and Namibia.
6

68. If it is a question of strategy, we can work out
guarantees, in the Security Council, to South Africa that it
will not be exposed to any aggression from outside. If it is a
question of South Africa protecting certain vested Interests
of white people who happen to be in Namibia, there can be
reparations made if they do not want to remain in the
Territory after Namibia gains its independence. There are
many ways and meansthat can be resorted to in fmding a
solution.
69. In the meantime,I am thinking aloud-and I hope the
Council will think aloud with me-whether or not we can,
dependingon a resolution of the Council, askSo&h Africa
to accept a couple of administratorsfrom neutral countries
to accelerate the processof independence.We would not
get rid of the High Commissioner.The High Commissioner
would be the liaisonbetween the co-administrators,including South Africa, and the United Nations, sothat we would
not have to repeatthe sameprocedureby rote every two or
three months which has sofar led to nothing.
70. Let me get this straight. The Council will prevail on
South Africa-through the Secretary-General,if possible,or
by any other means-to accept two or three neutral
co-administrators to accelerate the independence of
Namibia, and the Trusteeship Council will be informed,
through the High Commissioner,of the progressthat will
have to be achievedwithin a certain period of time, not to
exceed three or four years. If the Australians could work
miracles with Papua,it is not far-fetched that something
could lead to the eventua1independenceof Namibiawithin
a relatively short period of time. Let us set the target date
for the achievementof independence,and if we fail, we will
do our little part, and I am speakingnow on behalf of my
delegation.
71. We will maintain the embargoon oil and apply it 110
per Cent-not 5 percent-to the maximum, to South Africa.
I Will see to it asthe representative of a country that has
witnessedwhat colonial Powers can do, to encouragethe
maintenance of an embargo until doomsday if the South
Africans are not amenableto reason.

74. Mr. JANKOWITSCH (Austria): Mr. President,on your
assumptionof the presidencyof the Council for the current
month, my delegationwould like to join previousspeakers
in offering its sincerecongratulationsand good wishesto
you. We should Iike to add to this the pledgeof our full
co-operationin the fulfilment of your mostimportant task.
Your great seniority and experiencein the direction of the
foreign affairs of your country, China, a country to which
Austria feelsbound by closeand friendly relations,will no
doubt assistyou in guiding us successfullythrough the
Council’sdeliberationsduring this month.
75. May I also take this opportunity of thanking you,
Mr. President, membersof the Council and my respected
friend-may I say my respected fatherly friendAmbassadorBaroody, for their kind and generouswordson
my behalf.
76. As this is the first time that my country asa member
of the Security Council is taking part in a debateon the
question of Namibia,may I be permitted to outline briefly
the position of principle of my Governmenton this issue.
77. The attitude of the Austrian Government was expressedunequivocally by Austria’spositive vote on General
Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI) by which the United
Nations terminated South Africa’s mandateand declared
that it had no right to administerthe Territory.
78. Austria has no diplomatic, consular or trade representationin Namibia.
79. Austria welcomedthe decisionof the Security Council, as reflected in its resolution 284 (1970) of 29 July
1970, requestingan advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice regarding the “legal consequencesfor
States of the continued presence of South Africa in
Namibia, notwithstanding Security Council resolution
276 (1970)“.
80. The position which the Court took in its advisory
opinion of 21 June 19714flows with impeccablelogic from
earlier decisionsof this Organizationwhich placedNamibia
under the direct resljonsibility of the United Nations. The
highest judicial organ of the United Nations has thus
confirmed the unlawfulnessof the continued presenceof
South Africa in Namibia.

72. You know what I wastold by certain people-I do not
want to mention where they came from, but we all know
anyway-that “If you Arabs persist in maintaining that
embargo, we shall occupy your territory by force”. They
do not know that dynamite surrounds many of our
airfields. And by Jove, we have existed for 6,000 years
without oil. Our oil is only 50 years old. “Drink it”, we
were told; “Drink your oil”. I said, “NO, we will feed it to
you yet when you procreate like rabbits and you have no
proteins”. Protein can be produced from oil; one doesnot
have to drink it.

81. By voting for General Assembly resolution
2871 (XXVI), which welcomed the advisory opinion,
Austria fully supported the Court’s opinion that the
continued presenceof South Africa in Namibia being
illegal, South Africa was under an obligation to withdraw
its administrationfrom Namibiaimmediately and thus put
an end to its occupationof the Territory.

73. We should be asone in the Security Council. I say this
in a friendly manner and without any hostility, although
my voice may be high on this question becausethis is my
style of speaking.We should ask this gentleman whom I
have known for many years to be our ambassadoragain,
not just the ambassadorof his own Government, while our
ambassadorsconvey to his Government that it had better
mend its ways lest, indeed, we find ourselvesinadvertently
engulfed in an African conflict which may becomea racial
conflict, somethingwhich we should avoid.

82. It is a consequenceof this position of principIe that
Austria has co-operatedwith the United Nations Council
for Namibia in the pastand will continue to do so. May I
take this opportunity to salute the talented and distin4 Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence of
South Africa in Namibia (South West Africa), notwithstanding
Security Council resolution 276 (1970), Advisory Opinion, I. C. J.
Reports 1971, p. 16.

7

tion of United Nations policy towards Namibia. We felt
that the approach adopted by the Council pointed in the
right direction, namely, to secure, without abandoning the
principles of United Nations policy on Namibia and while
insisting on the need for the immediate transit of the
people of Namibia to self-determination and independence,
the co-operation of the Government which bears the
responsibility
for the non-implementation
of United
Nations decisions by all the peaceful means to which the
Charter points.

guished leadership that Ambassador Paul Lusaka of Zambia
has offered to the Council for Namibia as its President.
Austria very recently supported the proposal that the
United Nations Council for Namibia should be invited to
participate in the Conference on the Law of the Sea to
protect future interests of Namibia.
83. Austria has further accepted the travel and identity
documents issued by the Council for Namibia as valid travel
documents within the sphere of Austrian jurisdiction as
another token of our spirit of co-operation.

90. In examining the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral, my delegation shares many of the views expressed
around this table. Those views could hardly be better
expressed than by the words of the Secretary-General
himself, when he states in his report:

84. The special attention that questions concerning
Namibia receive in Austria is further underscored by the
fact that the Federation of Austrian Trade Unions was the
first non-governmental organization to contribute to the
United Nations Fund for Namibia.

‘L. 1 . the position of the Government of South Africa is
still far from coinciding with that established in the
resolutions of the United Nations concerning Namibia.”
[S/10921 and Cow. 1, para. 18.1

85. Turning now to recent developments in Namibia, in
particular developments after the adoption by the Security
Council of resolution 323 (1972) of 6 December 1972, we
find little which can be termed encouraging. Contrary to
resolutions of this Council, the South African Government
seems to have proceeded in its efforts to implement a
“homelands” type of policy in Namibia on the basis of the
so-called Development of Self-Government for Native
Nations in South West Africa Amendment Act. The
creation of a so-called advisory council in March 1973
represents a further step which can hardly be seen as
implementing the will of the people of Namibia and
relevant decisions of the United Nations.

91. The Secretary-General rightly points out in the same
paragraph that South Africa’s position on some of the basic
questions which arose during earlier contacts with the
Government of South Africa have been made clearer. In
this context I quote from paragraph14of the report, which
containsinformation to the effect that the South African
Government recognizes that South West Africa has a
separateinternationalstatusand that “it doesnot claim any
part of South WestAfrica”,

86. We have noted with great distress repeated reports of
police and military violence in Namibia, suppressing the
peaceful activities of political forces within the country.
The moving letter of the women of Namibia, which the
President of the Council for Namibia read out to this
Council at the preceding meeting, is a testimony of the
plight of the Namibian people.

92. While this statementseemsto hold out someencouragement, it is severely tempered by the lack of any
referenceto the independenceof Namibia, even after the
long period of time the Government of South Africa seems
to need to ascertainthe wishesof the people of Namibia.
This is evident from the last paragraphof the information
given by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of South Africa to
the Secretary-Generalin Geneva, contained in the Secretary-General’sreport, which readsasfollows:

87. Let me now turn to the mandate entrusted by this
Council to the Secretary-General in consultation and close
co-operation with a group of three Council members, to
which our special thanks and regards are due, to initiate as
soon as possible contacts with all parties concerned as
provided for in Security Council resolution 309 (1972).
The Council today has to consider the third report
presented by the Secretary-General in this context,

“On the basisof presentdevelopments,the Government
of South Africa anticipatesthat it might not take longer
than 10 yearsfor the population of South West Africa to
reachthe stagewhere it will be ready to exerciseits right
to self-determination.”[ibid., paru. 14.1
93. It seemsdifficult by any standardsto accept delays of
such length which are in total contradiction with the
repeated calls of the United Nations, of a general and a
specific nature, to grant self-determination and independenceimmediatelyto all colonial countries and peoples.If
the slightest uncertainty about the will of the people of
Namibia still exists, the speedy organization of a referendum under United Nations auspicescould dispel any such
doubts.

88. The report before US again shows the measure of the
efforts of the Secretary-General, and my delegation would
like to join others in paying a tribute to the painstaking and
conscientious manner in which he has implemented his
mandate.
89. Although Austria at the time of the adoption of
resolution 309 (1972), was not a member of this Council,
my country would have had little difficulty in supporting
the initiative taken by members of the Council, in view of
the complete deadlock existing over Namibia, an initiative
taken furthermore during its historic meeting in Addis
Ababa. It was this initiative which led to the various efforts
on the part of the Secretary-General to secure co-operation
from the Government of South Africa in the implementa-

94. In looking to the future, which is the task of this
Council, the overriding consideration guiding our efforts
must be the well-beingof the Namibian people asa whole.
No lessan authority than the International Court of Justice
has affirmed this duty of our Organization in paragraphs
121,125 and 127 of its advisory opinion.
8

95. My Government, therefore, will support any initiative
that can bring about by peaceful means the withdrawal of
the South African authorities from the Territory of
Namibia.

appreciate the impartial dignity
presiding over these proceedings.

with

which

you are

103. At the same time, I should like to express a word of
appreciation to Ambassador Jankowitsch of Austria for the
very energetic and constructive way in which he carried out
his duties as President of the Council last month.

96. It is in this spirit and with this understanding that we
fmd ourselves in broad agreement with the terms of the draft
resolution submitted by the delegation of Peru [S/11152/
Rev. I]. We should like to thank the delegation of Peru for
its painstaking work in preparing this draft resolution.

104. Given recent events, it is entirely fitting and, in fact,
necessary that the Council should review again the unique
role of the United Nations with regard to Namibia, and that
we should examine the situation in that Territory. I would
like to take this opportunity to thank the Secretary-General
for his conscientious efforts in carrying out his mandate
under the terms of Security Council resolutions
309 (1972), 319 (1972) and 323 (1972), and I would like
to express our appreciation for the detailed report of
30 April on his contacts with the representatives of the
Government of South Africa. With hindsight, perhaps it
would have been more useful had the Council met sooner
to consider the conclusions reached by the SecretaryGeneral in his report.

97. We regret the circumstances that have led to the
present situation, circumstances which are the motivation
for the proposals contained in the aforementioned draft
resolution. However, many speakers in the present debate,
and foremost of them all our Secretary-General, have
highlighted these developments and stressed how much the
response of the Government of South Africa has fallen
short of the expectations of the Security Council.
98. Furthermore, in considering a question of the deepest
interest to the peoples of Africa, we feel that we also have
to respect the considered opinion of the highest and most
representative instances of these very African peoples and
nations. I refer to the decisions adopted by the Tenth
Summit Conference of Heads of State and Government of
the Organization of African Unity in Addis Ababa in May
1973.

105. It has been nearly two years now since the Council
first invited the Secretary-General to initiate contacts to
enable the people of Namibia to exercise their right to
self-determination, The situation in Namibia today appears
on the surface much as it was when resolution 309 (1972)
was adopted. It has been said, accordingly, that the
contacts between the Secretary-General and the South
African Government have not been successful in meeting
the objectives set by the Council.

99. The draft resolution before us, therefore, reflects an
element of disappointment, combined with an attempt,
however, to bring movement into an extremely difficult
situation. Although this attempt has failed, we should not
lose sight of the fact that it was an initiative which had to
be taken in order to demonstrate the willingness of the
international community to explore all possibilities to
attain a peaceful solution. Although this process did not
yield the results that have been expected, it did add to a
further clarification of the question and of various aspects
of the problem. This in itself is no mean result.

106. Rather than simply accepting this assertion, however,
let us examine what has taken place. Through the Secretary-General’s consultations, United Nations officials visited
Namibia, examined conditions at firsthand, and met the
Namibian people. These visits were a concrete illustration
to the people of the Territory and to the world of the
United Nations concern and responsibility for Namibia.
107. We should not, in my delegation’s view, undervalue
the Secretary-General’s achievement in obtaining South
Africa’s assurances on Namibia. Foreign Minister Miiller
stated that South Africa would respect the wishes of the
whole population of Namibia and would allow all political
parties “full and free participation in the process leading to
self-determination and independence” lsee S/I 0921 a&
Corr.1, para. 131. The Foreign Minister added that South
Africa had no intention of delaying self-determination and
would co-operatewith the Secretary-Generalto determine
measures
to .achievethis goal. The South African Government also assertedthat it did not foresee the sudden
independenceof individual population groups. On balance-and my delegationbelievesthat history will support
this view-we believe that the Secretary-General’sefforts
have beenbeneficialto United Nations involvement in the
Namibianquestion.

100. At the same time, we have to ask ourselves what can
be done, realistically and constructively, to bring about the
attainment of those goals which the United Nations has set
for Namibia and which the International Court of Justice
has confirmed.
101. Consequently, my delegation will interpret the draft
resolution as keeping the way open for the initiation of a
new, more positive phase in the efforts of the United
Nations to realize the objectives which have been established for the future of Namibia. My delegation hopes that
further developments will enable the Security Council, in
the foreseeable future, to deal with the question again on a
more positive note. My delegation is convinced that the
efforts of all the organs of the United Nations will
contribute towards this goal and prepare the ground for it.
102. Mr. BENNETT (United States of America): As I
begin, Mr. President, I should like to assure you of the
fullest co-operation of my delegation in the conduct of
your important duties as President of the Security Council
for the month of December. We appreciate that a man of
your experience is at our head this month and we

108. Wehave followed recent eventsin Namibia, however,
with deepeningconcern. We believe that the South African
Governmentcould have avoided, and still can avoid, such
developmentswhich call into question its good faith. We
have in mind, in particular, that Government’spersistence
9

in implementing its so-called “homelands” policy in evident
contradiction
to previous assurances given to the SecretaryGeneral. The numerous arrests, the arbitrary suppression of
political activity, and the public floggings of dissidents
conflict sharply with the tenor of South Africa’s statements
to the Secretary-General.
109. The reaction of my own Government
to South
Africa’s illegal presence in Namibia in fact predates these
moves. Since May 1970, we have followed a policy of
discouraging further American investment there and we have
advised potential investors that we will not intercede as a
Government to protect their investments against claims of a
future legitimate Government in that Territory.
110. As members of the Council will recall, it was on
29 July 1970 that the Security Council in its resolution
284 (1970) requested the International Court of Justice to
give an advisory opinion on the following question:
“What are the legal consequences for States of the
continued presence of South Africa in Namibia, notwithstanding Security Council resolution 276 (1970)? ”
111. The United States participated in both the written
and the oral phases of the argument of the case. The United
States position was that the United Nations had succeeded
to the supervisory powers of the League of Nations over the
Mandate granted South Africa to administer Namibia, and
that, therefore, the General Assembly had terminated with
validity that Mandate by its resolution 2145 (XXI) of
27 October 1966. The United Nations had assumed direct
responsibility for the Territory and South Africa was under
an obligation to withdraw its administration. Until it did so,
however,
its responsibilities
to the people of Namibia
continued. On 21 June 1971, the Court handed down its
advisory opinion, the conclusions of which were consonant
with the United States position.

illuminating South African policies and actions. It is
negotiation on Namibia, as on other differences, that holds
the promise of ultimate success.
114. No matter what one may think of the sincerity of the
South African Government, responses already given to the
Secretary-General by Foreign Minister Miiller represented
important departures from previous South African policy.
They signal openings which are admittedly narrow but
which we believe are worth further exploration.
115. The PRESIDENT (translation fkom Chinese): I
should like now to make a statement on the question of
Namibia as the representative of CHINA.
116. The Chinese delegation has studied the Secretary
General’s report on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 323 (1972)[S/10921 and Con: 1J andhas listened
attentively to the speeches of many representatives. As is
known to all, the Chinese delegation has serious reservations and is not in favour of initiating a “dialogue” between
th.e Secretary-General and the South African authorities. In
our opinion, to conduct a “dialogue” with the South
African colonialist authorities before there is any indication
on their part that they will accept the United Nations
resolutions on Namibia would be of no help to the
Namibian people’s struggle for national independence, but
would only be utilized by the South African colonialist
authorities to create confusion, deceive the masses and
actively pursue the criminal policy of “Bantustans”, in the
name of “dialogue”, so as ,to legalize their unlawful
existence in Namibia. For these reasons, the Chinese
delegation did not participate in the voting on Security
Council resoiution 309 (1972) or on Security Council
resolutions 319 (1972) and 323 (1972), which called for a
prolongation of the dialogue.
117. The development over the past two years has turned
out as China and many African countries had expected. Far
from producing any positive results, the “dialogue” has
been used by the South African colonialist authorities to
step up the pursuance of their reactionary policy of
splitting the territorial integrity and national unity of the
people of Namibia, serving to hoodwink public opinion and
cover up the true state of affairs. For instance, in disregard
of the strong opposition of the people of Namibia, the
South African colonialist authorities set up last March a
so-called “advisory council”, appointed by the South
African racist rkgime. Last May, under the signboard of
so-called “self-determination”,
the South African colonialists and racists concocted a “Ban&Stan” in Ovanlboland
and Kavangoland, a farce of sham self-government. On
19 February last, South African Prime Minister Vorster
announced in the South African House of Assembly:

112. The United States regrets that South Africa has not
abided by the spirit of its discussions with the SecretaryGeneral. Yet, we are reluctant to eliminate the possibility
of future talks. As we are all aware, a number of seemingly
intractable international conflicts and problems have been
solved during the past several years by patient, dogged
negotiations. Are the people of Namibia not deserving of
similar efforts? The United States continues to believe that
such discussions are also the most realistic way of gaining
self-determination
fbr the people of Namibia. A number of
questions concerning South Africa’s plans for Namibia
require more specific replies. What time-table does South
Africa propose for Namibia’s self-government?
What steps
is South Africa willing to take now-now-to
improve
political and social conditions
in the Territory‘?
The
Secretary-General,
in our view, should be free to seek
and to look into the welfare of Namibians
answers,
reportedly ariested for speaking to visiting United Nations
officials.

“It was the choice of the peoples of the Territories in
South West Africa to decide for themselves whether or
not they should enter into a federation, a confederation
or whether each of the peoples should stand on their
own.”

113. We should, not delude ourselves that progress towards
Namibian self-determination
will be quick. As the Secretary-General has cautioned, time and protracted discussion
will be required. None the less, we believe contacts between
the Secretary-General
and South Africa are valuable in

This has pointedly revealed South Africa’s intention of
creating more “Bantustans” under its control through the
so-called “self-determination”
so as to achieve its criminal
purpose of divide and rule in Namibia.
10

118. While actively pushing that reactionary policy, the
South African colonialist authorities said in the dialogue:
“ ‘On the basis of present developments, the Government of South Africa anticipates that it might not take
longer than 10 years for the population of South West
Africa to reach the stage where it will be ready to exercise
its right to self-determination.’ “[ibid., pm. I-$./

independenceby this Territory. It therefore asked the
security Councilto terminate suchcontacts.Not long ago,
the United Nations Council for Namibia, the Special
Committee On decolonization, as well as the Fourth
Committee, reached the same conclusion and adopted
~~KhtiOns
to that effect. The Chinesedelegationfully
agreesWith andsupportsthis conclusionandmaintainsthat
the Security Council shouldrespectthe just demandof the
Famibian Peopleand the resolutionsadoptedby OAlJ, the
General Assemblyand its related committeesby termmating the “dialogue” forthwith and harbouring no more
illusionsabout it.

119. In the first place, the mention of the so-called
“exercise of self-determinationwithin 10 years” constitutes
in itself not only a conspiracy and fraud to prolong the
colonialist rule but also a gross insult to the people of
Namibia and the entire African people. What deserves 123. In the opinion of the Chinesedelegation,the correct
way of solving the Namibian question is as follows: the
Particuh’
notice is that suchan assertionrepresentsin itself
correct positionpreviously adopted by the United Nations
a brazen negation of the United Nations resolutions on
on the Namibianquestionmust be adheredto, namely, the
Namibia. If the conspiracy of the so-called “selfSouth
African colonialistauthoritiesmust immediatelyend
determination within 10 years” under the auspicesof the
their illegal occupationof Namibia,withdraw their military
South African authoritieswere to be accepted,would it not
mean a nullification of all the just United Nations resolu- and police forces, as well as their administration, from
Namibia and let the United Nations Council for Namibia
tions on Namibiathrough the instrumentality of the United
take over SO that Namibiacan achieveits independenceat
Nations and thus a legalization of the South African
an early date. The heroic Namibianpeopleare fighting for
colonialist authorities’ illegaloccupation of Namibia?
this lofty goal, and all justice-upholding countries and
people throughout the world are duty-bound to give firm
120. In addition to all this, the South African colonialist
and racist authorities have issueda great variety of Fascist support to this just struggle.
decrees, which, have completely deprived the indigenous
people of their basicrights and human freedoms.Moreover,
124. At the sametime, we are pleasedto note that the
they have steadily reinforced their troops and military
militant unity betweenthe African and Arab peopleshas
installations in Namibia and set up a so-called “police
grown ever stronger. The Arab Summit Conferenceheld
force” of the black people in pursuanceof their vicious
recently in Algiers proposed to sever all relations with
policy of “using Africans to fight Africans”, to suppress
the
South Africa, Southern Rhodesiaand Portugal and effect
national liberation struggleof the Namibianpeople.
an oil embargoagainst them in support of the fighting
African
peoples,
including the Namibian people. The
121. Where there is repression, there is bound to be
implementationof this decisionwill certainly deala telling
resistance.On the one hand, the South African authorities
blow at the SouthAfrican colonialistauthorities.
are utilizing “dialogue” for the intensified pursuance of
their reactionary policies; and on the other hand, the
125. A just causeenjoys abundant support. We believe
Namibian people are daily steppingup their opposition and
that the peopleof other countrieswill alsocontinueto give
resistanceto the reactionary policies of the South African
support and assistance
to the Namibianpeopleby various
authorities, Last March the Namibian people launched a
means,
The
Chinese
Government
andpeoplewill, asalways,
masscampaignto boycott the so-called“advisory council”
firmly stand on the side of the Namibianpeopleand give
in Katutura, during which they set fire to the municipal
them all support and assistance
within our capability until
buildings.servingcolonialism. Last August, when a phoney
they
win
final
victory.
election was being conducted by the South African
authorities in Ovarnboland, the people there, who have a
tradition of struggle,in defianceof the ban imposedby the
126. The Chinesedelegation will vote in favour of the
South African colonialist authorities, held a massrally on
draft resolution submitted by the representativeof Peru.
the eve of the election to expose the fraud of the South
But it shouldbe pointed out that operative paragraph3 of
African authorities and call on the Ovamboland people to
the draft resolutioncan in no circumstances
be interpreted
boycott the election, As a result of the firm resistanceof
as making it possibleto resumethe dialoguebetweenthe
the Ovambolandpeople,the “election” farce stage-managed Secretary-Generaland the South African authoritiesbefore
by the South African colonialists and racist authorities
the adoption of a new resolutionby the Security Council.
endedin ignominiousfailure.
122. The Namibian people and the broad massesof the
African countries and peopleshave already seenthrough
the sinistermotives of the South African authorities to use
the “dialogue” to servetheir insidiouspurposes.The Tenth
Summit Conferenceof the Organization of African Unity
held last May came to the correct conclusion that the
United Nations contacts with the South
African racist
authorities were detrimental to the interests Of the
Namibian people and prejudicial to an early attainment of

127. SpeakingasPRESIDENT, I wishto say that the list
of speakershasbeen exhausted,and if there are no further
representativeswishingto addressthe Councilat this stageI
shallconsiderthat the Council is now ready to turn to the
considerationof the draft resolution contained in documerit S/lll52/Rev.l, There beingno further speakersand
asno one hasaskedto speakin explanationof vote before
the vote, we will now proceed to vote on the draft
resolutionsubmittedby Peru.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour: Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea,
India, Indonesia, Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Yugoslavia.
The draft resolution was adopted unanimously. s
128. The PRESIDENT [translation from Chinese): I call
now on the representative of France, who wishes to speak
in explanation of vote after the vote.
129. Mr. LECOMPT
(France)
(interpretation
from
French): Mr. President, as this is the first occasion for the
French delegation to speak this month of December we
would not wish to miss this opportunity to extend our
congratulations to you on your taking office as President
and to assure you of our desire to co-operate with you to
the fullest extent in the work that you are conducting.
130. I also wish to extend to your predecessor,Ambassador Jankowitsch, the heartfelt thanks of the French
delegation for the good-humoured and highly efficient
authority which he displayedlast month,
131. The affirmative vote of the French delegationon the
draft resolution in document S/11152/Rev.l is of dual
significance.It reflects, first of all, the disappointmentthat
we felt last April when we received the report of the
Secretary-Generalon the mission that had been entrusted
to him pursuantto resolution 309 (1972) and reaffirmed in
resolutions 319 (1972) and 323 (1972), which he fulfilled
with a senseof dedication to which we wish here to pay
particular tribute. We had hoped, when the Council met
just about a year ago in order once againto considerthe
question of Namibia, that the South African Governmentwhich had announcedsome decisionsand promisedsome
reforms-would commit itself to a policy that would enable
the Namibian people to exercise their right to selfdetermination. We had somedoubts which, unfortunately,
turned out to be well founded.
132. Indeed, we are bound to note today that South
Africa has not responded to the expectations of the
Council,
133. Of course,the contacts which the Secretary-General
has had with the authorities of Pretoria have not been
entirely useless.They have madeit possibleto obtain or to
catch a glimpseof someconcessions,
which, to be sure,are
minor but which neverthelessare the first which the South
African Government has been willing to grant in this
matter. A certain interest by the United Nations in Namibia
hasbeenconceded.

conditions under which this right would be exercised,the
scope and extent of the consultationsreferred to by the
South African declarationwhich is includedin the report of
the Secretary-Generalhave not been spelledout. We also
deplore the pursuit of the policy of the so-called‘separate
homelands’,which accentuatestribal antagonisms
whereas
it would be more appropriateto attempt to reconcilethem.
We note, moreover,that the intentions displayedby South
Africa in regard to public freedomsin the courseof the
talks which took placein Geneva,which appearedto us to
be muchtoo restrictive evenat that time, arefar from being
translated into fact. That being the case, the French
delegationhas subscribedto a resolution which, in principle, correspondsto the wishof the majority.
135. However,our vote is alsothe expressionof the hopes
which, in spite of so much disappointment,we would not
wish to renounce. The course chosen at Addis Ababa,
which we do not regret havingsupported,the action of the
United Nations being basedupon the pursuit of ways of
making it possibleto arrive at a peaceful settlement of
disputes,hasnot yielded the expectedresults.It is now for
the Government of South Africa to adopt the positive
measureswhich, by providing an opportunity to the
Secretary-Generalto submit another report to the Security
Council, would make it possibleto bring the Namibian
questionout of its presentimpasse.That is our interpretation of paragraph3 of the resolution that has just been
adopted.
136. We venture to hope that the Governmentof South
Africa will understandthat contacts could be fruitful only
to the extent that it would not limit itself to affirming
piously its intention of makingit possiblefor the population of South West Africa to exerciseits right to selfdeterminationandindependence,and would take the necessary action which would prove unambiguouslyits will to
renouncethe oppressivepolicy condemnedunanimouslyby
the international community and to apply the principles
containedin the Charter.
137. The PRESIDENT (translation from Chinese):I call
on the representativeof Kenya to explainhis vote after the
vote.
138. Mr. FAKIH (Kenya): I have not askedto speakto
explain my vote as such,but to inform the Councilthat a
seconddraft resolutionhasbeenprepared.It is now being
circulated and we hope that as soon as the necessary
consultationshavebeenconcludedwith the membersof the
Councilit will be formally introduced.
139. The PRESIDENT (translation from Chinese):I call
on the President of the United Nations Council for
Namibia.
140. Mr. LUSAKA (President,United NationsCouncilfor
Namibia): It is not my wish to hold back the Councilafter
it has concludedthe first part of the item underdiscussion.

134. However, we very much regret that the Government
of South Africa has not supplied the Council with the
“complete and unequivocal” clarifications which the Council wished to obtain concerning the right to selfdetermination and independenceof the Territory. The

141. Perhapsit would be unfair to the delegationof the
United Nations Council for Namibia to accept certain
reservationsand interpretations of the resolution that has

5 Seeresolution342 (1973).
12

just been adopted. The unanimous decision of the Security
Council, in the view of the United Nations Council for
Namibia, is found in paragraph 2, which calls for the
discontinuation of the dialogue. Our interpretation of
paragraph 3 is that what is meant by “important developments concerning the question of Namibia” are events like
strikes in the country-that
is, Namibia-torture
by the
racist regime of Pretoria in Namibia, or even requests by
SWAP0 as and if it deems it necessary to ask the
Secretary-General to draw the attention of the Security

Council to any basic action against the Namibian people in
the Territory,
142. As YOU yourself, Mr. President, have pointed out, our
interpretation of paragraph 3 does not include any further
contacts with the South African regime by the SecretaryGeneral, even after the consideration of the second draft
resolution,
The meeting rose at 6 p.m.

13
