S/2017/94

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 February 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the Central
African Republic
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2301
(2016), by which the Council renewed the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) until 15 November 2017 and requested me to report to the Council by
1 October 2016 and every four months thereafter. The report provides an update on
major developments in the Central African Republic and the implementati on of the
mandate of MINUSCA since the issuance of my previous report ( S/2016/824) on
29 September 2016.

II. Major developments
A.

Political situation
2.
The political environment was marred by rising tensions and outbreaks of
violence, with an estimated 287 civilians killed in clashes between armed groups
and a resurgence in crime partly linked to the onset of the dry season and seasonal
migration. The tensions were exacerbated by the absence of tangi ble progress in
tackling the root causes of the conflict and the posturing of armed group leaders
seeking to strengthen their negotiating positions in view of continuing talks on
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation and parallel medi ation
initiatives by regional actors. The resurgent violence undermined government
efforts to re-establish State authority, just as the successful Brussels Conference for
the Central African Republic, held on 17 November 2016, raised popular
expectations that the generous pledges would help to address the country’s acute
needs. The agreement between the Government and most armed groups on the
strategy on disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, together with the
adoption of a national security policy and an internal security forces development
plan, represented important steps accepted by most Central African stakeholders,
although not by all armed groups.
3.
The President, Faustin Archange Touadera, continued to reach out to all actors
to encourage them to pursue peace and reconciliation through dialogue. On

17-00867 (E)

030217

*1700867*

S/2017/94

12 October, he convened the first meeting of the Consultative Follow -up Committee
on Disarmament, Demobilization, Reintegration and Repatriation, which was attended
by 11 of the 14 main armed groups. The Front populaire pour la renaissance de la
Centrafrique (FPRC), Maxime Mokom’s anti-balaka group and the Retour,
réclamation, réhabilitation (3R) group boycotted the process, although the last mentioned later joined the Committee. Following the outbreak of violence in Kaga
Bandoro between ex-Séléka and anti-balaka groups on 12 October, the President
travelled with my Special Representative to the area and met a wide range of actors,
including armed group representatives. While delivering a message of peace, he
underscored that those responsible for the violence would be held accountable.
4.
Efforts to reunite the ex-Séléka continued. The movement held a general
assembly on 18 and 19 October in Bria, with the participation of FPRC, the
Rassemblement patriotique pour le renouveau de la Centrafrique (RPRC) and
dissidents from the Union pour la paix en Centrafrique (UPC). At the assembly,
RPRC agreed to join ranks under a unified command led by the FPRC first vice president, Noureddine Adam. The Mouvement patriotique pour la Centrafrique
(MPC) and UPC boycotted the event. In the assembly’s final declaration, the
participants called for dialogue with the Government and expressed the group’s
intention to exercise authority in areas under its control. The Org anization of
Islamic Cooperation subsequently convened a meeting in Sido, Chad, on 30 and
31 October, during which it discussed with representatives of FPRC, MPC and
RPRC possible approaches in negotiating with the Government. UPC rebuffed the
invitation to attend the meeting. The UPC refusal to join the ranks of the FPRC
coalition and its expansion in the east sparked clashes between the two groups in
Ouaka and Hautte-Kotto prefectures.
5.
The political situation in Bangui, although generally calm, was affected by
violent demonstrations on 24 October. Subsequently, on 28 October, the President
met representatives of civil society, political parties, the private sector and the
religious platform. During the meeting, which was aired live by local media, he
called for political dialogue and for Central Africans to recognize the inability of the
military and the security forces to fully discharge their responsibilities, stressing the
need for comprehensive security sector reform. Meanwhile, on 24 November, the
Kwa Na Kwa political party released a statement by the former President, François
Bozizé, in which he announced his intention to return to the country to pursue
inclusive dialogue and reconciliation.
6.
The then Deputy Secretary-General visited the country from 1 to 3 November
to raise international awareness ahead of the Brussels Conference. He and the
President addressed the Consultative Follow-up Committee on Disarmament,
Demobilization, Reintegration and Repatriation and emphasized that that forum
represented the sole national platform for political dialogue and addressing the
grievances of the armed groups. This paved the way for the Committee’s adoption
of the national disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation strategy
on 3 November and its approval the following day at the first meeting of the
Strategic Committee for Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration and
Security Sector Reform, chaired by the President. The Strategic Committee also
approved the national security policy and the five-year capacity-building and
development plan for the police and the gendarmerie.

2/19

17-00867

S/2017/94

7.
The Brussels Conference represented a demonstration of the international
community’s commitment to the country, with more than $2.2 billion pledged in
support of the National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan. The pledges amounted to
some 70 per cent of the funding required for the five years of the Plan. The
Conference also witnessed the signature by the President and the then Deputy
Secretary-General of the Mutual Engagement Framework, which will serve as a
mechanism for continued high-level political engagement between the country and
the international community.
8.
The National Assembly held its ordinary session from 1 October to
31 December, during which it convened hearings with key ministers on the
Government’s strategy on security and efforts to combat impunity. On 9 November,
it adopted a law on gender parity aimed at achieving a 35 per cent quota for women
in decision-making structures. On 28 and 29 December, it adopted the national
budget for 2017, amounting to 237 billion CFA francs ($384,518,280), established
its internal rules of procedure and passed legislation establishing a constitutional
court and a high court. The Assembly convened an extraordinary session from 3 to
17 January during which it adopted legislation on the formation of the remaining
institutions enshrined in the Constitution, including an economic and social council,
a national mediation council, a high council for communication and a hi gh
committee on good governance. The holding of the election for the remaining
unfilled seat in the Assembly, in the constituency of Bimbo 1, a suburb of Bangui,
on 4 December completed the Assembly’s composition.
9.
The President continued to reach out to his counterparts in the region and
visited Angola, Burkina Faso, Chad, Côte d’Ivoire, Gabon and the Sudan, where he
sought support for his Government’s efforts. He also attended meetings with the
Board of Governors of the African Development Bank and the sixteenth Summit of
la Francophonie, held in Madagascar from 22 to 27 November 2016.
10. On 30 November, the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) held the eighth extraordinary session of the Conference of Heads of State
and Government, in Libreville. The participants expressed support for an African
Union-led mediation initiative, in coordination with ECCAS, the United Nations
and bilateral and multilateral partners, between the Government and the armed
groups. In the communiqué adopted, the armed groups were called upon to lay down
their weapons and join the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation process initiated by the President.

B.

Security situation
11. The reporting period saw surges in violence, including sporadic incidents in
Bangui and attacks against peacekeepers, combined with increasingly frequent and
intense clashes between armed groups outside the capital.
12. Between September and November, 53,000 persons were displaced during
clashes between FPRC and UPC in Bria and between ex-Séléka and anti-balaka
groups in Kaga Bandoro. Such violence was often triggered by power struggles
within and among armed groups and by attempts to control resource -rich areas and
seasonal migratory movements. Moreover, armed groups exploited intercommunal

17-00867

3/19

S/2017/94

tensions, especially in the centre of the country, exacerbating communal rifts and
often setting back nascent reconciliation efforts.
13. The security situation in Bangui deteriorated in October following the killing
of a Central African soldier in the third district on 4 October. The killing, in the
predominantly Muslim neighbourhood of PK5, triggered retaliatory killings of
3 ethnic Fulani and the disappearance of 14 civilians by presumed uncontrolled
Central African soldiers, members of self-defence groups and unknown perpetrators,
leaving more than 11 individuals from both communities dead. MINUSCA extracted
more than 135 Muslims stranded in hostile parts of the capital, undertook patrols in
coordination with the national security forces and established static posts in
strategic locations, which contributed to calming the situation.
14. On 24 October, a civil society leader, Gervais Lakosso, led violent
demonstrations in Bangui to call for the departure of MINUSCA, the l ifting of the
United Nations arms embargo and the redeployment of the national armed forces.
The demonstrations were organized with support from some political actors and
armed elements. Demonstrators erected barricades and stoned United Nations and
non-governmental organization vehicles. Gunfire and grenade explosions killed four
persons. United Nations staff movements were restricted for 48 hours while
MINUSCA dismantled barricades and secured strategic areas. In a separate incident
on 30 October, the leaders of two self-defence groups in the PK5 neighbourhood,
Abdoul Danda and Issa Kapi (alias “50/50”), were killed in violence between the
two groups.
15. In the north-west, criminal activity increased as a result of competition
between armed groups for the control of seasonal migration activities and the cattle
market, thereby exacerbating the humanitarian situation and stalling development
initiatives. The 3R group repeatedly clashed with anti-balaka elements around
Bocaranga, Koui and Ndim in Ouham-Pendé prefecture. In response, MINUSCA
strengthened its presence in Bocaranga and Koui in late September. On 13 October,
anti-balaka elements fired on MINUSCA peacekeepers in Makounzi Wali, 20 km
south of Koui, and stole ammunition, fuel and money. Also in Ouha m-Pendé and
Ouham prefectures, tensions rose between MPC, aligned with the Révolution et
justice group, and anti-balaka-affiliated groups, culminating in violent clashes
between 11 and 13 November in the areas of Bozoum, Gouzé and Paoua, forcing
inhabitants of 25 villages to flee. On 5 January, suspected anti-balaka elements
attacked a MINUSCA convoy escorting United Nations military observers in
Ouham-Pendé prefecture, killing a peacekeeper.
16. Violence between ex-Séléka and anti-balaka factions continued in the central
part of the country. The killing of an ex-Séléka element on 12 October in Kaga
Bandoro triggered a revenge attack on a camp for internally displaced persons and
violent retaliation against predominantly Christian neighbourhoods by several
hundred ex-Séléka elements, leaving at least 38 civilians and 12 ex-Séléka fighters
dead. Several houses belonging to United Nations national staff and the local
authorities were set ablaze and at least two offices of international
non-governmental organizations and the parish were looted. Some 19,000 civilians
sought refuge near the MINUSCA base and the airfield. Since then, the situation has
remained tense, although the number of internally displaced persons has fallen
slightly.

4/19

17-00867

S/2017/94

17. Tensions rose between UPC and anti-balaka factions in Ouaka prefecture. On
28 October, in the village of Bélénguo, alleged UPC elements killed six gendarmes
who were investigating unrelated crimes attributed to armed groups. Anti -balaka
elements shot at MINUSCA peacekeepers along the Bambari-Grimari-Sibut and
Sibut-Dekoa routes on eight separate occasions, injuring nine peacekeepers.
18. FPRC elements attacked UPC positions in Bria on 21 November, largely in
response to UPC expansion into FPRC areas of control, competition ove r natural
resources and the UPC refusal to join a reunified ex-Séléka movement. The initial
FPRC attack against the Fulani neighbourhood of Gobolo and reprisal attacks in
Bria left 93 dead, while some 13,000 civilians were displaced. On 24 November,
MINUSCA positioned its forces to prevent further FPRC attacks on the
neighbourhood, while FPRC insisted on the full withdrawal of UPC from Bria
before reducing its own presence. FPRC exacerbated tensions by employing rhetoric
casting itself as a Central African group and UPC as comprising foreign elements.
19. FPRC also forged opportunistic alliances with MPC and anti -balaka elements
to attack UPC positions close to the UPC stronghold of Bambari. Between
30 November and 10 December, control of the town of Bakala, located north of
Bambari along the route to Mbrès, changed hands twice between FPRC and UPC.
The town is currently controlled by FPRC. The provisional casualty figures from the
fighting, which are difficult to verify, indicate that 6 civilians, 95 elemen ts of the
FPRC coalition and 32 UPC elements were killed and 19 civilians, 38 elements of
the FPRC coalition and 17 UPC elements were injured. MINUSCA took measures to
protect civilians in Bambari, including Fulani civilians and Muslim displaced
persons in the Christian neighbourhood that had been targeted, as well as to detect
and respond to the risk of violent conflict in the environs of the town. MINUSCA
also strongly warned both parties of the repercussions of any attempts to destabilize
Bambari and its environs, stressing its determination to use force to protect civilians.
20. In the east of the country, unidentified assailants attacked a MINUSCA escorted fuel convoy in Haut-Mbomou prefecture on 3 January, killing two
peacekeepers and injuring two others. The overall number of incidents attributed to
the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) was 22 attacks and 101 civilians abducted. Some
were attributed to the Doctor Achaye splinter group that allegedly operates outside
the control of the LRA leader, Joseph Kony. An increase in LRA activity is foreseen
until the end of the dry season in March and in the light of the reduced presence of
the Ugandan military in Nzako and Sam Ouandja, where LRA has taken over
vacated bases. Uganda has expressed its intention to withdraw its forces operating
in the Central African Republic under the auspices of the African Union Regional
Task Force, although the timeline therefor remains unknown.

C.

Reconciliation
21. A national programme for reconciliation and social cohesion was adopted on
4 November. It provides strategic guidance in areas such as social cohesion,
transitional justice, dialogue with armed groups and the return and reintegration of
internally displaced persons and refugees. On 21 December, the President officially
launched local peace and reconciliation committees as part of the infrastructure for
peace. Elected by local communities, the committees are expected to solve local

17-00867

5/19

S/2017/94

conflicts and promote peace through mediation and dialogue. The Government plans
to establish such committees in all 16 prefectures in 2017.
22. In the aftermath of the violence in Kaga Bandoro on 12 October, the ad hoc
local peace committee helped to ease tensions by obtaining the commitment of
anti-balaka and ex-Séléka elements to allowing freedom of movement for the
population. Meanwhile, a symbolic reconciliation ceremony between Christians and
Muslims was held during a mass on 11 December at the Bangui stadium in honour
of the recently nominated Cardinal of Bangui. The Muslim cemetery in Bangui,
which had reopened in February 2016 and then closed again after the tensions in
October, reopened on 13 December.

III. Progress in implementing resolution 2301 (2016)
23. In line with the priorities identified in resolution 2301 (2016), MINUSCA
reviewed its mission concept to ensure coherence and unity of efforts. It also began
to realign its military and police posture and deployments to enhance mobility and
responsiveness, including by reducing the number of temporary operating bases and
generating company-size reserve capacity in each sector to complement airborne
and motorized reserves. In Sector West, the initial realignment of the Mission’s
deployment contributed to greater control over the movement of armed groups in
Ouham-Pendé and Nana-Mambéré prefectures. In Bangui, MINUSCA began the
progressive transfer of static guard duties to the national police and the gendarmerie
in December, handing over security for six national institutions. Moreover,
following the unrest in Bangui and the provinces in September and October,
MINUSCA and the national authorities established two mechanisms to enhance the
sharing and coordination of information between the Mission and the national
defence and internal security forces.
24. MINUSCA increased its use of strategic communications, including through
its Guira FM radio station, which has nationwide coverage. It also held 25 public
information events involving more than 25,000 people, including representatives of
local authorities, armed groups, political parties and women’s and youth
organizations and religious leaders, to promote peaceful co existence.

A.

Immediate priorities
Protection of civilians
25. The Mission’s proactive deployments and posture, coupled with enhanced
integrated operational planning and coordination mechanisms, helped to prevent or
mitigate the impact of violence on civilians. Improved crisis management mechanisms
helped the Mission to maximize its protection efforts, for example by guiding the
location of checkpoints, buffer zones and areas of active patrolling during clashes
between the FPRC coalition and UPC in Bria. This helped to contain the violence
and enabled humanitarian actors to address the needs of the most vulnerable.
26. In support of efforts to reduce violence associated with seasonal migration, the
Government, with the assistance of the United Nations and non-governmental
partners, developed an operational plan and established local committees to prevent

6/19

17-00867

S/2017/94

conflicts in traditional flashpoint areas in Bamingui -Bangoran, Nana-Mambéré and
Ouham prefectures. Since December, the MINUSCA force has c onducted longrange patrols along migratory corridors and maintained a presence in key hotspots.
27. A total of 23 joint protection teams were deployed to develop protection plans
in response to alerts received, mostly pertaining to violence associated wi th
seasonal migration or armed group activities. MINUSCA also provided training on
protection of civilians to incoming members of the military and police components.
The Mission, through the Mine Action Service, addressed risks posed by
unexploded ordnance by disposing of 122,430 rounds of ammunition and explosive
devices in populated areas and providing risk education to 99,810 beneficiaries.
Promoting and protecting human rights and international humanitarian law
28. MINUSCA documented 582 incidents of violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law committed against 872 victims, comprising 548 men,
117 women, 92 children and another 115 victims whose age and sex could not be
verified. Arbitrary killings, cruel, inhumane and degrading treatment, arbitrary
arrests and detentions and abductions constituted most of the abuses. The following
armed groups were allegedly responsible for 283 cases of abuse: anti -balaka (61),
ex-Séléka factions (189), LRA (16), Révolution et justice (12) and 3R (5). The
fighting between the FPRC-led coalition and UPC in Bria and in Ouaka prefecture
resulted in a spike in the number of civilian deaths. The Mission received reports
that both groups committed targeted killings of civilians suspected of collaboratio n
with the opposing group. The national security forces were attributed with
responsibility for 184 human rights violations, half of which were instances of
arbitrary and/or prolonged detention committed by the Investigation and Intelligence
Service of the gendarmerie (53) and by other units of the gendarmerie (40).
29. MINUSCA and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights mapped the most serious violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law committed since 1 January 2003 to inform efforts to combat
impunity, including the work of the Special Criminal Court and the development of
a transitional justice strategy. In parallel, on 14 December, MINUSCA published its
second periodic report on the human rights situation, covering the period from
1 June 2015 to 31 March 2016.
30. The United Nations system continued to apply the United Nations human
rights due diligence policy. Of 29 requests for support to non -United Nations
security forces, 22 were approved, with the necessary risk mitigation measures
recommended when appropriate.
31. MINUSCA conducted 12 human rights awareness training sessions for
760 government and civil society participants (256 women and 504 men) and for at
least 100 elements from UPC, FPRC and the anti-balaka.
Conflict-related sexual violence
32. MINUSCA received 42 reports of conflict-related sexual violence, involving
25 women and 17 girls. Of those cases, 35 involved rape and 7 attempted rape and
sexual assault. Of the 35 incidents of rape, 11 were committed by more than one
perpetrator. Of the 42 cases, 32 involved ex-Séléka elements, 4 armed Fulani

17-00867

7/19

S/2017/94

herders, 2 anti-balaka elements and 4 persons of unclear affiliation. The Mission is
investigating additional reports of alleged sexual and gend er-based violence
committed during the violence in Kaga Bandoro in October, after which 32 victims
received assistance from humanitarian partners.
33. The Government appointed 29 national police officers and gendarmes and two
medical and two social affairs officers to a new specialized national police unit
tasked with tackling violence against women and children. MINUSCA, the Team of
Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict and the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) supported training for the unit on investigative
techniques.
Children and armed conflict
34. The country task force on monitoring and reporting continued to verify grave
violations and abuses committed against children by armed groups. Fifteen children
were killed in the fighting in Kaga Bandoro, Bria and the Bambari area, marking a
sharp increase compared with the previous reporting period. In total, 14 children
were maimed, 12 girls raped, 20 children abducted and three hospitals and
10 schools occupied and looted. A total of 14 children escaped from LRA. The
period saw a significant increase in the killings of children, escapes from LRA and
incidents targeting humanitarian workers.
35. MINUSCA continued to engage with armed groups and civil society to
separate children from armed groups and to reduce their vulnerability to
recruitment. Those efforts saw anti-balaka groups hand over 1,085 children to the
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF). No children were released by ex -Séléka
groups, largely owing to renewed fighting among them. MINUSCA facilitated the
end of the four-month occupation by the Front démocratique du peuple centrafricain
of the Zoukombo school in Nana-Mambéré prefecture on 3 October. Advocacy
efforts by MINUSCA and UNICEF resulted in armed groups vacating schools in
Bakala, Bodjomo, Mbrès and Morouba.

B.

Sustainably reducing the presence of, and the threat posed by,
armed groups
Support for reconciliation and the extension of State authority
36. MINUSCA continued its good offices to build trust among all stakeholders and
to encourage the Government to assume full responsibility for the peace process. It
focused on promoting and supporting government-led dialogue along three tracks:
armed groups, Central Africans at the local and natio nal levels, and neighbouring
countries.
37. Following the President’s visit to Kaga Bandoro on 17 October, my Deputy
Special Representative and a delegation comprising four government ministers
visited Koui and Bocaranga in December to address violence relating to the
seasonal migration. Also in December, MINUSCA facilitated the efforts of eight
parliamentarians to deal with local conflicts and violence in their respective
constituencies.

8/19

17-00867

S/2017/94

38. With support from the Peacebuilding Fund and the United Nations Population
Fund, the Mission and UNDP rehabilitated public infrastructure in remote areas,
together with two maternity clinics in Nana -Grébizi and Ouaham-Pendé prefectures.
MINUSCA and UNICEF continued to support the redeployment of teachers to
remote areas. While the deterioration of the security situation slowed down the
redeployment of magistrates outside Bangui, MINUSCA trained and provided
technical advice to court personnel and magistrates in Bangui. In December,
MINUSCA launched training for 245 local chiefs in Bangui to promote resilience
and reconciliation. The Mission and the United Nations country team, with support
from the Peacebuilding Fund, also assisted local authorities in Bangui, Bambari,
Bouar, Bria and Kaga Bandoro in implementing income -generating activities
combined with awareness-raising activities on peaceful coexistence for more than
13,000 Christian and Muslim young people.
Support for disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation
39. MINUSCA facilitated the first three meetings of the Consultative Follow-up
Committee on Disarmament, Demobilization, Reintegration and Repatriation.
Following the adoption of the national strategy, the Committee discussed the
implementation of the associated programme, including the integration of eligible
former combatants into the national uniformed services.
40. MINUSCA continued to implement pre-disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation and community violence reduction programmes to
draw elements away from armed groups and reduce intercommunal tensions. A total
of 4,279 combatants (3,545 men and 734 women) are participating in related
activities in eight locations, involving cash-for-work activities, vocational training,
food distribution and weekly awareness-raising activities. Combatants who rejoin
hostilities are excluded.
41. The community violence project in Paoua, Ouham-Pendé prefecture,
implemented by MINUSCA in partnership with the International Organization for
Migration, engages 6,340 beneficiaries of the 7,000 targeted, comprising
4,486 members of armed groups and 1,854 community members, among whom
1,139 are women. The community violence reduction programme in Bangui,
launched by MINUSCA with the United Nations Office for Project Services on
28 November to provide vocational training, has thus far engaged 543 beneficiaries,
among whom 40 are women, of the 3,000 targeted.
Support for security sector reform
42. MINUSCA continued to provide strategic and technical guidance to the
national committee responsible for drafting the national security sector reform
strategy on the basis of the national security policy adopted in November. The first
part of the World Bank-led public expenditure review of the public financial
management of security institutions was finalized in December.
43. On 23 December, the European Union Military Training Mission concluded
the operational training of the first infantry company, comprising 175 soldiers.
MINUSCA completed the rehabilitation of the classrooms and barracks at Camp
Kassai in Bangui and the construction of 10 armouries, in addition to the retraining
of 54 non-commissioned officers and the training of 28 soldiers. The verification

17-00867

9/19

S/2017/94

and registration of members of the military were put on hold by the national
authorities.
44. MINUSCA supported efforts to implement the capacity-building and
development plan for the police and the gendarmerie (see para. 6 above). It assisted
the authorities in developing a nationwide outreach campaign and communications
strategy for the selection and recruitment of 250 police officers and 250 gendarmes
during the first half of 2017. The Ministry of the Interior, supported by MINUSCA,
UNDP and the Peacebuilding Fund, verified and registered 71 gendarmes and
315 police officers, with 1,945 gendarmes and 1,469 police officers registered thus
far. MINUSCA and UNDP continued to support the rehabilitation of the police
academy and deployed a specialized police team to build national forensic capacity.
Support for the rule of law and efforts to combat impunity, including through
the operationalization of the Special Criminal Court
45. To support the rule of law and combat impunity, MINUSCA provided
technical assistance, capacity-building and support to make the Special Criminal
Court operational. In addition, it apprehended 84 alleged perpetrators, 18 of whom
under its urgent temporary measures mandate.
46. Some decisions, including those resulting in the release of high -profile
suspects such as Aubin Yanoué and Jonathan Fabrice, made in September by the
Criminal Court in Bangui raised concerns over the impartiality and capacity of
ordinary courts to try serious crimes. MINUSCA continued to provide advice on
continuing investigations into more than 20 people allegedly involved in serious
crimes, including the presumed organizers of the violence of 24 October in Bangui
and the former Minister of Defence, Jean-Francis Bozizé.
47. Significant progress was made in making the Special Criminal Court
operational, with support from MINUSCA and UNDP, including within the
framework of the Global Focal Point for Police, Justice and Corrections Areas in the
Rule of Law in Post-Conflict and Other Crisis Situations, and bilateral partners. The
terms of reference for national magistrates were published on 9 December. A
selection committee for international members of the Court, established by my
Special Representative, is about to complete the selection of the Special Prosecutor
and other international magistrates. The Government designated a building for the
Court and another for judicial police officers, while MINUSCA developed a security
plan for the personnel and premises. The decree establishing the selection
committee for judicial police officers was finalized in N ovember and is pending
approval by the national authorities. While full funding for the Court’s first
14 months of operations has nearly been secured, a gap remains for its entire five year mandate.
48. More than 1,560 civil cases were adjudicated by mobile courts in Bouar with
the support of UNDP and MINUSCA. The second criminal session since 2015 was
organized in Bangui with the support of UNDP and MINUSCA, during which
52 files involving 95 indictees were adjudicated. Three cases of sexual violence
were tried as rape and convictions pronounced.
49. MINUSCA and UNDP refurbished prisons in Bangassou, Berberati, Bimbo
and Ngaragba, including the Camp de Roux annex, between September 2015 and

10/19

17-00867

S/2017/94

the end of the reporting period. Central African soldiers continu ed to provide
security at eight prisons, including Ngaragba and Camp de Roux in Bangui.
MINUSCA and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime are supporting a plan
to demilitarize the prisons. Government-provided corrections personnel are
deployed in nine locations to support the national prison administration through
capacity-building projects. A total of 60 such personnel are deployed to Camp de
Roux and Ngaragba to actively support the management of prison incidents. In some
areas, suspected criminals are released after being held briefly by internal security
forces as a result of an ineffective criminal justice system. Armed groups often
implement parallel justice systems in areas that they control.
Natural resources management
50. The national authorities, with MINUSCA support, are developing a strategy to
curb the illicit exploitation of and trafficking in natural resources. The Kimberley
Process expanded the compliant zones for diamond trading to Boda, Carnot and
Nola in Berberati prefecture. The national authorities, with MINUSCA support, also
visited key mining areas and sites in Bambari, Bria, Dimbi, Ndélé, Nzacko and Sam
Ouandja to review the implementation of requirements under the Process, in the
hope that additional areas will be declared free of conflict and illicit trafficking and
that there will be a sufficient presence of State authority to ensure that diamond
revenues are not being channelled into the hands of armed groups.

C.

Coordination of international assistance and the Mutual
Engagement Framework
51. The institutional architecture for the implementation, monitoring and
evaluation of the Mutual Engagement Framework and the National Recovery and
Peacebuilding Plan was set out in a presidential decree of 5 November. An advisory
council will serve as the forum for high-level dialogue and policy discussions
between national and international partners on critical aspects of both.
52. The United Nations, the European Union and the World Bank supported the
Government in developing the National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan, while
harmonizing humanitarian and development funding to ensure complementarity.
Through extensive consultations, including with 720 women and youth civil society
leaders, the Plan identified three pillars: promoting peace, security and
reconciliation; renewing the social contract between the State and the population;
and facilitating economic recovery.

IV. Humanitarian situation
53. The humanitarian situation further deteriorated during the reporting period.
Half of the estimated 4.6 million Central Africans remain dependent on
humanitarian assistance. The number of internally displaced persons increased by
18 per cent, to a total of 411,785. The number of refugees in neighbouring countries
remains unchanged at 474,848. Some 2 million people face extreme food insecurity,
a significant increase from the 1.4 million in 2014. In Bangui, humanitarian partners
supported a government-led plan for the return of 28,000 internally displaced

17-00867

11/19

S/2017/94

persons at the M’Poko airport site, resulting in some 15,000 having returned to their
places of origin (mainly Bangui) by 13 January. Insecurity in LRA -affected areas
and access challenges prompted the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees to relocate the Bambouti refugee camp, which hosts
5,000 South Sudanese refugees, to Obo, Haut-Mbomou prefecture. Humanitarian
access continues to be reduced in many areas. International non-governmental
organizations have at times had to temporarily relocate non -critical staff from
Bambari, Batangafo, Bria and Kaga Bandoro to Bangui, restricting activities in
those regions only to lifesaving interventions.
54. The needs of Central Africans and funding levels remain inversely correlated:
the Humanitarian Response Plan for 2016 garnered only 36 per cent of the
$532 million necessary. The lack of funding has forced some humanitarian
organizations to leave the country, while others are reducing their geographical
coverage, the significantly increased humanitarian needs notwithstanding.
Consequently, as at November 2016, thousands of displaced people were living off a
quarter of the standard food rations. Without increased fundin g, food assistance to
150,000 people will no longer be provided from February, affecting the
700,000 people reliant on World Food Programme assistance. On 13 January, the
President personally appealed for food aid support.
55. The Humanitarian Response Plan for 2017, amounting to $399.5 million, was
launched by the United Nations Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator, alongside
the Minister for Social Affairs and National Reconciliation, on 21 November in
Geneva. The Inter-Agency Standing Committee Emergency Directors Group and
regional United Nations Development Group team conducted a joint visit to the
country from 4 to 6 December during which they advocated greater funding,
enhanced protection of civilians and unimpeded humanitarian access.

V. Socioeconomic developments
56. Economic growth slowed to 4.5 per cent in 2016, below the 5.2 per cent
projected, as a result of insecurity. The estimated inflation rate of 5.1 per cent is
notably higher than earlier projections, largely owing to the rising pr ices of staples.
On 30 September, the National Assembly adopted a supplemental budget to raise
national revenue collection, clear wage and pension arrears and build a budgetary
reserve for 2017 to mitigate the volatility of foreign aid. In December, the
International Monetary Fund approved the disbursement of $16.8 million under the
framework of the Extended Credit Facility.

VI. Electoral needs assessment
57. Pursuant to resolution 2301 (2016), an electoral needs assessment mission was
deployed to Bangui from 14 to 28 October to assess, among other things, the
prevailing environment, the legal and institutional framework governing the
electoral process and the capacity and needs of the National Elect oral Authority and
the various electoral stakeholders, with a view to making recommendations on
possible electoral support to be provided by the United Nations.

12/19

17-00867

S/2017/94

58. During its assessment, the mission consulted a broad array of national and
international stakeholders, during which key national stakeholders clearly conveyed
their will to hold local elections as soon as possible. The mission concluded that the
holding of local elections and broader decentralization could contribute to attaining
the strategic objective of MINUSCA and reinforce other peacebuilding processes.
Likewise, progress regarding dialogue and reconciliation, disarmament, security
sector and justice reform, the extension of State authority and the return of
internally displaced persons and refugees would enhance the creation of an
environment conducive for the holding of inclusive local elections that would
contribute to sustaining peace. For this purpose, local elections and decentralization
reform should form an integral part of the broader peacebuilding processes.
59. The mission found that the national authorities and electoral bodies faced
technical and financial challenges that would require continued support from the
international community, including to strengthen the capacity of th e National
Electoral Authority and to support the eventual holding of local elections. The
mission identified the following areas requiring continued United Nations technical
and advisory support: development of the legal framework, information technology,
civic and voter education, training, operations and logistics, communications and
external relations. Given that the electoral calendar has not yet been promulgated
and security challenges persist, the mission recommended that the United Nations
should provide electoral assistance in phases.
60. The first phase (until 30 June 2017) would be focused on political support and
technical assistance aimed at strengthening the strategic and operational planning
capacities of the National Electoral Authority. Together with UNDP, MINUSCA
would continue to use its political engagement and good offices to promote credible
elections, while providing institutional and capacity -building support to the
Authority to develop, among other things, an electoral timeline, a re alistic electoral
budget, a voter registration strategy, a detailed logistics plan, a comprehensive
external relations strategy, including voter information and public outreach
campaigns, and consultative mechanisms with electoral stakeholders. MINUSCA
would also advise relevant authorities on electoral reforms. This would require no
change to its mandate, but it would need the resources necessary to provide such
support. The second phase would involve supporting the relevant national
authorities in the implementation of the various plans, in particular technical,
logistical and security, beginning with the establishment of the electoral calendar.
The mission also recommended that the previous United Nations internal
coordination mechanism for electoral assistance to the national authorities under the
authority of my Special Representative should be maintained.

VII. Deployment of the Mission
A.

Military
61. As at 15 January, MINUSCA had deployed 10,370 military personnel (96.5 per
cent of the authorized strength of 10,750), comprising 11 infantry battalions, a
special forces company and several enabling units, including a military police unit,
four engineering companies, a heavy transport company, three level II hospitals,

17-00867

13/19

S/2017/94

three signal companies and three helicopter units, including a combat helicopter
unit. Women comprised 1.5 per cent of military personnel. The deployment of a
quick reaction force company began on 9 January, while efforts to generate an
additional engineering company and an unmanned aerial vehicle unit are continuing.
Troop-contributing countries continued to improve the equipment of their respective
contingents.

B.

Police
62. As at 15 January, MINUSCA had deployed 1,710 police personnel (82.2 per
cent of the authorized strength of 2,080), comprising 316 individual police officers
(79 per cent of the authorized strength of 400), eight formed police units and two
protection support units comprising 1,394 personnel (82.9 per cent of the authorized
strength of 1,680), including 148 women. A total of 78 individual police officers
were deployed in 10 locations outside Bangui, while of the eight formed police units
one was in Bouar and another in Kaga Bandoro. Detachments of formed police units
were temporarily deployed in Bria and Kaga Bandoro in October and November.
Women constitute 8.66 per cent of the overall number of police personnel.

C.

Civilian personnel
63. As at 15 January, MINUSCA had deployed 1,241 civilian personnel (72 per
cent of the authorized staffing), comprising 611 international and 427 national staff
members and 203 United Nations Volunteers. This includes the net increase of
129 positions authorized for 2016/17. Women constitute 25 per cent of civilian
personnel deployed and 22 per cent of personnel holding a senior position at the
P-5 level or above.

D.

Status-of-forces agreement
64. The Government made efforts to resolve outstanding issues pertaining to the
status-of-forces agreement, including by confirming the fuel tax exemption for
2017. The Mission’s advocacy efforts notwithstanding, differences in the
interpretation of article 65 of the agreement, which incorporates the privileges and
immunities of United Nations funds and programmes in the country, and additional
issues relating to the agreement remain outstanding, including reimbursement of
fuel taxes already paid, annual registration fees on residential leases and taxes on
MINUSCA personnel leaving the country with their pay and emoluments.

VIII. Safety and security of United Nations staff
65. United Nations civilian and uniformed personnel continued to face threats
from crime, social disturbances and armed conflict. There were 86 security incidents
affecting 110 civilian personnel, including 22 international and 38 national staff
members who were relocated from Bambari and Bria to Bangui owing to fighting
among ex-Séléka factions. Three peacekeepers were killed in action and 14 wounded.
There were 36 incidents involving humanitarian organizations. During the

14/19

17-00867

S/2017/94

demonstrations in Bangui on 24 October, five international civilian personnel had
their residences burgled by armed assailants.

IX. Serious misconduct, including sexual exploitation and abuse
66. The number of allegations of serious misconduct fell in comparison with the
previous reporting period. As at 30 November, the number of allegations of sexual
exploitation and abuse had fallen from 16 in the previous period to 6, while other
types of serious misconduct fell from 10 to zero.
67. A trained immediate response team member conducted fact-finding missions
and gathered evidence within 72 hours of the five more recent allegations reported.
It remains difficult to provide assistance to alleged victims of sexual exploitation
and abuse owing to the lack of international and State service providers. In
December, in close collaboration with the respective police - and troop-contributing
countries concerned, the Office of Internal Oversight Services completed its
investigation into multiple allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse in Dekoa,
Kémo prefecture. The reports of the Office’s investigations were shared with the
troop-contributing countries to complete their own investigations and take
appropriate disciplinary or criminal accountability measures, as warranted.
Individuals found to have engaged in sexual exploitation or sexual abuse are
prohibited from participating in future peacekeeping operations.
68. MINUSCA is implementing a new abuse action plan that defines the roles and
responsibilities of its sections and United Nations partners in prevention, response
and capacity-building in relation to sexual exploitation and abuse. The Mission has
also developed a tracking matrix to identify gaps in victim assistance.

X. Financial aspects
69. The General Assembly, by its resolution 70/271, appropriated the amount of
$920.7 million for the maintenance of the Mission for the period from 1 July 2016
to 30 June 2017. As at 5 January 2017, unpaid assessed contributions to the special
account for MINUSCA amounted to $243.6 million. Total outstanding assessed
contributions for all peacekeeping operations as at that date amounted to
$1,801.7 million. Troop and formed police costs have been reimbursed.
Reimbursements of contingent-owned equipment have also been up to 30 September
2016, in accordance with the quarterly payment schedule.

XI. Observations
70. Developments over the past four months in the Central African Republic
reflect the fact that, even though the conclusion of the political transition has
generated positive momentum, the country continues to face significant challenges.
The mobilization of the international community at the Brussels Conference
represented a strong expression of international solidarity. The adoption of key
reform plans on areas such as the security sector, disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and gender parity, coupled with progress in making the Special

17-00867

15/19

S/2017/94

Criminal Court operational, reconfirmed the commitment of the Central African
authorities to moving forward. Nevertheless, the soaring violence since the end of
the rainy season stands as a stark reminder of the limits of State authority and the
destructive role that armed groups continue to play in the country. Without
improved security and tangible progress in tackling the root causes of the conflict,
the risk that the fragile gains made thus far will be reversed remains all too real.
71. The fighting between two ex-Séléka armed groups, FPRC and UPC, must end.
These senseless clashes, driven by power struggles and competition for resources,
are taking a disproportionate toll on civilians. I deplore all attacks against civilians,
the widespread abuses and violations of human rights and the looting of
humanitarian premises. Both parties must immediately lay down their weapons and
enter into a genuine process of disarmament and political dialogue to restore peace.
MINUSCA will make full use of its capacities to protect civilians and prevent the
continuation of this fighting. I call upon regional leaders and institutions with the
power to influence armed groups to persuade them to lay down their weapons and
immediately join the framework for dialogue established by the President.
72. I am outraged by the continued attacks on peacekeepers who are deployed in
the country to serve the people and help them to find a path to peace and stability. I
strongly condemn attacks against and the killing of United Nations peacekeepers,
which may constitute war crimes, and call for the perpetrators to be held
accountable.
73. The end of the political transition generated popular hope for change and high
expectations for stability and recovery. I commend the President for his commitment
to bringing about lasting peace. I urge him and his Government to continue to fulfil
the promises made to the public in his inaugural speech, the Mutual Engagement
Framework and the National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan. With limited
capacity to project State authority and provide tangible benefits to the population in
the short term, the Government must continue to call for peace and inclusive
dialogue while steadfastly advancing governance reforms and pursuing
reconciliation. I urge all government institutions to work collaboratively towards the
implementation of the recommendations made during the Bangui Forum on National
Reconciliation, including the negotiation of a new social pact to bind the country
together. This effort, which is aimed at fostering national cohesion, will require
deeper grass-roots contacts with all citizens.
74. I applaud the continued commitment of the President to advancing the
government-led dialogue with the armed groups. The United Nations will continue
to support the dialogue. The agreement reached with 12 of the main 14 armed
groups on the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation strategy
is of critical importance. There should not, however, be any illusion that
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation will be a panacea to
advance peace and to address the deep and legitimate grievances of all communities.
I urge the Government to proceed expeditiously in broadening the dialogue with the
armed groups, including by exploring options for integration into the security sector
and participation in the Administration, as well as by considering interim security
arrangements, without which disarmament may fail.
75. A broadened dialogue must, however, refrain from offering amnesty for war
crimes, crimes against humanity and other gross violat ions of human rights. Such a

16/19

17-00867

S/2017/94

blanket amnesty would perpetuate impunity and undermine the desire for justice
expressed at the Bangui Forum. I welcome the engagement of the African Union,
ECCAS and other partners in promoting mediation initiatives. It is ess ential that all
such efforts be aimed at strengthening the legitimate authorities and the
government-led peace process by bringing into their fold those armed groups that
remain outside it. The leaders of the subregion are called upon to support the
President’s efforts in the interests of longer-term peace and security along their
shared borders.
76. Advancing security sector reform is an essential prerequisite for addressing the
root causes of the conflict. I welcome the progress in this regard through th e
adoption of a national security policy and the successful training by the European
Union Military Training Mission of a Central African infantry company. It is
essential that the conversion of the new security policy into a national strategy be
subject to wide consultations with all stakeholders. This national strategy will also
need to include specific steps to establish professional, ethnically representative and
regionally balanced national defence and internal security forces, beginning with the
upcoming recruitment of police officers and gendarmes and the training of new
military units. MINUSCA will collaborate with the European Union in support of
national efforts to ensure that the training of the Central African military takes the
stabilization and reconciliation agenda forward. The Government is called upon to
ensure that the process of certifying members of the armed forces continues
unhindered. The President’s approval of the five -year capacity-building and
development plan for the police and the gendarmerie is an important first step. As
the lead actor on the reform of the police and the gendarmerie, MINUSCA will
support efforts to recruit, train and deploy at least 500 gendarmes and police
officers. It will be important for international partner s to support security sector
reform in a coordinated manner.
77. I am encouraged by the progress achieved towards making the Special
Criminal Court operational. Less encouraging, however, are the setbacks in the
restoration of the rule of law and the national judicial system, which has been
greatly disrupted by the recent violence. We must remain resolute in our efforts to
combat impunity, including through the establishment of a national programme for
the protection of victims and witnesses, together with a legal aid system. I urge the
development of a comprehensive national transitional justice strategy to tackle
human rights violations and abuses, both past and present. Further steps to
strengthen the independence of the judiciary are needed, and work to advance the
demilitarization of the prison service must continue.
78. Building a sense of shared belonging among Central Africans is a multifaceted
undertaking that requires the Government’s long-term commitment and investment.
Reconciliation must be actively pursued and nurtured. I welcome the adoption of the
national reconciliation strategy. Its implementation will require dedicated leadership
and it will play an essential role in the country’s stability and prosperity, including
in the safe return of the displaced and refugees. All initiatives undertaken by
parliamentarians in support of national dialogue and reconciliation are welcome. I
urge them to continue to improve the legislative framework defining the roles and
responsibilities of citizens, together with the institutional capacity to enforce equal
protection under the law. In this regard, the National Assembly is called upon to

17-00867

17/19

S/2017/94

support reconciliation efforts by taking up the bills to establish Muslim holidays, as
recommended at the Bangui Forum, and a new iteration of the Nationality Code.
79. The Brussels Conference of 17 November resulted in pledges of more than
$2.2 billion. This demonstration of solidarity embodies the commitment of the
international community to learning from the lessons of the past and not
disengaging prematurely. I urge international partners to honour their commitments,
lest efforts to sustain peace falter. The subregion is encouraged to continue to play a
constructive role by collaborating to tackle common security issues , including those
relating to armed groups, seasonal migration, arms trafficking and the smuggling of
natural resources.
80. The Government must accord priority to efforts to equitably meet the urgent
needs of the population through the provision of public goods and services. I urge it
to take steps to respond to the needs of young people to obtain an education and
employment as a bulwark against association with armed groups and falling into
crime. Tangible results in these areas will contribute substanti ally to the mutually
reinforcing dynamic of peace and development. Needs are immense and
expectations must be managed, but progress is possible. I stress the importance of
avoiding the appearance and practice of corruption, and urge the Government to
hold individuals accountable for plundering public resources, including those
pledged by donors for the welfare of the population. The Government and
international partners must make full use of the Mutual Engagement Framework and
the National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan follow-up mechanisms to foster
progress in these areas, including to focus on the key priorities where the limited
capacities of the State can be strengthened.
81. I am deeply concerned by the deteriorating humanitarian situation. The lack of
funding for the humanitarian response risks bringing essential humanitarian
activities to a near halt in the coming weeks. To avoid a further exacerbation of the
situation, which could also undermine peace efforts, the international community is
urged to contribute urgently and generously to the Humanitarian Response Plan.
82. I am grateful to my Special Representative for the Central African Republic
and Head of MINUSCA, Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, for his unwavering dedication
and leadership. I am deeply appreciative of the work of the personnel of MINUSCA
and the United Nations country team in a demanding environment. I am also
grateful to my Acting Special Representative for Central Africa and Head of the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa, François Louncény Fall, for his
role in the subregion in support of the Central African Republic. I thank the African
Union, troop- and police-contributing countries, ECCAS, the European Union, the
World Bank, international partners and multilateral and non-governmental
organizations for their continued efforts to work with the Central Africans towards a
better future.

18/19

17-00867

S/2017/94

17-00867

19/19
