S/PV.7419

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7419th meeting

Friday, 27 March 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Fabius. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Augusto
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Labbé Villa
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mrs. Kawar
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. McLay
Mr. Sarki
Mr. Churkin
Mr. García Margallo
Mr. Ellwood
Ms. Sison
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
The victims of attacks and abuses on ethnic or religious grounds in the Middle East
Letter dated 12 March 2015 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission
of France to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2015/176)

15-08778 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1508778*

S/PV.7419

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The victims of attacks and abuses on ethnic or
religious grounds in the Middle East
Letter dated 12 March 2015 from the Chargé
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of
France to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2015/176)
The President (spoke in French): I wish to warmly
welcome our friend, the Secretary-General, Ministers
and other distinguished representatives present in the
Security Council Chamber.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Bahrain, Belgium, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Canada, Colombia, Croatia, Cyprus, Egypt, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, India, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Luxembourg, Morocco,
the Netherlands, Pakistan, Poland, Portugal, the
Republic of Korea, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Slovenia,
Slovakia, South Africa, Sweden, Switzerland, the
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine and
the United Arab Emirates to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Zeid Ra’ad
Al Hussein, United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights; His Beatitude Louis Raphaël I Sako,
Patriarch of Babylon of the Chaldeans; and Mrs. Vian
Dakhil, member of the Iraqi Parliament.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Al Hussein,
who is joining today’s meeting via video-teleconference
from Geneva.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
individuals to participate in this meeting: His
Excellency Mr. Stavros Lambrinidis, European Union
Special Representative for Human Rights, and His
Excellency Mr. Ufuk Gokcen, Permanent Observer for

2/78

27/03/2015

the Organization of Islamic Cooperation to the United
Nations.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations, to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2015/176, a letter dated 12 March
2015 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of France to the United Nations addressed to
the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note on
the item under consideration.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General (spoke in French): I thank
the French Foreign Minister for convening this highlevel debate.
I am deeply concerned about the grave dangers
facing minorities in parts of the Middle East. At stake
are millions of individual lives and the social fabric of
entire countries.
Right now, thousands of civilians are at the mercy
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), also
known as Daesh. Its fighters are systematically killing
ethnic and religious minorities, those who disagree
with its warped interpretation of Islam and anyone
who opposes its apocalyptic vision. They are targeting
women and children with heinous brutality and they
are destroying religious and cultural symbols that
constitute the heritage of humanity.
We see this spreading in Syria, Iraq and now in
Libya — and even Yemen, where the bombing of
mosques last week has further fuelled sectarian violence.
I condemn in the strongest terms all persecution and
violations of the rights to life and physical integrity of
individuals and communities based on religious, ethnic,
national, racial or other grounds. I urge all parties to
ensure the protection of civilians and spare innocent
lives.
The members of the Security Council — and all
those with influence — must help the people of the
region reclaim their historic diversity and dynamism.
That is essential to securing our common future.

15-08778

27/03/2015

The situation in the Middle East

(spoke in English)
The atrocity crimes in the region demand an urgent
response. We must end impunity for those committing
serious crimes against any and all communities. I
also stress again that abuses in counter-terrorism are
morally wrong and strategically counterproductive. The
commission of atrocities never absolves Governments of
their responsibility to honour human rights obligations.
In Iraq, the mission of investigation of the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights cited information strongly suggesting that
Daesh may have perpetrated genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes. My Special Advisers on
the Prevention of Genocide and on the Responsibility
to Protect warned last August that acts committed by
Daesh pointed to the risk of genocide. Now we also see
sectarian violence against local populations in areas
liberated from its control.
There is strong evidence that members of a number
of different minorities have been victims of crimes
against humanity, war crimes and other very serious
violations and abuses of human rights. That is especially
true for women and girls. We must also remember that
violent extremism in Iraq precedes Daesh’s advance.
The underlying conditions must be addressed.
I welcome steps by the Iraqi Government to further
national reconciliation, promote inclusion, strengthen
social cohesion and reform the security sector. I call on
the Government to do more to uphold human rights and
restore the rule of law in areas liberated from Daesh.
The international community must help Iraq in this
effort.
Five years into the conflict in Syria, the lack of
accountability has led to an exponential rise in war
crimes, crimes against humanity and other human
rights violations. Both Government forces and
non-State armed groups in Syria, especially Daesh and
Jabhat Al-Nusra, have committed such deplorable acts.
As we consider the plight of minority communities, we
must avoid highlighting differences and reaffirm the
values of diversity and peaceful coexistence. I urge
the international community, particularly the Security
Council, to overcome differences and seek new ways to
ensure the protection of all Syrian civilians.
In a few days, I will travel to Kuwait to attend
an international pledging conference for Syria. I
call on all countries to give generously to help the

S/PV.7419

millions of Syrians who are suffering, and to assist
the neighbouring countries that shoulder most of the
burden. Such humanitarian assistance is also vital to
the region’s political stability.
I am deeply concerned about developments in Libya.
Daesh-affiliated groups are targeting minorities and
attacking religious sites. Amid widespread violence,
religious minorities remain highly vulnerable. The
main parties must quickly reach agreement to bring an
end to the military and political conflict. That is crucial
to curb the danger of Libya falling into the hands of
terrorist groups. I am also concerned at the ongoing
tribal tensions in the South, which could ignite violence
along identity lines. No strategy will succeed without
strong regional cooperation and an empowered Libyan
State.
The United Nations is developing a plan of action
on preventing violent extremism, which we will launch
in September. We are also strengthening our efforts to
champion and protect diversity in the Middle East. I
intend to convene a group of respected women and men
with deep understanding of the region’s religious, civil,
cultural, academic and business sectors. They will
serve as an advisory panel on inter- and intra-sectarian
dynamics.
Governments and parties have the primary
responsibility for protecting minorities, but we must
engage with partners in civil society, faith leaders and
others with influence, including regional and other
actors. I especially look to religious and community
leaders to clearly remind their followers that religions
are about peace, not violence and war.
Next month, the President of the General Assembly
and I will invite leaders from different faith communities
to a special event at the United Nations. We will build
on the experience of the United Nations Alliance of
Civilizations to promote mutual understanding and
reconciliation.
(spoke in French)
The Middle East is widely considered the cradle of
many of the world’s great civilizations. Today, let us
resolve to empower people — especially youth — to
transform the region into the birthplace of a more stable
and secure world.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.

15-087783/78

S/PV.7419

The situation in the Middle East

I now give the floor to Mr. Al Hussein.
Mr. Al Hussein: Our discussion today — which
we welcome and thank you for, Mr President — is a
discussion both about tolerance, that breadth of view
which acknowledges and embraces the differences
between peoples, and its opposite: a maniacal ideology
imposing conformity, harsh and cruel.
The Preamble of the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court begins:
“Conscious that all peoples are united by
common bonds, their cultures pieced together in
a shared heritage, and concerned that this delicate
mosaic may be shattered at any time ...”
That mosaic of our heritage is our only hope for permanent
peace in the world. The alternative — sharply delineated
groups doomed to confrontation — will destroy us. If
we are to survive, we need pluralism — societies that
are enriched by exchange and grounded in respect.
It is easy to portray the Middle East now as
exceptionally fragmented, but in reality the history of
the region is marked by long-standing acceptance of
multiple identities. The dramatic crises and atrocities
that we see today have been fanned into flame by
discrimination and by deliberate failures to respect
equality and human rights. In Syria, for example, the
violent suppression of peaceful protests and, now,
civil war are forcing a retreat by many into the shelter
of ethnic and religious identities. The once benign,
even celebrated differences between communities are
now, tragically, being carved into bitter and lethal
divisions as the country continues to break apart.
Many communities have suffered appalling violence
and targeted attacks by all sides, often because of their
religious or ethnic affiliation.
As the chaos and violence of Syria bleed across
international borders, they have birthed Daesh, a
totalitarian-minded Takfiri group determined to
silence all dissent. Iraq’s exceptionally rich cultural
landscape includes communities that have lived in
the region since the opening lines of history. But two
weeks ago, an investigative mission by my Office found
that vicious attacks against the Yazidis by Daesh may
amount to genocide. Other communities, as our report
also shows, have suffered great violence — including
crimes against humanity and war crimes — at the hand
of non-State actors and State-affiliated forces. Ancient

4/78

27/03/2015

and deeply significant monuments have been ravaged.
All this we condemn.
Daesh is an abomination. An intricately interwoven
social fabric in Syria and Iraq is giving way to the
demented obliteration of any difference and any choice
not in conformity with the taxi world view — which is
itself impossibly thin. And yet, in what amounts to a
painful paradox and a most terrible irony, Daesh may be
more accepting of diverse ethnic origins when it comes
to its own members — so long as those same members
act in accordance with Takfiri ideology — than many
States are when it comes to their own citizens. And how
can that be?
The international community’s attention to the
human rights of minorities is too often both partial
and sporadic. It is partial in the sense that States have
often focused primarily on communities with which
they share specific cultural ties, overlooking abuses of
other marginalized communities, and brushing away
concerns regarding discriminated groups in their own
countries. It is sporadic because the rights of minorities
are often highlighted only after the outbreak of extreme
violence, even though that eruption is virtually always
preceded by years of exclusion, disregard for linguistic
and religious rights, and obstacles to full participation
in the political, social, cultural and economic life of
the State. If we attend to minority rights only after
slaughter has begun, then we have already failed.
Fanaticism always finds oxygen and flourishes
where tolerance and the universal standards of human
rights are battered. It grows in States that betray their
people, that fail to respect their own Constitutions, and
that do not embrace, genuinely, the ethnic, linguistic
and religious diversity of their societies; in States where
the voice and participation of all members of society are
smothered; in States that attack civil society activists,
whose work, ironically, is the very best antidote against
the toxin of extremism. To immunize properly against
further radicalism, human rights defenders must be
promoted and defended, not imprisoned and tortured.
Sadly, there are many such States in the Middle East
and other regions, and by their actions they fertilize
the soil of intolerance, where extremism takes root.
The United Nations Network on Racial Discrimination
and Minorities, which my Office coordinates, can help
Member States develop strategies to open opportunities
to marginalized minority groups and to build in greater
protection for their human rights. It is only by insisting

15-08778

27/03/2015

The situation in the Middle East

on the dignity and worth of all human beings, securing
their rights and their space on this Earth properly and
meaningfully, that we will all survive.
The delicate mosaic is being shattered, and the
Security Council must take action unanimously and
decisively to end the conflicts and refer Iraq and Syria
to the International Criminal Court. It must end the
fighting in Yemen, Libya and other countries too. Or
are we going to have to wait until the strength of the
victims, of all humankind, to produce more tears has
sapped — when finally only the stones can weep? And
what good will it be then? What good will it be to all
of us if action never comes, or arrives far too late to be
effective?
Without supreme and joint resolve now, the common
bond will soon also disappear, along with the cultures
stitched by time into one heritage — a debt so dreadful
and malignant to our children that I hope it is one we
cannot bear to inflict.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Al
Hussein for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Patriarch Sako.
Patriarch Sako (spoke in French): On behalf
of Christians of different ethnic and cultural
denominations who are enduring severe trial in
the Middle East, I extend my thanks to the French
Government — and especially to French Minister for
Foreign Affairs Mr. Laurent Fabius — for leading this
groundbreaking humanitarian initiative.
As Council members may know, this year is the
centenary of the massacres of Christians in 1915. Today,
100 years later, we are experiencing a similarly tragic
situation, which has pushed thousands of Christians to
emigrate. This is a great loss for all. To speak frankly,
the so-called Arab Spring had a negative impact on
us. If we had had the opportunity to work in harmony
with the mosaic of religions and ethnic groups in our
region, there would have been a driving force in the
region towards peace, stability, progress and openness
throughout the region.
In this Chamber, I would like to convey a message
inspired by the spiritual and humanitarian values that
animate me. Positive coexistence, on the basis of peace
and justice and in the spirit of love and citizenship,
should remain utmost priority for the Security Council
and the United Nations.

S/PV.7419

With regard to my country, I call for support for
the central Government and the regional government
of Kurdistan so as to liberate all Iraqi cities, especially
that of Mosul and the towns and villages in the planes of
Nineveh, for us Christians, Yezidis and Shabaks alike.
I call for international protection of these towns and
cities, who were forcibly displaced from their homes.
A secure zone should be created and a real estate and
property law adopted so as to ensure their rights to
their lands, and enable them to return home and resume
their normal lives. The central Government should also
be responsible to compensate them for the damages
incurred.
The major problem lies in an understanding the
various components of a State — the way in which
religion, citizenship, individuals, the role of woman and
national education are seen — in order to live together
in peace and respect. The Islamic extremist groups
refuse to live with non-Muslims. They are persecuting
and uprooting them from their homes and destroying
all traces of their history. We are facing a cultural and
ideological crisis — a way of monopolizing power,
disabling institutions and restricting freedom. It is
therefore urgent to establish consistent criteria based
on international law.
In addressing the Council, I should stress that
terrorists who commit crimes against humanity should
not be categorized together with the innocent faithful
of Islam. Indeed, the majority of Muslims are silent and
peaceful. They reject such politicization of the religion.
They are accepting and coexist with others within a
secular State and according to the law with respect for
all institutions.
It is increasingly clear that peace and stability
cannot be achieved solely through military action.
Military action, in fact, cannot dismantle this clustered
way of thinking that destroys human beings and cultural
heritage. What this calls for is that the international
community, including the League of Arab States and the
Organization of the Islamic Cooperation, take definitive
legal measures. For example, they could adopt political,
cultural and educational solutions. These solutions
should be appropriate to protect the national mosaic
comprising individuals, persons and groups regardless
of their diverse religions and ethnic backgrounds. The
rights of the all citizens must be safeguarded and the
relations among citizens strengthened.

15-087785/78

S/PV.7419

The situation in the Middle East

I would like to draw the Council’s attention to a
more significant emerging threat. When millions of
children and young people are deprived of schooling
and education, and millions of refugees are gathered
in camps without special care and attention, there
is growing frustration, unemployment and poverty,
which could very easily develop into an atmosphere of
revenge and openness to extremism. There is therefore
a need to provide care for these refugees by responding
to their needs and alleviating their suffering. We must
undertake a practical process to emerge from this
vicious cycle.
First of all, through the United Nations, executive
policy should be adopted, based on the updating
of the constitutions and laws. This would promote
justice, equality and dignity for all citizens without
discriminating against one group in a favour of
another. It is imperative that our countries acquire
secular Governments guaranteeing equality to all
citizens. These Governments should be responsible
for the protection of all individuals. They must
comprehensively protect the rights of all their citizens.
Secondly, religious leaders should be encouraged
adopt moderate discourse that deepens the sense of
citizenship. No matter what they religious beliefs or
ethnic origin may be, they should nurture a feeling of
belonging to their national territory, not exclusively to
their religious denominations or tribes. A necessary
factor is the reform of educational programmes so as
to enhance the principles of respect between citizens
and to promote tolerance and communication. This
would also condemn division, hatred and the desire for
revenge. All of this would protect future generations
from the consequences of extremism, violence and
terrorism. These things cannot be achieved unless the
religious hierarchy presents an appropriate exegesis
of religious texts, with zero tolerance to extracting
religious texts regarding violence from their contexts.
Thirdly, a law should be adopted criminalizing all
States and individuals who support terrorist groups,
either financially or intellectually, or by providing
them with weapons. Their acts are a crime against
social peace. They must be held accountable.
Fourthly, we must promote the development of
organizations for human rights and promoting civil
society. Such organizations should be supported to play
a role that is more simply consultative, but rather an

6/78

27/03/2015

executive one, at the regional and international levels
alike.
May the Council rest assured of my best wishes for
success in its humanitarian mission.
The President (spoke in French): I now give
the floor to Mrs. Vian Dakhil, Member of the Iraqi
Parliament.
Mrs. Dakhil (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): On behalf of
the Yazidis and all oppressed persons in Iraq, allow me to
express my deep thanks and gratitude to His Excellency
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Development of France and to the Government and
people of France for the humanitarian stance toward
our people. We also wish to express our deep gratitude
to Mr. Ban Ki-moon for his commendable efforts to
achieve peace in the whole world.
I stand before the Security Council today, not to
speak on behalf of the Yazidi population, which has
suffered immeasurably in Iraq at the hands of the worst
and most dangerous terrorist organisation in the world,
but on behalf of Iraqis of all ethnicities, who have
paid a huge price due to the aggression of the Islamic
State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). I would also like to
convey the greetings and best wishes of the Speaker of
the Iraqi Parliament, Mr. Salim Al-Jabouri, who wishes
this meeting every success. I also bring greetings from
the Government and people of the Kurdish region of
Iraq along with their hope for the Council’s support for
any resolution that would help the Iraqi people.
The terrorist organization ISIL constitutes a real
threat and danger to international peace and security.
Today, Iraqis of all backgrounds and ethnicities are on
the front line in facing that threat. I am sad to say that
minorities in Iraq — Christians, Yazidis, Shabaks and
Turkmen, among others — were that organization’s
first victims and the groups most gravely affected
by their campaign of aggression. They were the ones
who directly faced the Iraqi terrorists’ guns. They
made tremendous sacrifices as a result of the crimes
committed against them — crimes unprecedented in
the history of the world — which affected women,
children and the elderly, and brought back the age of
slavery by capturing Yazidi women and turning them
into objects for sale. These are crimes that bring shame
to all of humankind and that confront the international
community not only with a moral responsibility but also
the legal one to help free the Iraqi people in general and
specifically Iraq’s minorities from the grip of terrorism.

15-08778

27/03/2015

The situation in the Middle East

No people was spared — not the Christians, not the
Yazidis, not the Shabaks, not the Kurds, not the Shia.
We have all heard about the crime that took place at
Camp Speicher, where 1,500 people were killed in one
day. That is clear proof that ISIL has neither religion
nor humanity and that it does not belong to Islam, which
stands above any crime being committed in its name.
I would like to present the Council with some
statistics to illustrate the suffering of the Yazidis. Until
3 August 2014, and prior to ISIL’s attack on Mount
Sinjar, the Yazidis were a peace-loving, primarily
agricultural people whose number was approximately
600,000. Today, 420,000 Yazidis are displaced persons
living in camps in the Kurdistan region, with another
8,000 confined to camps in Syria and Turkey. Some
5,680 people, including men, women girls, children and
the elderly, have been kidnapped. Almost 1,000 children
between the ages of 4 and 10 have been taken by force
from their families and are being held in ISIL training
camps in order to create a new generation of terrorists.
Some 3,000 Yazidi girls have been kidnapped and
being sold in slave markets inside and outside Iraq after
being violated by all means, including physically and
psychologically. The price for one Yazidi girl is $18.
In what age are we living? More than 2,000 Yazidis
were slaughtered in cold blood by ISIL and its terrorist
personnel for no other reason than that we are Yazidis
and profess a religion different from that professed
by ISIL. We are being killed. Our women are being
raped. Our girls are being sold. Our children are being
abducted and taken to places where we have no idea
what will become of them. We are bought and sold like
goods in the market for no reason.
It is indeed a special opportunity for me appear
before the Security Council — our last resort — and
to present both our suffering and our hopes. We have
been oppressed because of our religion and our faith,
because the Takfiri groups consider us infidels. To
summarize, what we seek from the Council, first of all,
is to define the Yazidis’ suffering as a genocide and to
adopt a resolution in that regard. Our suffering meets
all the criteria for the crime of genocide. Secondly, we
ask the Council to impose international protection for
minorities where they live, especially the Yazidis, who
will not otherwise be able to return to their homeland
even if it is liberated after what we have suffered at the
hands of ISIL and their supporters. Thirdly, we urge
the international community to expedite its campaign
to eradicate the terrorist ISIL group, in particular from

S/PV.7419

the Government of Mosul, to enable us to free the more
than 3,000 kidnapped Yazidi women who continue to
suffer physical and psychological torture. Fourthly,
we request the Council to support and arm the Iraqi
Army, including the Peshmerga and all Iraqi forces that
are fighting ISIL on behalf of the entire world. Fifthly,
we ask the international community to undertake the
reconstruction of the cities that have been destroyed by
terrorism and to redress the results of those terrorist
attacks on our communities.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mrs. Dakhil for her very strong statement.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity
as Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Development of France.
I shall speak in no uncertain terms. In the Middle
East, we are facing a barbaric and systematic process of
ethnic and religious eradication. While, in their sheer
number, Muslims are the primary victims of Jihadist
terrorism, non-Muslim communities find themselves
especially targeted. They embody the type of diversity
that Daesh wants to eliminate. Christians, Yazidis,
Turkmen, Kurds and Shabak are all threatened by
what I would call a triangle of horror: forced exile,
enslavement and death.
Because of its history, France has deep ties with
Eastern Christians as well as a long tradition of
protecting minorities. We intend to stay faithful to what
are the tenets of the French nation.
In Iraq, as has been clearly described, upon the
capture of Mosul last summer, Christians were hunted
down. In Syria, the situation is tragic: nearly 220
Assyrian Christians were kidnapped by Daesh in the
northern region of Hasaka. Persecution has extended
beyond the official boundaries of the Middle East. Last
month in Libya, 21 Coptic Egyptians were beheaded.
Daesh would like to continue growing its network
of terror. While I have mentioned the targeting of
Christians, Daesh attacks all minorities with the same
inhumanity. For instance, the Yazadis besieged on Mount
Sinjar or Kurds targeted in Kobani especially come to
mind. Their barbarism strikes even the artefacts that
symbolize diversity — what the High Commissioner
referred to as the mosaic. These terrorists ransacked the
museum in Mosul and attacked the ancient Assyrian
city of Nimrod and the Parthian city of Hatra. They not
only want to erase the present, but physically destroy

15-087787/78

S/PV.7419

The situation in the Middle East

its roots — they would like history not to begin before
or without them.
The danger of Daesh’s enterprise is that of the total
disappearance of minorities. We are the international
community; we must no longer remain collectively a
powerless force. For that reason, from this Chamber, I
would like to send a dual message — one of solidarity
with the persecuted and one of determination against
the terrorists, what the High Commissioner called an
abomination. We must show to the minorities in the
Middle East that we are on their side and on the side of
States respectful of diversity. We must let the terrorists
of Daesh know that we will fight them relentlessly and
defeat them.
During the last few months, the world has tried
to respond to the humanitarian emergency in order to
save these minorities from death. While these efforts
obviously remain needed, we can all see that they are
not enough. The minorities are not asking for favours,
but rather they are demanding their rights. Our mission
must be the return of displaced minorities to their
homes. In that pursuit, all means must be used.
First, there must be humanitarian support. The
situation is dire. Our collective efforts should enable
exiled minorities to return home in safety and dignity.
United Nations agencies, especially the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), plays an outstanding and major role.
We believe it should concentrate its efforts on such
support. Member States must meaningfully strengthen
their financial support, which is absolutely essential.
Specifically, I propose that we set up a specific return
assistance fund that would help with the reconstruction
of homes and places of worship.
Accordingly, we should take the same approach
to military action. As Daesh retreats, we need to
enable minorities to return to the areas they had to
leave. This means that the presently deployed ground
troops must help secure their return, because without
security there will be no sustainable return. In areas
still not yet liberated, France wants the coalition, in
conjunction with the Iraqi authorities, on the one hand,
and the moderate Syrian opposition, on the other hand,
to make the return of minorities part of its strategy. In
tandem with the anti-Jihadist struggle, the preservation
of minorities in Iraq and Syria must become a key
objective of the military effort of the coalition and local
forces.

8/78

27/03/2015

I would also like to reiterate my country’s
commitment to combating impunity. We call upon the
States of the region that have not yet done so to adhere
to the Rome Statute in order that the International
Criminal Court can prosecute the perpetrators of
these crimes. Even if this raises legal issues, given the
irreversible destruction committed, we believe that
cultural genocide should be included in the scope of
crimes against humanity. Perpetrators of war crimes
and crimes against humanity must be prosecuted — and
in particular Daesh terrorists. We believe it is essential
that the Security Council refer such matters to the
International Criminal Court.
More generally, we all know that only an overall
political solution will allow for the sustainable
and peaceful return of minorities. That is why the
international community must support the consolidation
of States that are the guarantors of the coexistence
of all segments of society, rather than advocates of a
single community, because, as has been well said,
sectarianism breeds extremism. Only inclusive States,
protecting diversity and providing everyone with full
citizenship, are able to restore the confidence of the
people, especially minorities. Through this concept of
inclusiveness, ensuring a place for minorities is at the
heart of the solution to these crises. I will give three
examples.
In Iraq, the response to terrorists has been a process
of unificiation and reconciliation, initiated by Prime
Minister Al-Abadi; but those efforts must be increased.
This is the prerequisite for a united, stable and peaceful
Iraq.
In Syria, the issue of minorities is unfortunately
manipulated by a Power that has used the Jihadist threat
to erect a supposed bulwark against terrorism that it
itself triggered and colludes with. In this case as well,
only an inclusive political solution that includes both
the regime and the opposition and that serves to protect
the various communities, will lead to a meaningful
democratic transition and ensure the rights of each and
every one in future.
In Lebanon, the model of coexistence among the
communities established by the Constitution, the
National Covenant and the Taif Agreement is challenged
by the current institutional paralysis. We call upon the
Lebanese to elect, as soon as possible, a President who
will ensure the preservation of that model.

15-08778

27/03/2015

The situation in the Middle East

I know that comparisons may be misleading, but let
us remember Yugoslavia: the collapse of the State that
protected minorities caused a resurgence of violence
against them. Today, I propose and request on behalf
of my country that the Secretary-General submit to
the Security Council a charter of action to address
the situation of minorities in the Middle East. The
international community needs a detailed road map to
implement its response.
Such a charter could be organized around the four
components that I mentioned, and which other speakers
have addressed. The first is humanitarian assistance:
the action of United Nations agencies, especially
UNHCR, must be even more focused on the return of
minorities. Secondly, on the military level, the issue of
return and the security of minorities must be integrated
into the strategy of the coalition and local forces.
Thirdly, in the fight against impunity, the perpetrators
of war crimes and crimes against humanity must be
tried by the International Criminal Court. Finally,
politically, we must strengthen the unifying policy in
Iraq and promote an inclusive political transition in
Syria. I am thinking here of Libya, of Yemen and other
places, where we hope for Governments and States that
are inclusive.
I want to warmly welcome the announcement made
by the Secretary-General on the establishment of an
advisory panel of experts to look into this crucial issue.
I propose that their priority task, if he agrees, should be
to draw up a plan of action. France is prepared to host an
international conference focusing on the presentation
of the panel’s findings.
Public opinion — by that I mean that of ordinary
citizens — is wondering how so many countries
gathered here together, who call themselves the United
Nations, have so far been unable to confront the threat
of terrorism and eradicate it. Those citizens are right.
This meeting of the Council will have been useful if
it serves not simply as a warning cry, but also as a
specific call for action, action focused on a single goal:
to preserve the 2,000 year-old diversity in the entire
region and to enable persecuted minorities to return
permanently to their lands.
That is the appeal, one of gravity and hope, that I
want to make today on behalf of France.
I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Security Council.

S/PV.7419

Mr. García Margallo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
This is the first time that I participate in an open
debate of the Security Council since Spain became a
non-permanent member on 1 January. It is a worthy
opportunity for me to do so since the matter that brings
us here today is of extreme gravity.
My first words are of emotion and respect. I was
moved by the testimony we heard, which will resonate
for years in this Chamber. The voices we heard are the
voices of people of goodwill, people immune to hatred
and the desire for revenge. Their words of brotherhood
are raised against the intolerable harassment, the
irreparable pain and the humiliation inflicted. These
voices speak for the elderly and for men, women and
children who have been persecuted, expelled from their
lands or massacred; they are the voices of the inhabitants
of the Middle East, the cradle of civilizations, the
source of spirituality and wisdom; they are the voices
of a region that is the heritage of all of humankind and
that today, more than ever, is being torn apart because
of the utter disregard for life and human dignity.
Their suffering does not leave us unmoved. Their
presence here today at the United Nations gives us
greater dignity, it humanizes us and makes us stronger.
We owe them our admiration and gratitude. They
embody the best of the human condition. On behalf
of Spain, which I am honoured today to represent
on behalf of its King, its Government and its people,
I want to reach out to them and extend my fraternal
greetings filled with affection to each and everyone of
the members of the communities that they represent.
Now let me ask: what is the reason for this debate.
Why are we here? I think the reason is that we run
the certain risk that the rich and pluralistic Middle
East will disappear. The Middle East is more than a
geostrategic space of the first order. It is also a melting
pot of races, cultures and beliefs. It is the cradle of the
three great monotheistic religions practiced by most of
the inhabitants of this planet. But it is also the region
that gave birth to Yazidism and the Baha’i, Druze and
Ismailist faiths and Mandaeism. Much earlier, the region
witnessed the rise of Zoroastrianism, Manichaeism and
Mithraism.
The jihadist terrorism of Daesh threatens to
annihilate the diversity that is inherent to the region.
Just as we express without any reservavtion our most
emphatic rejection and condemnation of jihadist
terrorism, we cannot and must not allow for that

15-087789/78

S/PV.7419

The situation in the Middle East

27/03/2015

phenomenon to be confused with Islam. jihadism has
manipulated and twisted the message of Islam. It has
kidnapped it and held it hostage, creating a violent,
cruel, totalitarian, oppressive and expansionist
ideology. Furthermore, the overwhelming majority of
the victims of jihadist terror are Muslims.

victims. We know how important it is to hear their
voices in devising strategies aimed at countering
terrorism. Secondly, Spain has set the protection and
promotion of human rights, the responsibility to protect
and the fight against terrorism as the essential axes of
its foreign policy.

The fight against jihadist terrorism is not the
manifestation of a conflict between Islam and the
West, nor is it a clash of civilizations. Rather, it is a
confrontation between civilization, with all of its
manifestations of freedom, creativity and diversity, and
mass barbarism, which aspires to reduce the individual
to an object subject to brutality. It is that simple; it is
that terrible.

Experience and effectiveness also counsel the
adoption of a multidisciplinary approach that addresses
the root causes of barbarity and injustice. Spain is
promoting various actions within the framework of its
foreign policy to promote intercultural and interreligious
understanding. The Alliance of Civilizations is an
instrument of dialogue among religions and peoples
in the fight against radicalism. Together with Austria,
we are among the founders of the King Abdullah Bin
Abdulaziz International Centre for Interreligious and
Intercultural Dialogue. It is urgent for both initiatives
to deploy their full potential.

Expressed in such terms, the debate affects not
only individuals living in the Middle East, but each and
every one of us, and each and every one of our nations.
The French presidency of the Council has most
appropriately convened this debate. Not only is it
timely. It is also a moral and political obligation. It is not
enough for us to express our indignation, or express our
regret or pain because of so many dreadful crimes. The
victims and the entire international community expect
that the Council will act with unity, determination and
intelligence against barbarism and hatred. We have
been doing this. Today’s meeting should lead to a new,
determined step forward in this endeavour.
I wish to express Spain’s full support for the
important statement of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban
Ki-moon. I fully endorse his statement. The guidelines
that he lays out for us are certain and necessary,
especially those that refer to the establishment of
an advisory panel of experts to advise on peaceful
coexistence among communities of different faiths. The
scourge of terrorism must be fought on many fronts. We
must make greater efforts to prevent the radicalization
and recruitment of young people. We must counter
the falsehoods in the terrorists’ discourse. We must
close off their sources of financing. We must promote
harmony among peoples and communities of different
faiths. The action plan that the Secretary-General
has presented to us contains guidelines for the entire
international community. All of us, all of us members,
have to work for it to be implemented and we, especially
at the Council, must ensure that it is complied with.
For Spain, today’s theme is an absolute priority — first,
because we have experienced at first hand the scourge
of terrorism. We are well aware of the suffering of the

10/78

The United Nations system must incorporate
those issues into its daily work in a cross-cutting
manner. Indeed, at the latest forum of the Alliance of
Civilizations, held in Bali, Indonesia, last September, I
made a series of specific proposals that, I believe, it is
appropriate to recall here. I proposed the creation of a
platform of religious leaders for peace in conflict areas,
where action is most urgently needed, including Syria,
Israel-Palestine and in Iraq. Religion, as I have stated,
must build peace rather than cause division.
Secondly, I proposed the establishment of a team
of expert mediators in intercultural and interreligious
affairs who can support the mediation, negotiation and
dialogue efforts of United Nations envoys and resident
coordinators and political missions on the ground.
Thirdly, I suggested, and now reiterate, the
inclusion of intercultural and interreligious experts
in United Nations peacekeeping operations. The
difficult transition from conflict to peace calls for
multidimensional operations adapted to the new
political challenges and realities.
Lastly, I proposed, and continue to propose, that
the peacebuilding agenda, which is closely linked
to the idea of reconciliation and is currently under
review, should incorporate aspects of intercultural and
interreligious dialogue.
The time has come to turn to a new page in the
fight against terrorism and violent extremism. Our
focus must be global, daring, flexible and fully

15-08778

27/03/2015

The situation in the Middle East

respectful of human rights and the most sacred
principles of humankind. We must ensure that mass
crimes and abuses of fundamental human rights do not
go unpunished, and must establish a solid foundation
to ensure accountability for perpetrators. We must also
cauterize, at its very source, the hemorrhage being
caused by fanaticism in many societies. We must use
the truth to combat lies and manipulation, and education
to fight ignorance, and we must undertake an active
campaign to unmask extremism.
I want to make two clear, specific proposals. We call
on the Secretary-General to immediately implement
the action plan that he has just presented. I also submit,
for his consideration, that he should appoint, within
the Secretariat and using existing resources, a Special
Representative endowed with a mandate to combat
violent extremism. The Special Representative could,
on his behalf, coordinate policies against the fanaticism
and extremism feeding terrorism. He or she would work
in close coordination with the High Representative for
the Alliance of Civilizations and take into account the
Alliance’s valuable legacy.
We also propose the establishment of a specialized
international jurisdictional mechanism to bring to trial
those responsible for crimes committed out of violent
extremism. The objective of justice and the fight
against impunity cannot be renounced, as highlighted
by resolution 2170 (2014).
I conclude by gratefully expressing thanks for
the convening of this debate. We are facing a conflict
between totalitarianism and humankind’s plurality,
between intolerance and the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations. Our commitment
must be complete, because we are facing a totalitarian
threat. Somebody must stop that madness, and that
somebody is us — the United Nations. Spain assures
the Council of its full support and willingness in that
task.
Mr. Ellwood (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s important debate
on the victims of attacks and abuses on ethnic or
religious grounds in the Middle East. I also thank
the Secretary-General and all of the briefers for their
thoughtful and sobering statements.
Last week I had the somber privilege of speaking
alongside Kurdish friends at the United Kingdom
event marking the chemical attack in Halabja, Iraq,
in 1988. On 14 April, the United Kingdom will mark

S/PV.7419

Anfal Memorial Day. As a former soldier, I served in
Northern Ireland, the Middle East and on mainland
Europe, including in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I have
seen at first hand the devastating and enduring impact
of attacks against ethnic and religious groups.
My message today is this: the key to ending the
suffering of ethnic and religious groups in the Middle
East is leadership — bold leadership that promotes
tolerance and stands up against hatred; leadership that
brings groups together, regardless of their ethnicity,
religion, belief, gender or sexual orientation, and
enables their full participation in society.
I welcome the Secretary-General’s announcement
today of the establishment of an advisory panel of
experts, and Foreign Minister Fabius’ proposal for a
conference to consider the findings of the panel.
We look to the future, but we can also learn from
the past. The past gives us hope, and the Middle East,
described by Foreign Minister José Manuel García
Margallo as the cradle of civilizations, has long been
admired for its history of tolerance and cosmopolitanism
and for being what His Beatitude described as a mosaic
of religions.
Before Daesh began its brutal war against the
citizens of Iraq and Syria, Assyrians and Yazidis had
lived for millenniums alongside the Muslim majority.
Even in the recent past, leaders have boldly stepped
forth in the spirit of reconciliation and tolerance. In
1977, for example, Egyptian President Sadat stunned
the world when he became the first Arab leader to visit
Israel. Initially seen as an unpopular move after so
many years of conflict, it fundamentally changed the
relationship for the better.
But, in 2015, Daesh’s actions have underlined
the urgent need for today’s moderate voices and bold
leaders to make themselves heard. Daesh is slaughtering
Muslims and non-Muslims alike. Their cruelty knows
no bounds. The recent United Nations report on Iraq
describes Daesh’s widespread abuses, including
killings, torture, rape and sexual slavery, forced
religious conversions and the conscription of children,
along with other horrific stories. For example, my
parliamentary colleague from Iraq, Mrs. Vian Dakhil,
articulated in her extremely passionate speech how
Yazidi girls and women are openly sold or handed over
as gifts to Daesh ministers, with witnesses describing
the screams of girls as young as six and nine as they
were raped by Daesh fighters.

15-0877811/78

S/PV.7419

The situation in the Middle East

Daesh is also destroying our shared cultural
history. As was mentioned by the President of the
Council, the ancient Assyrian city of Nimrud was
bulldozed. The human-headed bull statutes of ancient
Nineveh were literally defaced by pneumatic drill,
and priceless artifacts have been sold to fund Daesh’s
brutality. But as the problem is wider than Daesh, our
response must be broad as well. Under articles 18 and
20 of the International Convenant on Civil and Political
Rights, each United Nations State Member has a duty to
protect all of its people. But how should we support that
in the Middle East? We must degrade and ultimately
defeat Daesh, working through the global coalition. As
the United Kingdom’s Minister for the Middle East, a
large proportion of my time has been devoted to the
diplomatic efforts.
The other immediate priority is the appalling
humanitarian crisis that is taking place across Syria and
Iraq, where 11.4 million Syrians and over 2.5 million
Iraqis have fled their homes. The United Kingdom has
been at the forefront, helping to protect the Yazidis on
Mount Sinjar, contributing $12 billion to the Syrian
crisis, and nearly $60 million to Iraq.
With over 220,000 killed and over 2 million people
displaced in Syria, a generation is being denied the
education that they need and deserve. One day the
guns will fall silent in Syria, and the international
community must do its part to help educate free Syrians
and refugees so that there are, for example, doctors,
farmers, teachers and civil servants to help the country
get off its knees. We need others to step up urgently at
the pledging conference that will take place in Kuwait
next week. That is the opportunity to do so. However
more must be done to address the sexual violence and
conflict, and to support survivors. That is why we hosted
the Global Summit to End Sexual Violence in Conflict
last June, and produced an international protocol on the
documentation and investigation of sexual violence in
conflict.
The Iraqi Government is the first in the region to
have a national action plan on women and peace and
security; but it needs our international support. To that
end, the United Kingdom and Canada recently set up
a scoping mission to Iraq, and are working with the
Iraqi Government to implement the recommendations.
However, the best defence against radicalization, the
best guarantee of stability and sustainable growth the
world over, is inclusive and accountable Government.
That will not happen overnight. It will not happen in

12/78

27/03/2015

a year or, indeed, a decade. It will be the work of a
generation. But it is work that is crucial nonetheless. In
Britain, we have learned this the hard way. The Magna
Carta, whose eight hundredth anniversary we mark this
year, did not create a free and just society overnight.
Rather it was a critical step in an incremental process,
peppered with setbacks, civil wars and religious
persecution, towards the parliamentary democracy we
know today. But while the work in the Middle East
could take a generation, we must not let it take eight
centuries.
In the past, ideas could travel only as fast as a person
on a horse spreading the word from town to town. Now
ideas can be shared with the touch of a button. We can,
and must, be quicker to foster such ideas to enable the
creation of inclusive, representative Governments. On
that note, I should also say we should be mindful of
how modern technology, the Internet, is being hijacked
to promote extremism and incite violence. We all have
a role to play in tackling extremism. For example, I
commend the exceptional work in Lebanon of Mufti
Deryan, who I met recently, to build bridges between
faith communities to end extremism and terror. We must
give our full support to the Middle East peace process
and to the two-State solution to prevent more suffering
and an uncertain and dangerous future for Israelis and
Palestinians alike. We must also continue to seek peace
in Syria. We should not fall for the regime’s specious
argument that it can protect minorities. Al-Assad’s
actions have fuelled sectarian violence, and his regime
is ultimately responsible for the deaths of hundreds
of thousands of civilians. The Syrian people deserve
a more accountable, inclusive, representative form of
governance than Al-Assad could ever offer.
We, the international community, must heed
early warnings and seek to prevent atrocities before
they begin, as we did last year in the Central African
Republic. But where preventative action fails or comes
too late, then there must be no impunity for perpetrators.
Justice is neither easy nor quick, but it is essential.
From Rwanda to Yugoslavia, South Africa to Northern
Ireland, history has shown that peace can be built only
on accountability and justice.
Finally, we must counter Daesh’s twisted narrative
through education and good governance. We need to
underline the responsibility of authorities and civil
society alike to support counternarratives and tackle
what the High Commissioner for Human Rights calls
the toxins of extremism. And we must engage and

15-08778

27/03/2015

The situation in the Middle East

empower women to help build the secure, stable and
prosperous Middle East that we all want. We call on
the Governments in the region to guarantee freedom
of religion for all their people, as laid down in article
18 of the United Nations Universal Declaration of
Human Rights. When children are brought up to
respect followers of all religions, and of none, extremist
ideologies will wither and die.
In conclusion, during this United Nations anniversary
year, let us take inspiration from its founders and our
shared history. Let our bold leaders, whether of countries
or indeed of communities, continue doing the vital
work for tolerance and reconciliation. To those leaders,
I will end with this: as together we tackle Daesh, as we
address the humanitarian crisis in Syria, as we build
a more stable, inclusive and more prosperous Middle
East, they should know that they have the support of the
United Kingdom.
Mr. Augusto (Angola) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Angola congratulates the French
presidency of the Security Council for holding this
debate on attacks and abuses against ethnic and
religious minorities in the Middle East. We welcome
and thank Mr. Laurent Fabius, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of France, for presiding over this debate.
(spoke in English)
At present, in many countries — namely, Syria,
Iraq, Libya, South Sudan and the Central African
Republic, just to mention a few — the international
community is once again faced with its inability to
quickly and effectively protect and respond to the
humanitarian needs of ethnic and religious minorities.
We, the international community, should conduct some
soul searching and ask some crucial questions. Do we
really believe in the protection of minorities, of the
disadvantaged and those marginalized by abuse and
persecution? What should we do differently in order to
prevent mass killings and the persecution of minorities?
As recent events show, the political turmoil in the
Middle East and North Africa has a devastating impact
on minority groups. Egyptian Copts, Israeli Arabs, Iraqi
and Syrian Kurds, Palestinians in Jordan, Saudi Shia
Muslims, Assyrian Christians, Turkmen and Yazidis
are some of the groups facing increasing hostility at the
hands of extremist groups, and even from Government
institutions.

S/PV.7419

Most worrisome is the fact that violent extremism,
religious and ethnic intolerance seem to be gaining
ground in the Middle East and elsewhere, with
minorities being subjected to brutal persecution by
extremists and terrorist groups that endanger the future
of those societies by breaking down the social fabric
of the communities and countries they have lived for
centuries. Acts of persecution, including targeted
killings, forced religious conversions, abductions,
forced evictions, slavery, sexual and physical abuse,
torture and the harassment of entire communities on
the basis of ethnic or religious affiliation are having
a disastrous effect on the collective perceptions of the
people affected.
Another cause for great concern is the rapid
advance of radical militant groups such as Daesh in
Iraq, Syria and other parts of the Middle East and
North Africa. Those terrorist organizations, while
significantly threatening the territorial integrity of the
countries throughout the region, have been outspoken
in their hatred of other religious or ethnic minorities.
This dangerous spread of Jihadist and Salafist ideology
in the Middle East and North Africa is unsettling
the centuries-old coexistence of religious and ethnic
communities and creating an environment of mistrust
and intolerance, which only leads to further conflict.
The members of the Security Council have
condemned, in the strongest terms, the widespread
and grave violations of humanitarian and human rights
law committed by Daesh against ethnic, religious and
other minority groups, while reiterating their support
to the protection of civilians, including minorities, in
accordance with international humanitarian law and the
standards set out in international legal instruments on
human rights and the rights of refugees. However, none
of the Conventions, statements or resolutions adopted
by the Security Council seem to have the desired effect
in places where war is raging and the most egregious
human rights abuses occur. These normative documents
tend to lose their weight without the strong political
will of the Security Council to enforce its decisions by
all necessary means.
The threat posed by the radical extremists has
to be matched and, in addition to the use of force, a
clear ideological response must be provided, including
through communication technologies, that counters
their propaganda at every turn and reduces their capacity
to mobilize youth to their sinister ends. Additionally,
the promotion of a culture of tolerance, inclusion and

15-0877813/78

S/PV.7419

The situation in the Middle East

common understanding is key to ensuring different
but equal coexistence with other human beings. In
that regard, there arises the need to assist the peoples
of the Middle East to peacefully resolve the issues of
coexistence among diverse communities in Iraq, Syria,
Yemen and Palestine, among other places, and join the
fight against radical elements whose only purpose is to
promote hatred and division.
The Republic of Angola therefore supports
the action plan announced by His Excellency the
Secretary-General this morning for a new and urgent
approach to the question of minorities. In the same
vein, we recognize the importance and the pertinence
of the proposals made by you, Mr. President, on the
implementation of concrete actions to address the
prevailing situation of minorities in the Middle East.
The United Nations is at a crossroads, and the
Security Council has enormous responsibilities ahead
on which it must deliver in order to safeguard its very
nature and relevancy in the twenty-first century. The
challenge is enormous because we must take a definite
stand against armed groups such as Boko Haram, the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant/Daesh and others,
which threaten entire societies and communities that
have for so long coexisted in peace and harmony.
However, promoting a culture of tolerance and common
understanding will be possible only with political
stability, economic prosperity and policies for real
political, social and economic inclusion, particularly
for the youth. In that regard, we must continue to assist
the peoples of the Middle East to peacefully resolve the
conflicts in the region and bring about all the positive
changes proclaimed by the Arab Spring.
Mr. Labbé Villa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): On
behalf of Chile, I join Minister García-Margallo y
Marfil in warmly welcoming those who have come to the
Security Council today speak for the victims — those
massacred simply because they were different, because
they were practicing their faith and because they did
not fit into an insane paradigm that defies all the values
that underpin the Organization.
We are grateful to France for convening this
open debate, which Chile believes addresses central
components of a holistic understanding of peace
and international security. Such an understanding
is people-centred and therefore must always uphold
human dignity. It is in that context that we approach
the issue of the rights of minorities. This is also an

14/78

27/03/2015

opportunity to reflect on the extensive and systematic
persecution perpetrated by the Islamic State, or
Daesh, of communities and individuals belonging to
certain ethnic, religious or sectarian minorities. Their
actions are exacerbating the climate of insecurity that
unfortunately prevails in the region and its resulting
global humanitarian impact, which the United Nations
system is politically, legally and ethically bound to
address through the Council.
Chile, which strongly supports the doctrine of
interdependence among the three pillars of the United
Nations — peace and security, human rights and
development — is also committed to respect for human
dignity and unity in diversity. In that framework,
the multicultural, multi-ethnic and multi-religious
character of many States — not only those in the
Middle East — is a global public good to be preserved
rather than just being a descriptive footnote. The
preservation of ethnic, religious and cultural diversity
is an imperative of civilization.
Therefore, at the present stage of the development
of human civilization, active religious tolerance, which
stems from the inherent right of people to espouse a
religious belief, not to espouse one or to convert to
another belief, emerges as an essential attribute of
human dignity and serves to establish freedoms that we
must guarantee and fully respect.
With regard to the Middle East, we must denounce
the cruel opportunism of the violence unleashed against
religious minorities who have from time immemorial
been part of the social, economic and even political
fabric of the region. Indeed, no community can survive
and develop over the decades, centuries and even
millennums in the midst of other majority communities
unless there are and have been deep-rooted ties, both
explicit and implicit, of belonging and coexistence.
Such a coexistence of spiritual poles, viewed over
time, has but enriched the civilizations of the region, in
which my own country too can claim spiritual, ethnic
and cultural ancestors. Chile reiterates in this Chamber
the inalienable right of those communities to live in
their own countries in peace, freedom, full equality
and dignity.
The specific situation in which the Christian
communities of the Middle East find themselves is
a source of special concern, particularly in view of
the structural role played by Christian Arabs in the
ideological construction and definition of secular Arab

15-08778

27/03/2015

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.7419

identity. The disappearance or virtual exile from the
region of those communities would, in the medium
term, result in the collapse of Arab secularism, and
therefore create a risk that democratic principles would
be eradicated in the Middle East and North Africa.
Based on that reasoning, with other delegations in
the Council, Chile co-sponsored the joint statement
entitled “Supporting the Human Rights of Christians
and other Communities, Particularly in the Middle
East”, initiated by the Russian Federation, the Holy
See and Lebanon on behalf of 64 States in the context
of the twenty-eighth session of the Human Rights
Council, and the “Joint Concurrence Statement on
Persecution of Minority Communities in the Middle
East”, spearheaded by the United States, endorsed by 40
other States and expressing concern about all minority
groups, including Muslims.

any falsely justifying overtones, but also require our
collective action aimed at the total eradication of this
modern scourge that is undermining the very foundation
of civilization. As others have said in the course of this
debate, impunity is not an option. And, as the SecretaryGeneral has noted, we are faced with an abomination,
an abomination that certainly leads to desolation. We
in the Council and the multilateral system are indebted
to the religious and ethnic minorities in the Middle
East and Africa. Success will be possible only if we
are united around profound convictions and effective
mechanisms. Only then will the sacrifice of the martyrs
of the Levant have redeeming value.

In various statements to the Council concerning the
Islamic State, our delegation has stressed the importance
of respecting and guaranteeing the human rights of
religious, ethnic and cultural minorities, pursuant to
resolution 2170 (2014), adopted on 15 August 2014.
From its seat in the Security Council, Chile has strongly
supported all collective actions by the international
community to combat terrorism and violent extremism,
without needing to note that terrorism, as a threat to
international peace and security, cannot be eliminated
by military means alone.

Allow me to thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban
Ki-moon; the High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Mr. Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein; the Patriarch of Babylon of
the Chaldeans, Mr. Louis Raphaël I Sako; and member
of the Iraqi Parliament, Mrs. Vian Dakhil. I would like
to tell Mrs. Dakhil that her words were difficult for all
of us to hear, especially for me, as a woman and as an
Arab.

During its past presidency of the Council, Chile
wished to share its perceptions and concerns regarding
the profound causes of the conflict, emphasizing, on
the basis of the interdependence among the three pillars
of the multilateral system, the links between inclusive
development and the maintenance of international
peace and security. Indeed, President Michelle Bachelet
stated on 19 January in this forum:
“In order to understand and tackle those new
challenges, we must adopt a multidimensional
approach that explains the causes underlying those
threats. Those include socioeconomic, gender,
ethnic, tribal, religious and ideological tensions
that may have local, regional or global effects.
That is the only way by which we can effectively
contribute to conflict resolution and peacebuilding
in the world.” (S/PV.7361, p. 6)
The crimes perpetrated by the Islamic State and
the terrorist groups that have sworn allegiance to it not
only deserve our resounding condemnation, without

Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in French): I thank the
delegation of France for having organized this debate.
(spoke in Arabic)

Numerous conflicts and daunting challenges
confront us in the Middle East region, whether we
are Muslims, Christians, Sunnis or Shiites. Multiple
experiments were conducted over the past century
to thwart the establishment of good governance,
moderation and tolerance. However, the region has never
witnessed the new kind of terrorism — assassinations
and killings, rape, forced displacements, persecution
of religious and ethnic minorities. This terrorism is
amplified in hate speeches and the misuse of religion
for political reasons. The heinous violence and crimes
committed by the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria
(ISIS) deliberately and systematically target religious
and ethnic minorities, notably Christians, Turkmen,
Kurds, Assyrians, Sabians, Mandeans and Kakais, with
the aim of annihilating those minorities as a group
and depopulating the region by direct killing or by
spreading fear among the populations.
Among the terrorist crimes perpetrated against
religious and ethnic groups are those of torture, rape,
women and girls enslaved and others forced to work
as combatants, suicide bombers, executioners, sex
slaves or forced workers. I would like to say that all
of those crimes and violations are new to our societies

15-0877815/78

S/PV.7419

The situation in the Middle East

in the Middle East region. Our region has historically
been known for its pluralism, tolerance, coexistence
and acceptance of others despite the fact that there
were many faiths, religions and sects living in the
region since time immemorial. Are these war crimes,
crimes against humanity or crimes of genocide? Such
terms indeed describe what we currently see. The real
challenge that our societies currently face is to hold
perpetrators accountable, deter and prevent impunity
by imposing punishment. We want to prevent the
recurrence of such crimes; therefore, we must monitor
and document the violations against ethnic or religious
minorities by extremist armed groups, with a view
to holding accountable those who have committed
or ordered such crimes, particularly those who have
committed operations of sexual violence against, or
mass kidnappings of, girls and women, which is what
happened with the Yazidis recently.
We must create a mechanism to document the
immovable assets and wealth that armed groups
have seized from minorities. Needless to say, States
must provide protection to their religious and ethnic
minorities. We also stress the need for States not to
discriminate among its citizens on the basis of religion,
faith or sect. The Middle East region will never enjoy
peace and security unless efforts to combat extremism
and extremist thoughts are pursued in tandem with
joint, serious efforts to address the root causes of such
phenomena and the expansion of terrorist groups, or
unless the core questions of the region are addressed,
particularly the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and the
Syrian crisis. Ignoring our responsibility to seek
permanent solutions to such crises does not only
encourage terrorism but will prevent us from the
achieving stability.
We must also fight hate crimes and address the root
causes of the attraction that terrorist organizations have
for young people. This popularity has allowed terrorist
organizations to promote their extremist ideologies. We
must recall that provocative actions against Muslims
will lead only to fomenting hate speech, because any
defamation of a religion or its followers is totally
extraneous to freedom of thought and expression.
There is a fine line between the exercise of freedom
and fomenting and inciting hate speech. This obdurate
racism and Islamophobic discourse are the best
propaganda for ISIS, Al-Qaida and other extremist
organizations.

16/78

27/03/2015

Jordan, under the leadership of His Majesty
King Abdullah II, the Custodian of the Two Holy
Mosques and the protector of Islamic sites and the
Islamic religion, has supported every effort to protect
religious minorities, safeguard the Christian and Arab
identities and preserve the right to worship freely
based on the common denominators of Islam and
Christianity. His Highness said that the Christians of
the region are closer to understanding Islam because
they form part and parcel of our Arab societies and
have played an effective role in building our culture and
our civilization. Minorities do not represent only a faith
or a language; they are representative of many cultures,
because they are the common denominator of the value
of the region in which they live. The historical wealth
of eastern civilization is therefore the result of the
diversity and harmony among the region’s components,
which has provided fertile ground for the development
of the culture of our region.
Jordan has stressed its policy of tolerance and
respect for religion in many initiatives, including the
Amman message, the proposal to proclaim World
Interfaith Harmony Week, and the initiative entitled “A
common word”, on the common denominator between
Islam and Christianity, which is love of God and love of
neighbour. That is because we in Jordan believe in our
religious and ethical duty to protect minorities in Iraq
and Syria and other parts of the middle East. As we
have always done in the conflicts to which our region
has been exposed and because we wanted to provide
safe haven to the weak, we in Jordan hosted more than
2,000 Christians from Iraq who had sought safe haven
in Jordan following the terror that they had to endure
from ISIS and other groups.
In conclusion, diversity in society is natural, and
therefore building societies that are stable and live in
harmony is not only an ambition of the people of the
Middle East but also a usurped right that we hope to
recover, so that we can enjoy it the way we did in the
past.
Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): Malaysia joins other
Council members in warmly welcoming you,
Mr. President, and other high-level dignitaries to the
Council and to today’s meeting. We commend you
and the delegation of France for having convened this
important open debate at this crucial juncture for all the
communities in the Middle East.

15-08778

27/03/2015

The situation in the Middle East

My delegation takes this opportunity to express
appreciation to His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
the Secretary-General, and to His Highness Mr. Zeid
Ra’ad Al Hussein, United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, for sharing their perspectives and
insights on the topic at hand.
We also thank His Beatitude Louis Raphaël I
Sako, Patriarch of Babylon of the Chaldeans, and The
Honourable Mrs. Vian Dakhil, member of the Iraqi
Parliament, for being with us today and for bringing
their perspectives as victims directly affected by the
wave of violent extremism in the Middle East today. We
are humbled by their fortitude in the face of such trying
circumstances.
The landscape of threats to international peace
and security has evolved significantly since the
establishment of the Council. Accordingly, the
Council’s responses must continue to evolve and take
into account the changing nature of the threats faced.
The scourge of terrorism and violent extremism stands
out as one of the most prominent and challenging
threats we face today. In that connection, Malaysia
recalls Council resolutions 2170 (2014), 2178 (2014) and
2199 (2015), which are among the most recent responses
by the Council and reaffirm its commitment to their
implementation and that of other relevant resolutions.
We are pleased to note the Secretary-General’s
proposal on the plan of action to combat fanaticism and
violent extremism, and we welcome France’s leadership
in taking this proposal forward through the proposed
international conference.
It is tragic and disconcerting that the deadly
consequences of the twin scourges of terrorism and
violent extremism, fuelled by the fires of radicalization
and hatred, have spread and seemingly become
entrenched in the Middle East, a region known as the
cradle of civilization.
Malaysia condemns in the strongest possible terms
the outrageous and senseless acts perpetrated by violent
extremists against ethnic or religious minorities,
wherever and whenever they occur. We denounce and
reject totally the ideology propagated by the likes of
Al-Qaida, Boko Haram, Daesh, Ansar Al-Sharia, the
Al-Nusra Front and other groups or individuals of
similar persuasion. We especially reject their claims
that their heinous and barbaric acts of violence are
carried out in the name of Islam, a religion of peace.

S/PV.7419

To the victims, we can but attempt to assuage their
grief and despair by reaffirming and reassuring them
of our continuing strong commitment to combat those
scourges, including through the implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions.
Malaysia wishes to reaffirm its commitment to
continue working in a coordinated and concerted
manner with all partners and stakeholders in combating
terrorism and violent extremism in the framework of
the United Nations and other relevant international and
regional organizations.
The current wave of extremist violence in the
Middle East, particularly in Iraq and Syria and
other parts of Middle East, affects all communities
irrespective of creed or ethnicity, whether Christian,
Yazidi, Kurd, Shia or Sunni. These are communities
which have for the most part lived in peace, side by side
with one another, for centuries, if not millennia.
The advent of violent extremists and their
particular brand has resulted in deep fractures among
those communities from which they may never recover.
As such, while it may seem an impossible task at this
particular juncture, we must remain mindful of the
need to maintain and strengthen the common ties and
linkages between them in order to build a better future
for the next generation.
At the same time, we also wish to highlight the
situation of the Palestinian-Arab citizens of Israel. The
Palestinian minority in Israel has suffered continuously
from racial discrimination and inequality, much of it
officially legislated and sanctioned by the Government.
At least 40 different laws are currently in place that
in essence discriminate against the Israeli Palestinian
population, whether Muslim or Christian, affecting
schools, communities, land ownership and other rights.
Palestinians in Israel are relegated to the status of
second-class citizens and are victims of segregation
and displacement.
Impunity, wherever it may occur, breeds hatred
and vengeance. In this regard, we echo the appeal made
by earlier speakers that efforts and initiatives aimed
at establishing accountability must be fully supported
by the international community. The perpetrators
of extremist violence must realize that there will be
consequences for their despicable actions.
Malaysia reaffirms the primary responsibility
of Governments to ensure the safety and security

15-0877817/78

S/PV.7419

The situation in the Middle East

of their citizens and the promotion and protection of
the human rights and fundamental freedoms of their
peoples, including minorities. We realize that for
certain countries, especially those just emerging from
conflict or in a transition process, the key challenges
they face include establishing and maintaining strong
governance and law-enforcement institutions that will
enable them to ensure their peoples’ safety and security
regardless of creed or ethnicity. At the same time,
those institutions should be able to foster conditions
conducive to people’s socioeconomic development and
the promotion and protection of their human rights.
We believe that the international community, and the
United Nations in particular, has a critical supporting
role to play in that regard.
As a multi-ethnic, multicultural and multi-faith
society, Malaysia is keenly aware that it has to carefully
balance the exercise of certain rights and freedoms
with its responsibility for maintaining peaceful and
harmonious relations among its various communities.
While today we generally have peace and harmony
among Malaysia’s various communities, that has not
always been the case, since inter-ethnic relations, and
intercommunal divisions on such issues as wages,
income inequality and socioeconomic status, were
acutely sharp and divisive in the years immediately
following our independence.
In the light of our own experience, we would like
to take this opportunity to underscore the importance
of certain key values, principles and approaches that
must be preserved and nurtured in pluralistic societies.
They include, first, tolerance and inclusiveness among
communities, which pluralist societies must foster
and strengthen over time; secondly, an understanding
of diversity as a source of strength and unity must
also be fostered, through Government-led efforts,
where appropriate; thirdly, applying the principle
of moderation as a general approach to guiding and
framing the parameters for inter-communal relations,
cooperation and understanding; and fourthly,
ensuring that certain rights and freedoms of minority
communities, where appropriate, enjoy legal protection
and sanction. It is equally important that promoting
and protecting minority rights be seen to be balanced,
especially when measured against the legitimate
concerns of the majority.
Against the rising tide of violent extremists and
their narrative, the need for broad-based cooperation
aimed at fostering understanding and building bridges

18/78

27/03/2015

between communities, including through sustained
interfaith dialogue, among other things, must be
pursued in earnest. For its part, Malaysia stands ready to
participate and contribute in the fight against terrorism
and violent extremism, including by combating their
destructive narrative and agenda.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Mr. Fabius, we are pleased to welcome you
as President of the Security Council today. We are
grateful to you for convening today’s meeting on such
an important and topical subject, which the Russian
Federation considers particularly significant, as was
also indicated in the speech on Christians in the Middle
East given in Geneva on 2 March by Sergey Lavrov,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation,
at a side event during the current session of the Human
Rights Council initiated by Russia, the Vatican and
Lebanon on “Supporting the rights of Christians,
particularly in the Middle East”, with the resounding
backing of 65 States.
For thousands of years the Middle East has been
a crossroads of cultures and civilizations. It was the
birthplace of three major monotheistic religions. Its
historical traditions of peaceful coexistence between
different beliefs and mutual learning and cultural
enrichment go back for centuries. Unfortunately,
the Middle East has also seen many bloody wars and
devastating invasions and has been plunged into an abyss
of obscurantism and senseless brutality more than once.
Today, once again, a terrible drama is playing out before
our eyes in the region. Gangs of radical extremists, led
by a blind, inhumane, medieval ideology, are inflicting
mass carnage on anyone who does not share their
dogmas, blowing up schools, mosques and churches,
evicting people from their homes, destroying thousandyear-old shrines and historical and cultural monuments
and imprisoning religious leaders in dungeons. Their
bloody cruelty and reason-defying obscurantism know
no limits.
The preconditions enabling a slew of countries in
the region to become hotbeds of terrorism — terrorism
that hides behind the slogans of Islam but has nothing
in common with that world religion — did not appear
overnight. The spread of this evil phenomenon has
been due in large part to the thoughtless actions of
players from outside the region, both before and during
the so-called Arab Spring, examples of which are not
hard to find, since everyone is talking about them.
The 2003 invasion of Iraq, among other ills, wiped

15-08778

27/03/2015

The situation in the Middle East

out its State institutions and essentially abandoned the
country’s religious and ethnic communities to their
own resources, exposing deep contradictions between
them that have taken horrifying and exaggerated forms.
The situation became even worse in 2011, when the
NATO bombing undertaken in violation of resolution
1973 (2011) not only destroyed the Al-Qadhafi regime
but all the elements that had previously made Libya a
unified State.
In Syria, some members of the international
community, instead of helping the Syrians settle their
internal crisis, began to rock the boat, showering money
and arms on opponents of the country’s legitimate
President, Bashar Al-Assad, while simultaneously
putting unprecedented military, political and economic
pressure on his Government. As a result, the successors
to Al-Qaida, having established a solid position in the
Syrian war, proclaimed a caliphate and plied their trade
of violence and genocide throughout the territories of
Syria, Iraq and Libya, with cells in Lebanon, Egypt,
Tunisia, Afghanistan, Pakistan and a number of other
countries. What was once a population of half a million
Christians, Yazidis, Assyrians and Sabian Mandaeans
in Iraq is now threatened with a total exodus.
Representatives of Syria’s minorities — Christians,
Jews, Armenians, Assyrians and Turkomans — are also
leaving in droves. The reverberations of the tragedy that
has gripped the region, intensified by inter-confessional
and inter-civilization contradictions, are being heard
far beyond the region’s borders in very different parts
of the world.
From the very beginning of the so-called Arab
Spring, Russia has supported settling the crisis
situations in the region through evolutionary reforms
and national dialogue without outside interference,
based on building peace and harmony among all
religious groups, including the various sects of Islam
and Christianity. At the time, our calls for ensuring that
the situation not be given up to the mercy of religious
extremists went unheeded — or, rather, were heard
selectively. In some places the extremists were held
off, while in others they were supported, led by cynical
political calculation, used as a battering ram to crush
inconvenient regimes. The most evil forces felt that
their time had come. The results have been the Egyptian
Copts beheaded in Libya and Egypt, the Lebanese
Shiites incinerated in a bus outside Damascus, the Zaidi
Shiites bombed in mosques in Sana’a, the Iraqi Yazidis
tortured in barbaric jails. The Alawites of Latakia and

S/PV.7419

the Assyrians of Hasaka, as well as those Sunnis who
oppose the caliphate’s wars, are also targeted.
Russia firmly and consistently condemns all acts
of violence against civilian populations, including
those based on ethnic and religious grounds. We will
continue our principled approach in the interests of
achieving inter-confessional and inter-ethnic peace and
reconciliation in Syria, Iraq and the other countries of
the Middle East. And we will continue to advocate for
both Christians and followers of other religions who are
persecuted by terrorists.
We believe firmly that we can successfully combat
the rise of religious extremism and the terrorist
structures representing it in the region only through
a global and comprehensive approach. The overall
objective should be to unite international, regional
and national efforts, which can be achieved only by
rejecting policies of double standards and an obsession
with extracting every possible short-term geopolitical
benefit.
The Security Council has taken important
steps with its adoption of a number of resolutions,
including resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2199 (2015).
But that is clearly not enough. We urge all responsible
representatives of the international community to do
everything possible to reverse the dangerous trend to
ethnic and sectarian strife in the Middle East and to
support the coexistence of different ethnic and religious
communities, so deeply rooted in history, in this vital
region of the world.
In order to solve the problem of violence against
Christians and other minorities, the international
community should unify its efforts aimed at combating
terrorism on the basis of norms of international law,
avoid double standards, including in counter-terrorism
efforts, and cease to rely on radical forces or to train
opposition forces, because they can easily be turned
into extremists. It is also important to work together to
restore the political process for a settlement in Syria by
encouraging all Syrian parties to return to dialogue and
unity to fight terrorism.
Our shared task is to help the countries in the region
to peacefully overcome crises, to bring an end to old and
new conflicts and to renew healthy pluralistic societies
and strong political systems by ensuring human rights
and basic freedoms for everyone. It is clear that only
through a comprehensive and responsible approach
in the areas of policy and security can we solve the

15-0877819/78

S/PV.7419

The situation in the Middle East

problems that States of the Middle East are facing, and
thereby protect the rights of all minorities in the region.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I would like
first of all to commend the initiative of the French
delegation to organize today’s open Security Council
debate at the ministerial level on the protection of
minority victims of attacks and abuses on ethnic or
religious grounds in the Middle East. I welcome His
Excellency Mr. Laurent Fabius, French Minister for
Foreign Affairs and International Development, as well
as all the ministers present in the Chamber.
I also thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon;
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights; His Beatitude Louis
Raphaël I Sako, Patriarch of Babylon of the Chaldeans;
and Mrs. Vian Dakhil, member of the Iraqi Parliament,
for their briefings.
Today’s debate is timely, especially as it comes at a
particularly critical moment for the Middle East, which
is going through a deep political and security crisis that
has ushered in the emergence and expansion of extremely
violent terrorist groups. These groups commit crimes
of unheard of atrociousness, in particular in Iraq and
Syria, in violation of human dignity and international
law.
Individuals and groups belonging to national,
ethnic or religious minorities are the favoured targets
of such terrorist movements as Daesh and its affiliates,
which engage in systematic and widespread persecution
of Christians, Kurds, Yazidis, Shabaks, Turkmens and,
in certain regions, Sunnis, Shiites and other ethnic
and religious minorities. That persecution consists of
murders, abductions, torture, forced displacement and
all other forms of atrocity. As evidenced by the moving
testimony of Mrs. Dakhil, women and children are
subjected to physical and sexual violence as part of their
daily lives, and some are deliberately executed. The
destruction of works including cultural assets shows the
degree of terrorist groups’ animus towards minorities.
However, Christians and other minorities have lived
for millennia in the region and are an integral part of
the social fabric. By targeting these groups, Daesh has
destroyed the social fabric and peaceful coexistence
that have existed among the different communities in
the Middle East for millennia.
The issue of minorities is as ancient as their
existence across countries and regions of the world.
The Middle East has its own share of minorities who,

20/78

27/03/2015

with all their religious ethnic, social diversity and their
own history and cultural values, have contributed to the
influence of this part of the world.
Political transitions under way in the Arab world
that should be bringing about social cohesion have
instead caused confusion, from which, unfortunately,
terrorist groups have been able to benefit. Already in a
precarious situation, minorities persecuted by terrorist
groups doubly suffer the horrors of war. Daesh’s recent
persecution of Christian, Shiite and Kurdish minorities
in Iraq and the barbaric executions of Egyptian Copts
in Libya are not only a source of concern for the future
of those minorities, but also serve to point to the fact
that substantial efforts at international and regional
levels are needed for their protection.
Faced with such a grave situation, we need to
guarantee these minorities our support and protection.
In that regard, we believe that the actions that the
United Nations and the international community
could undertake should take the following elements
into account: stepping up international and regional
cooperation in the fight against terrorism, taking into
account the recent decisions taken at the Washington,
D.C., summit on 19 February and the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council on terrorism and
violent extremism; the regular inclusion of the issue of
the protection of minorities in the agenda of the Security
Council’s deliberations in order to find the ways and
means to increase protection while respecting the
territorial integrity, national unity and independence
of States; broadening the scope of judicial cooperation
among States, especially those in the Middle East
region, to ensure that cross-border criminals do not
evade justice; and helping to establish democracy and
the rule of law, which are a vehicle for human rights and
the only guarantor of true peace. On the humanitarian
front, we should provide massive assistance to affected
communities in conflict zones in the Middle East and
help them resettle in their homelands.
We know that the emergence and rapid growth
of Daesh in Iraq, Syria and elsewhere are the
consequences of years of exclusion and marginalization
of a significant portion of the population that has been
left behind in political, economic and social processes
and which has suffered from all forms of frustration,
thereby reinforcing the need for identity politics or
the rejection of the other, which the terrorists have be
able to exploit. Under these circumstances, it is not
just military solutions to the various conflicts that

15-08778

27/03/2015

The situation in the Middle East

could prevail in the Middle East; we need to encourage
countries in crisis to engage in peaceful and inclusive
political processes leading to the establishment of
a State in which citizenship is the only criterion of
belonging to the nation and where all the components
of society can enjoy their right to live in their country
in peace, freedom, equality and dignity. From this
perspective, we believe that to ensure the protection of
minorities, education and outreach are the best means
for breaking down barriers between communities and
dispelling stereotypes from which antagonisms are
built in the Middle East as elsewhere.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I would like
to begin by thanking Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein, His Beatitude Louis Raphaël
I Sako, Patriarch of Babylon of the Chaldeans, and
Mrs. Vian Dakhil, member of the Iraqi Parliament, for
sharing their valuable insights with us today.
Promoting religious freedom is a priority for
President Obama, and it remains a core value that
influences United States diplomatic engagement
worldwide. In recent days and months, the brutal
persecution of religious minorities has been
metastasizing at an alarming rate. We thank you,
Mr. President, for France’s presiding over this meeting
on such an important issue. We also note with great
interest the Secretary-General’s announcement of a
United Nations action plan and intention to create an
advisory panel on the matter.
We have all heard today, and some in this Chamber
have witnessed with their own eyes, the horrific
atrocities commited by non-State actors against targeted
religious groups in the Middle East. We have seen how
Governments have been unable or unwilling to protect
members of those groups or grant them the benefits and
protections accorded to other citizens. Without that,
those marginalized communities face an existential
threat. Solely because of the faith they practice, Shia
Muslims, Christians, Yazidis, Jews, Ismailis, Druze and
others have been forcibly converted, killed or evicted
from the places where their ancestors have lived for
hundreds and, in some cases, thousands of years. Some
face abduction, and others have been forced into sexual
slavery. My Government has repeatedly condemned the
targeting of civilians of any religious affiliation for any
kind of violence, and likewise has strongly condemned
the destruction of religious sites and property. Let

S/PV.7419

me be clear that there must be accountability for the
individuals responsible for these terrible acts.
The threat of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant,
also known as ISIL or Daesh, transcends all cultures,
religions and borders. Vulnerable communities across
Egypt, Iraq and Syria are in danger of ISIL’s abuses.
We condemn the despicable and cowardly murder of
21 Egyptian Copts by ISIL last month in Libya. ISIL’s
atrocities are not solely targeted against the region’s
religious minorities, however. The mass executions
of over 700 Sunni Arabs from the Al-Sheitat tribe in
eastern Syria last August, over 600 members of the Abu
Nour tribe in western Iraq in October, and at least 1,000
detained Shia Iraqi Air Force cadets at Camp Speicher
in June attest clearly to this fact.
With more than 60 coalition patrtners, many of
which are represented in the Chamber today, we are
working to degrade and ultimately defeat the common
threat ISIL poses to the world. We are providing security
assistance to combat ISIL, and working to disrupt the
flow of foreign fighters and ISIL’s financial resources.
But I also want to specifically note that protecting
religious minorities in the face of the threat that ISIL
poses, notably in Iraq and Syria, is and will remain one
of the key priorities in our strategy to counter ISIL.
The actions we took on Mount Sinjar in Iraq last
summer exemplify that commitment. Tens of thousands
of Yazidis — men, women and children — fled ISIL’s
advances on their villages around Mount Sinjar. Others
were trapped on the mountain with no food, water or
escape route in the scorching August heat. In light of
those dire circumstances, President Obama decided
to take targeted military action and provide critical
assistance, at the request of the Iraqi Government,
to avert further atrocities. Since that time, we have
remained keenly attentive to the ongoing threats against
Yazidis, including the fate of the 4,000-5,000 women
and girls taken captive by ISIL — a situation described
so very powerfully by the honourable member of the
Iraqi Parliament, Mrs. Vian Dakhil. We remain in close
touch with representatives of the Yazidi community.
The persecution of religious minorities in the
Middle East, however, extends beyond these heinous
acts carried out by ISIL. In Syria, the Al-Assad regime’s
brutal, heavy-handed tactics in violently suppressing a
peaceful protest movement have fueled the growth of
ISIL and other extremist groups. As throughout the
Middle East, the Christian community’s presence in

15-0877821/78

S/PV.7419

The situation in the Middle East

Syria has dropped precipitously. After four years of
civil war, hundreds of thousands of Christians have fled
the country to escape the ongoing violence perpetrated
by the Al-Assad regime and extremist groups alike.
In the city of Homs, for example, the number of
Christians has dwindled to as few as 1,000, down
from nearly 160,000 before the war began, after the
city was completely emptied of all but a few residents
following a merciless siege by the Al-Assad regime that
prevented food, water and medicine from entering the
city for almost two long years. Al-Assad’s regime has
indiscriminately bombed residential areas across the
country and killed thousands and thousands of Syrians
of all backgrounds. It has bombed dozens of churches,
mosques and an ancient Syrian Jewish synagogue,
highlighting the regime’s cynical efforts to violently
suppress its opponents at any cost.
We cannot turn to the dangers that religious
minorities now face from the Al-Assad regime and
extremist groups such as ISIL without first recognizing
the role that the systematized marginalization of
religious minorities vis-à-vis State institutions, legal
structures or Government practices has played in
depriving citizens of their civic rights, due solely to
their religious identity. Blasphemy laws, registration
laws, societal discrimination and plain outright violence
have served to marginalize such groups, making them
unwelcome in their own communities. For instance,
Muslims who practice Sufism have faced persecution
from some Governments in the region. The Baha’i
are another example of a minority group that has long
suffered at the hands of virtually Government in the
region, either from onerous registration laws or active
and violent Government persecution. All that remains
of the once vibrant and extensive Jewish population in
the region is a handful of small, isolated communities.
The United States continues to seek every
opportunity to assist those suffering under the threat
of extremist groups, including ISIL. The United States
remains the single largest donor to the humanitarian
response for Syria, contributing over $3.1 billion since
the civil war began. That assistance is being provided
to all individuals on the basis of need, regardless of
religious identity or political affiliation, and to meet
the needs of all Syrians, including religious minorities.
The United States Government also continues to be a
primary donor to displaced Iraqis, contributing over
$219 million since 2014. We also expect to make another
major contribution to the Syrian humanitarian crisis at

22/78

27/03/2015

the upcoming pledging conference later this month in
Kuwait.
Of course, while religious differences can be
exploited to divide societies, religioun can also be a
powerful motivator for bringing people together. We
saw how religion can bind and help heal a community
when ISIL brutally used sexual violence against Yazidi
women and girls as a tactic of war, attempting to exploit
the destructive power of the stigma attached to rape.
These attempts failed, however, when a prominent
religious leader of the Yazidi community, Baba Sheikh,
called on all Yazidis to welcome these girls back, even
accepting into his home two girls who had escaped
ISIL.
We believe that our nations are strongest when
we uphold the the equality of our people. We in every
country around the world must therefore be relentless
in turning the tides against any effort to sow hatred
along sectarian or religious lines, or deprive anyone of
equal respect, dignity or rights based on the beliefs they
hold. Many of us are already committed to diversity
and respect for freedom of belief and conscience for
all women and men, but all of us must recommit by
speaking out on behalf of the religious minorities
that are fighting for their rights, their lives and their
humanity today.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): I thank France for
holding this very important debate, which, as the High
Commissioner reminded us, is about tolerance versus
maniacal ideology — a stark choice indeed.
I also thank the two briefers, His Beatitude
Patriarch Sako and Mrs. Dakhil, for what they told us
through their briefings. While we debate issues in a
windowless room, far from events — and there is a lot
of symbolism in that — they have breathed real life into
our consideration of ethnic and religious attacks and
abuses. And I thank them for that.
The oppression and persecution of religious
and ethnic minorities and religious eradication is, as
Minister Fabius reminded us, deplorable, wherever and
whenever, and at whosoever’s hand it occurs. That is
especially apparent now, with terrorist groups, such as
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, posing a direct,
complex threat to international peace and security.
Such groups show no respect for national borders,
crossing them at will and drawing support from
networks extending to the farthest ends of the earth, my
own country included. They revel in publicizing their

15-08778

27/03/2015

The situation in the Middle East

atrocities and inciting fear. They want us to respond
with anger and outrage, and we do just that. It is
crucial that the international community acknowledge
the threat that these groups pose and that we promote
the cause of inclusive, multicultural, multi-religious
societies. We therefore see this debate as an important
step in galvanizing global momentum towards that end,
and in addressing the causes of the conflicts on which
those groups thrive.
New Zealand is appalled at the upsurge in violence
and persecution of ethnic and religious minorities in
many parts of the world. This issue is not unique to the
Middle East or to any single religion. Violent extremist
groups find traction in times of major societal stress,
and diverse, multicultural societies worldwide are
affected. And they are diminished as a result. But we
are particularly concerned at the brutal and ongoing
atrocities in the Middle East.
As the High Commissioner told us, it is apparent
that recent atrocities perpetrated by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant amounted to genocide against
Iraq’s Yazidi community. The richness and diversity of
the Middle East has been a major contributor to global
civilization, and that richness and diversity must be
preserved. Some of the region’s ethnic and religious
communities have traditions that go back millennia.
And just as we celebrate those traditions, it is equally
important that we acknowledge that most Middle
Eastern countries have a long history of tolerance and
of managing ethnic and religious diversity.
The current turmoil is bringing communities that
have coexisted peacefully for centuries into brutal
conflict, and it threatens irrevocable damage to the
region’s rich social tapestry. Extremist groups are
exploiting instability in order to establish themselves
and to spread their brutal sectarian agenda, often
displaying considerable skills in the use of social
media. The Internet, which was initially largely a
product of open, liberal societies, has been turned back
on those same societies — the British Under Secretary
spoke earlier of the hijacking of the Internet. So, what
should be the response from affected States and from
the international community? How should we respond?
The immediate priority must be to restore
security in situations where minorities are particularly
vulnerable. That requires stable and inclusive political
solutions, and it means providing support to end the
conflicts and instability on which extremist groups

S/PV.7419

nurture their ideologies. But security-based approaches
will not succeed alone. Affected communities need to
find new, post-conflict ways to manage their diversity.
Factors such as economic, social and sectarian
discrimination, inequality, marginalization, insecurity,
and a lack of inclusive and impartial governance must
all be addressed. They are the causes: they must be
addressed. That requires strong political will and
sustained commitment at all levels of Government, as
well as inclusive post-conflict initiatives that do not
entrench existing divisions.
One of the real tests of a society is the extent to
which it accommodates minorities, so it is regrettable
that in these situations minority voices are all-too-often
sidelined, causing ever more discontent and conflict.
We need to work with communities. Violent extremism
often has its roots at the community level, and must
therefore be defeated at that same community level.
Religious, community and educational leaders all
play a central role in promoting peace, tolerance and
mutual respect. We therefore urge the United Nations
and individual Member States to continue promoting
anti-radicalization and to continue countering violent
extremism by involving those leaders in a genuinely
meaningful manner. It is they who can provide the
solutions.
New Zealand supports projects in our region that
enhance community resilience, such as community
policing, which brings together community members
and police to apply policing in ethnically diverse
environments. We join those who have endorsed the
Secretary-General’s action plan, and we call for its
swift implementation.
The Security Council has an important role to play
in addressing the persecution and oppression of religious
and ethnic minorities by strengthening community
resilience and fostering inclusive governance and crosscultural dialogue. As with so much of the Council’s
agenda, New Zealand stands ready to contribute to that
dialogue, and in so doing, to take up Mr. Fabius’s dual
challenge to show solidarity with the persecuted and to
show a determination to fight the perpetrators of these
dreadful crimes.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank
you, Sir, for having convened this open debate. I thank
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of France, Mr. Laurent
Fabius, for his presence here in the Security Council.

15-0877823/78

S/PV.7419

The situation in the Middle East

I also express our gratitude for the remarks by the
Secretary-General and the briefing by Mr. Zeid Ra’ad
Al Hussein, High Commissioner for Human Rights. We
also appreciate and deeply value the testimony given
by Louis Rafaël I Sako, Patriarch of Babylon of the
Chaldeans, and representative of the Iraqi Parliament,
Mrs. Vian Dakhil.
Venezuela unequivocally condemns all acts of
intolerance, intimidation, aggression and violence
committed against any religious or ethnic community
by extremist organizations, in particular acts committed
by terrorist groups, which have recently proliferated in
the Middle East. We condemn how human beings have
been degraded, with the revival of medieval practices
that we believed long-buried, including acts of murder,
slavery, kidnapping, torture, and human trafficking
that are motivated by religious belief or ethnicity. We
also condemn the destruction of the cultural, historical
and religious heritage of humankind in the Middle East
region at the hands of these extremist groups.
Venezuela, based on its ongoing commitment
to international peace and security, reiterates its
firm and unequivocal condemnation of violence and
terrorism, whatever their motivations, whoever the
perpetrators and wherever committed. We wonder how
it can be possible that the region that was the cradle
of civilizations, where diverse ethnic and religious
groups have coexisted for millennia, is being torn
apart by the barbaric terrorism that we are denouncing
today. We believe that the prolonged war in the region,
along with military interventions in Iraq, Libya and
Syria as well as assistance to armed groups seeking to
destabilize or overthrow Governments, has led to tragic
consequences, exacerbating inter-religious and ethnic
hatred and violence as State institutions have crumbled
or collapsed.
Prolonged war and intervention have also
jeopardized the unity, territorial integrity, sovereignty
and political independence of the countries of the
Middle East, unleashing a spiral of violence against
communities based on their social, political, religious
or ethnic identity. The destruction of the social fabric
and the dismantling of State capacities and institutions
are fertile ground for terrorist extremism. We denounce
the current attemptto to apply the same formula in
Syria as was done in Iraq and Libya, The training,
supply and support of armed extremist groups, as well
as action against States based on politically motivated
arguments of questionable credibility have generated

24/78

27/03/2015

economic, political and social chaos, paving the way
for the rise of extremist organizations such as those that
have generated the present situation.
How is it possible for terrorist groups to act with
such military might? We cannot but notice that such
organizations have continued to proliferate and have
recently grown more powerful. Who is financing them?
Who is providing the military arsenal that enables them
to commit such atrocities agaisnt religious or ethnic
minorities? We call on the Security Council to insist
on full compliance with the resolutions it has adopted
within the framework of Chapter VII of the Charter,
which prohibit funding and support for such criminal
groups. It is essential that the perpetrators of such
crimes and those who provide them with financial and
material support be brought to justice.
The international community must take decisive
action against terrorist organizations such as Al-Qaida,
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and the
Al-Nusra Front, among others. However, a military
vision alone cannot put a stop to those terrorist groups.
In order to guarantee peace and security, States and the
international community as a whole must contribute in an
organic and comprehensive way to building egalitarian
societies that promote inclusive development, eradicate
poverty and universalize systems of social security and
protection that ensure the full enjoyment of the social,
economic, cultural, environmental, political and civil
rights of all people, including minorities.
It is vital to explore the structural conditions that
trigger the appearance and proliferation of terrorist
entities. The international response to the phenomenon
demands an honest appraisal of States’ responsibility to
preserve the security and integrity of society as a whole.
The fight to combat terrorism must be conducted within
the framework of international law, human rights, and
international humanitarian law. But the fight against
terrorism must not be used as an excuse to violate
the principles and purposes of the Charter. Political
solutions to conflict should prevail over military ones.
Venezuela is a melting pot of cultures, races and
religions. As a land free of armed conflict, we have
created a society whose common goals are based
on eradicating poverty and promoting inclusive
development to ensure for all its citizens a life with
dignity. Our country views with pain and indignation
the suffering of the victims and expresses its solidarity
with the countries of the Middle East, with which we

15-08778

27/03/2015

The situation in the Middle East

have strong historical and cultural ties. From our seat
on the Council we will do everything possible to resolve
this scourge that threatens humanity itself.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates the French initiative to convene today’s
open debate on the protection of Middle East minorities
and welcomes Foreign Minister Fabius to New York
to preside over the meeting. I would like to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, Mr. Zeid Ra’ad
Al Hussein for their briefings. My thanks also go to
Patriarch Sako and Iraqi parliamentarian Dakhil for
their statements.
Over the recent period, terrorism and violent
extremism in the Middle East have been rampant.
Massive human rights violations, in particular
violations against ethnic and religious minorities,
have been frequent, leading to huge casualties and the
destruction of some significant cultural sites, which has
drawn great concern from the international community.
China supports the measures that the international
community has taken in that regard.
First, the utmost effort should be made to promote
peace and stability in the Middle East. Turbulence
breeds terrorism and extremism. As long as there is no
peace in the world, terrorists and extremist force will
take advantage of the situation. History and reality have
repeatedly proven that the resort to force or violence
against violence will not bring about peace. Political
dialogue and national reconciliation are the only
solution. China hopes that the parties concerned in the
Middle East will base their actions on the well-being
of their people, iron out their differences and settle
their disputes. The international community, on the
basis of respect for the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of the countries concerned, should
provide effective assistance and stabilize the situation
in the Middle East as soon as possible.
Secondly, concerted efforts should be made to
combat terrorism and extremism. Terrorism is the
common enemy of mankind. Combating terrorism
requires the solidarity, synergy and coordination of the
international community. China is firmly opposed to all
forms of terrorism and actively supports international
counter-terrorism cooperation. There should be no
double standard in counter-terrorism. Furthermore,
there should be no linkage posited between terrorism
and specific ethnic or religious communities.

S/PV.7419

In a context in which the forces of international
terrorism keep changing their tactics and use the
Internet and other new media to conduct terrorist
activities, the international community should
strengthen cooperation and take effective measures to
firmly combat terrorist organizations that are using the
Internet to carry out recruitment, incitement, planning
and funding. The international community should pay
close attention to the ripple effect caused by terrorists.
While strengthening efforts to combat terrorism and
extremist in the Middle East, measures must be taken
to effectively prevent them from spreading to other
regions or areas.
Thirdly, it is vital to eradicate ideologies
supporting terrorism and extremism and advocate for
dialogue among civilizations. The Middle East has a
long history and a wide range of ethnic communities
and is one of the regions with the greatest diversity of
human civilizations. When it comes to civilizations,
one cannot speak of superiority or inferiority.
Inclusiveness brings about coexistence; exclusiveness
brings about hatred. The international community,
including the relevant United Nations agencies
working in the Middle East, should promote respect,
openness and inclusiveness, which embody the spirit of
dialogue among civilizations. It should also advocate
for exchanges and mutual learning and should work
to create a sound social atmosphere for people with
different ethnic, cultural or religious backgroundsso
that they can coexist in equality and harmony and no
opening is left for terrorism and extremism.
Fourthly, it is important to speed up development
and eradicate the breeding ground for terrorism, which
is poverty and underdevelopment. They are the major
root causes for conflicts and terrorism. The international
community, and the United Nations in particular,
should strengthen their efforts on the international
development agenda, actively assist the Middle Eastern
countries in developing their economies, creating job
opportunities, eradicating poverty, improving people’s
livelihoods, enhancing youth education and women’s
empowerment, improving governance and building
capacity for self-development, so that people can enjoy
peace and prosperity, thus removing the breeding
ground for terrorism.
Protecting the people of the Middle East from
terrorism and extremism is the common responsibility
of the international community and requires greater
efforts, inputs and measures from all States. China

15-0877825/78

S/PV.7419

The situation in the Middle East

is ready to join hands with the parties concerned and
make constant efforts to remove the real threat facing
the Middle East, in particular their minorities, so as to
create a sound and peaceful environment for them.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania) (spoke in French):
My delegation would like to thank the French presidency
for having convened this important meeting. Without a
doubt, the force of humanity lies in its diversity. But
entire communities, which have existed in the Middle
East for thousands of years, are at risk of disappearing
owing to fanatic and radical attacks. Without the
richness of religious, ethnic, linguistic and cultural
diversity, the Middle East would no longer be itself. We
are not only talking about the loss of an age-old heritage,
but also structural transformation into a region where
extremism no longer finds any obstacles to its spread.
The situation in Iraq and Syria no longer constitutes
merely an armed conflict or a conflict of values, ​​but
a global human, economic and cultural tragedy. The
attacks in Tunisia and Yemen last week, which followed
several others, including those that struck France in
January, have confirmed the urgency of the common
battle against radical extremism in all its manifestations.
The Daesh fanatics are not like other terrorists.
They control a vast territory and present themselves
as an illegal and criminal version of a State. They
aspire to create a space for themselves, one of a fanatic
extremism that is blind and deadly, a space where
those who do not share their vision — whether Yazidis,
Shabaks, Kurds, Christians, or even Muslims who have
a different concept of their faith — are left only with the
alternatives of flight, forced conversion, enslavement
for women and girls, forced conscription for children,
or, in the end, massacre.
The report that the Human Rights Council has just
published does not falter in addressing Daesh crimes
against humanity and their genocide with reference
to the Yazidis. The situation of other minorities in the
region is equally tragic. In particular, the Christians,
an integral part of the historical regional diversity,
a people of the Book, are disappearing in the areas
controlled by Daesh.
The terrorist scourge of Daesh knows no borders.
From Syria and Iraq, it is moving to Libya; it carries
out attacks in Mali, Yemen, Tunisia and elsewhere.
It threatens to destabilize the entire Sahel region. It
is creating dangerous ties with radical movements
in Nigeria and Somalia. It is recruiting thousands of

26/78

27/03/2015

foreign fighters, which is further fuelling the conflict.
These fighters come from other countries, and given
the fact that they are not local, they are often the
perpetrators of the most brutal and inhuman crimes
against local populations, including minorities.
In spite of all that Daesh’s propaganda claims, we
the international community must remain very clear
and unequivocal with regard to one fact — Daesh is
simply a murderous and perverse organization. We must
stop these barbaric extremists by taking all necessary
measures against them. We must coordinate our
efforts in order to destroy the fabric of their deceitful
propaganda. We must rip off their religious mask to
reveal their true criminal, brutal and depraved face.
Daesh is a modern terrorist organization. It is
sophisticated in its use of media technologies and
social networks. While terrorism is becoming more
modern, the international community’s response must
also evolve. The new dimension of the threat requires
continued work on intelligence and analysis to deal
with the propaganda, recruitment and misinformation
created by these Internet terrorists. Additional efforts
are required to disseminate persuasive messages and
counter-arguments — and to hunt down, neutralize and
punish those responsible for brutal and extreme cruelty.
We insist that Security Council resolutions be fully
implemented. Daesh and other terrorist groups that are
overrunning the region should no longer be allowed to
find sanctuary there. We must dismantle their financing,
recruiting and weaponization networks. Additionally,
we must attack the marriage of convenience between
terrorism and cross-border organized crime. That
massive and multifaceted task requires coherence,
coordination and complementarity of action on the
part of the entire United Nations common system. In
particular, we must overcome the silo mentality that
still persists in the work of the various entities of the
system.
We know very well that at the heart of the fight
against terrorism lies respect for human rights, good
governance, legality, trust on the part of populations in
their Governments as being truly capable of ensuring
them a dignified future based on inclusion, integration
and equality among all of the elements of society — true
economic and social cohesion. We must coherently and
consistently promote the ideas of tolerance, rewarding
diversity and open and inclusive dialogue among
religions, cultures and civilizations. It is also important

15-08778

27/03/2015

The situation in the Middle East

to take into account good practices already existing in
this area.
We must win the hearts and minds of the local
population so as to overcome existing divisions,
prejudices and marginalization. We bear in mind that in
Iraq considerable efforts have been required to achieve
national reconciliation and a fair and inclusive policy.
In that respect, we fully support the necessary efforts
of the Iraqi Government, while recognizing that much
remains to be done. Unfortunately, the Syrian regime
persists on its path of death and destruction, while
facilitating the expansion of forms of terrorism that are
most atrocious and barbaric, including those of Daesh.
Before I conclude, please allow me to underscore
another key point, namely, justice. It is imperative that
those responsible for terrorist atrocities, war crimes
and serious violations of human rights, including those
against minorities, be properly identified and punished
by tribunals, including the International Court. The
fight against impunity is a prerequisite in ensuring that
the historical, cultural and religious diversity of the
Middle East are preserved and protected.
Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): Allow me to commend the
presidency for the exemplary leadership that it has
given to the Security Council during the course of this
meeting and to welcome His Excellency the Foreign
Minister personally to this meeting. Allow me to
also welcome the Foreign Ministers of Angola and
Spain, the Under Secretary of State from the United
Kingdom, the Director General from Chile, Patriarch
Sako, and Mrs. Dakhil from Iraq. We also welcome the
participation of the Secretary-General and commend
him for his leadership.
For as long as we can recall, this is the first time
that a religious matter has been debated in the Security
Council in this manner, outside the framework of an
Arria formula meeting. We welcome this initiative of
the delegation of France. Based on the realization that
the deteriorating situation in the Middle East poses a
grave threat to many communities in the region, we
welcome the participation of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights in this debate. We call upon his Office
and the Human Rights Commission to intensify their
efforts to offer protection to all endangered minorities
everywhere in the world. We also hope that the scope
of this debate will be extended in the future to cover the
situation of all minorities everywhere, including racial
minorities, such as Africans, people of African descent

S/PV.7419

and indigenous peoples. The protection of religious and
ethnic minorities must extend beyond the Middle East
and encompass all other parts of the world.
Turning to the Middle East, if history is to be an
accurate guide, we recall that during the centuries of
Ottoman rule in the region a policy of tolerance and
harmony was established by means of the millet system.
To a large extent, the millet system accorded ethnic
and religious minorities the freedom to practice their
religions and to live in freedom and relative security.
The harmonious system lasted until the dismemberment
of the Ottoman Empire.
If we are to do justice to this subject, we must look
at the root causes of the phenomenon in the region. The
general instability engendered in the region by foreign
occupation, civil wars fuelled by external interference,
forceful changes of Government, the delegitimization
of national leaders, the imposition of sanctions and
other punitive measures, the free flow of dangerous
and sophisticated armaments to rebels and terrorists,
the financing of anti-Government forces, prolonged
occupation and injustices meted out to people and
several other factors have contributed to the sorry state
of affairs that we are witnessing in the Middle East
today.
The proliferation of small and light weapons and
deadly ordnances of war must also be linked to the
atrocities that are being committed by terrorists like
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIS) and
other illegal armed groups in the Middle East. The
effective imposition of sanctions on proliferators of
weapons of mass destruction must be expeditiously
considered by the Council. The Arms Trade Treaty,
which has come into force, must also be universally
ratified and implemented to check the further spread of
this scourge. The observance of existing international
human rights and international humanitarian law is a
basic prerequisite for the maintenance of international
peace and security and the protection of all minorities
in our regions. Human rights, treaty bodies and relevant
conventions of the United Nations have a role to play in
that regard. We also believe that the Durban Declaration
and Programme of Action offer a platform for combating
discrimination, intolerance and xenophobia.
The Security Council’s relevant resolutions are
equally critical to addressing this problem. We therefore
welcome the Secretary-General’s announced initiative
to address the issue of violent extremism. We also

15-0877827/78

S/PV.7419

The situation in the Middle East

thank France for its leadership and commend Spain for
the proposals that it has put forward. Nigeria hopes to
contribute further to this initiative. We have put in place
a soft approach to countering violent extremism in our
country that we can share with other interested parties.
It is a multidimensional and multifaceted framework
that recognizes that counter-terrorism and countering
violent extremism must not be limited to military
action alone, but should also consist of other initiatives
that offer incentives to win young people away from the
lure of terrorism and extremist ideology.
Nigeria has always espoused tolerance, mutual
respect and understanding as the glue that binds
together multiethnic, multi-religious and multicultural
societies. Where this is lacking, problems are bound
to occur. Ethnic and religious minorities form part of
the social fabric of the Middle East. They belong to the
region and have lived there for millenia. They have the
right to continue to live in their communities without
let or hindrance, in peace, safety and dignity. The right
to maintain their religious identities and ways of life is
inalienable.
The atrocities committed by ISIS are unprecedented. It
has killed and enslaved innocent people indiscriminately,
often with minorities being deliberately targeted. It
has destroyed valued religious and cultural structures
and symbols. It has caused massive destruction of
social fabrics and displaced large numbers of people,
including ethnic and religious minorities, from their
homes, thereby triggering avoidable humanitarian
disasters.
The atrocities of ISIS underscore the urgent need
for the international community to scale up the fight
against terrorism, violent extremism and other forms
of intolerance and xenophobia. A strong and clear
message needs to be sent to all terrorist organizations
acting with utter impunity and callous disregard for life
and property. The international community, led by the
Council, must also show resolve in fighting the forces
of unscrupulous violence and destabilization, and
support all affected populations through the immediate
delivery of humanitarian and other forms of assistance.
The 1999 Constitution of Nigeria recognizes
and accommodates our diversity as a nation along
ethnic and religious lines. The Constitution provides
an inclusive framework in which every citizen is
guaranteed the enjoyment of full freedom and liberty
as a right. Nigeria stands shoulder to shoulder with

28/78

27/03/2015

your country, Mr. President, and with the rest of the
international community in the fight against terrorism,
violent extremism and other forms of negative and
destabilizing influences.
The President (spoke in French): I would ask
speakers to limit the length of their statements to
four minutes in order to enable the Council to carry
out its work expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy
statements are kindly rquested to circulate the text
in writing and to deliver a condensed version when
speaking in the Chamber.
I give the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Emigrants of Lebanon.
Mr. Bassil (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I wish to thank France, which has always worked
to protect minorities. We extend our heartfelt thanks
for the initiatives and ideas that have been proposed
today. We warmly greet Patriarch Sako and our sister
Mrs. Vian Dakhil, who is the model of the courageous
activist Arab woman.
I have come to this meeting today after cutting short
my participation in the meeting of the League of Arab
States. I was the only one among all the Ministers who
left that meeting in order to be here with my colleagues
in the Security Council to find ways to end the cultural
genocide that is occurring in our region. Once this
meeting has been adjourned, I will immediately
return to my home region, and my roots, where I will
actively strive to ensure that the region continues to
encompass civilizations united by more than language
alone. No matter how much the international and Arab
communities disappoint us, we will continue to work
and our people will continue the struggle to save to the
soul of Lebanon and the Middle East and our culture
from danger. We are the children of a nation that has
witnessed the greatest travails of history. We have been
resilient, depending not on material power, but only on
our culture.
We are are descendants of the Phoenician civilization
that invented the alphabet and exported it around
the world through our commercial ports. We are of
an eastern identity that has moulded the heavenly
religions in one land and in one human being. We are
the descendants of a Lebanese formula unique in terms
of power-sharing in governance between Christians
and Muslims. We are the descendants of a great nation
that is a martyr in its own land, a people that has sent
out a message of hope when it was able to withstand

15-08778

27/03/2015

The situation in the Middle East

and showed resilience on its own land, a people that has
carried along with it the message of humanity when it
was forcibly displaced from its land.
We come here from the land of divine messages
and from the home of the message, Lebanon. It is the
message of tolerance, coexistence and the safeguard
of others. It is a message of humanity in the face of
Daesh, the inhuman. We are the descendants of the
messengers and prophets. We come from the wombs
that brought forth Moses, Jesus and Mohammed. We
are the grandchildren of those who were born and grew
up in the Middle East, emigrated to and integrated and
lived in Lebanon and coexisted with the East and the
West. That is why we have been persecuted. Our only
guilt is that, by the coefficient of coincidence, we were
born into confessional communities. We believed that
the United Nations was created to protect people like
us, but the rise of Daesh represents a major setback for
the global security regime.
The apostolic guidance directed us not to ask for
any privileges and we do not seek any. Nevertheless, we
want to ask: What has happened to the characteristics
of our region? What has become of the Mesopotamian
country of Iraq? What has become of Syria, the country
of the two caliphates? What has become of Lebanon,
the country of two civilizations? One cannot but
wonder why our principles have been sacrificed on the
altar of alien interests, and we now find ourselves being
killed by Daesh and Israel, in the full glare of the world,
which only records events and reports. We therefore
wonder whether this twofold attack will continue to
fuel tensions in the world. We also wonder about what
remains of international law, international justice and
the Security Council, while we no longer have the rule
of law, justice or security in our region.
Speaking of minorities, one might ask: What
remains of the minorities dignity if they live at the
mercy of the majority’s ideolog? If their numbers are
decreasing, this will lead to their culture isolation. And
what if their existence has become the shortest way to
their disappearance? What remains of a minority if it
has declined from 2 million to 300,000 in Iraq and in
Turkey from 15 per cent to 1 per cent? In Bethlehem,
the minority has declined from 85 to 12 per cent, and
in Jerusalem from 52 to 2 per cent. Seven hundred
thousand Christians and Yazidis were forcibly displaced
from Mosul in one fell swoop and two bishops were
kidnapped, without provoking any response. What will
remain of the dignity of minorities if Assyrians are

S/PV.7419

forcibly displaced as a result of this silence, and if the
sculpture of Sargon of Akkadi, in Mosul, is destroyed?
Moreover, what use is it if the authority of the Lebanese
presidency has been transmuted and the candidates are
scorned to a degree that they become accessible only to
people whose political conscience is not free? Will any
be minority spared if a State is allowed to be created
in the name of Islam, while it is a radical and distorted
interpretation of Islam?
In the light of all this, is it not worthwhile to
operationalize the military option, and something
more than mere air strikes, such as support for those
armies, including our heroic Lebanese army, that are
fighting and dying on the ground? Is it not worthy to
operationalize the mechanism of international justice,
something more than mere a statement, and to truly
support Lebanon’s endeavours at the International
Criminal Court? Is that not worth something more than
a meeting of the Security Council? In this respect, we
thank France, whose level of representation reflects the
international concern for safeguarding minorities and
maintaining the dialogue among civilizations.
We are not here to defend groups or religions; we are
here to defend principles and ways of life. Christianity is
a culture of life and a set of human values that belong to
all persons. Do we believe that Christianity can survive
throughout the world in the absence of Christians on
the land of Christ? Can a river continue to flow if its
sources dry up? Can Islam continue if it is distorted in
our region, demonized in the West and is hastily being
massacred in the four corners of the world? Do we
believe that Judaism, if it adopts an insular entity that
is closed off to others, can defend against evil by itself?
Do we believe that freedom means only accepting
those who mock Mary and Jesus and publish cartoons
depicting Mohammad being ravished, while anyone
who uses anti-Semitic slurs is prosecuted?
Do we believe that the notion of integrity is
limited to a mere simulacrum of the Middle Easterners
in the West and the return of Muslims to the Middle
East? Is it not that the very origin of the violence
among civilizations lies along the two civilization
on the shores of the Mediterranean? The value of
Middle Easterners is resides in their remaining in
the Middle East, thereby preserving its plurality and
diversity. Additionally, that would prevent the various
confessions from being transformed into isolated,
homogenous sects, losing their original identities and
rejecting their humane message, and stop them from

15-0877829/78

S/PV.7419

The situation in the Middle East

27/03/2015

fighting among themselves and clashing collectively
with the West. Such Middle Easterners would not be a
demographic burden to the West. If all the embassies,
interior ministries and airports welcomed the people of
the Middle East, that would protect their them nor their
receivers. Only resistance on their own territory will
preserve our common civilization and community.

rise in extremism in the name of religion. Tensions
among different religious communities within our
societies are increasing. A brief look at Facebook shows
that especially young people seem to be the target
of radicalization. That is a dangerous development
and shows that one of the biggest challenges for my
generation is to safeguard the cohesion of our societies.

We have come here today to ask for more than the
issuing a mere statement; we ask the presidency to
prepare an international draft resolution that would truly
protect the minorities of the Middle East and lay down
geographic and moral red lines. Its implementation
mechanism must include all States, while deterring all
problematic groups. We ask for more than an end to
the encouragement of the constituent communities of
Armenians, Kurds, Turkomans, Circassians, Syriacs,
Assyrians, Yazidis, Shabaks, Sabians and Druzes to
emigrate. We even demand the return of all of those
who were forced to flee from their homes at the hands
of all the extremists since the nineteenth century.

The situation is particularly dramatic in the Middle
East and North Africa — regions that are suffering
from the terror of Daesh. The terrorists there are
enslaving children, raping women and beheading
men. In particular, minorities such as the Yazidis and
the Christians are suffering. More than 50 per cent of
the Christians in Iraq have disappeared over the past
10 years. Christians are already the most persecuted
religious group worldwide, with 100 million suffering
from persecution. In that context, we fully support
the action plan proposed by the French presidency
in that regard. We also have to call the shocking acts
committed by Daesh by their names. They are war
crimes, crimes against humanity, and even genocide.
We must not let them go unpunished. Therefore the
Security Council should quickly refer the situation in
Syria to the International Criminal Court.

Furthermore, we demand more than contributions
to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and more than a trust fund for construction
projects. We demand that an international fund be
established by the United Nations for the reconstruction
of the civilizations that have been destroyed, the return
of peoples who have been forcibly displaced, and
the restoration of cultural heritage damaged in the
laboratory of realpolitik. Leaving home is like cutting
off one’s roots. Emigration is isolation from one’s
original roots, and we are the roots, the trunk and the
link to our region. We are not ready to be separated
from ourselves.
Israel has been the legitimate father of Daesh for
decades and the one who has instigated war among us,
the builders of civilization and advocates of peace. We
need the Council’s help in safeguarding our civilization,
our culture and our identity, and in moving beyond
the focus on our oil and resources. Our friendship,
love, affection, goodness and peace must be won. Our
presence in our own land is an act of faith. We are the
children of faith, yet the Satan Daesh will not defeat us.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Integration of
Austria.
Mr. Kurz (Austria): First of all, I would like to
thank you, Sir, for convening this very important
debate. At the moment, we are witnessing a dramatic

30/78

In Austria, many people think Daesh is far away and
chiefly a problem of the Middle East. However, Daesh
has already reached our homes via YouTube, Facebook
and Twitter. It is globally recruiting foreign fighters,
and the attacks in Paris and Copenhagen have proven
that nobody is safe. Daesh poses a threat to our partners
in the Middle East, threatens wider international
security and is a direct threat to our societies.
Austria is taking action and intensifying international
cooperation especially with the Western Balkan
countries. Last week, we adopted an action plan to
confront jihadism together with all Western Balkan
States. It includes, for example, closer cooperation
among law enforcement authorities, enhanced border
security, and joint efforts to remove terrorist content
from the Internet.
If we want to succeed in decreasing the tensions
within our societies, it is not enough to fight Daesh. We
have to do more. First, we have to make clear that this
is not a conflict between the Western and the Muslim
worlds, or between different religious beliefs. Rather, it
is a conflict between all of us and terrorism.
Secondly, we have to stand up for religious freedom
and coexistence. There is no natural law that Muslims,

15-08778

27/03/2015

The situation in the Middle East

Jews and Christians cannot live together peacefully.
We therefore have to use all channels of intercultural
and interreligious dialogue, and we have to encourage
religious leaders of each country to raise their voices
when people are being persecuted for their beliefs.
Thirdly, we also have to be credible and live our
values. We have to make it clear that diversity is an
integral part of our culture. There is, for instance, an
ongoing debate on whether Islam is part of Europe or
not. The answer is clear: yes, it is, just as Judaism and
Christianity are part of the Middle East. It is possible to
be a proud European citizen and a believing Muslim at
the same time. This is also true for any other religious
group in any other part of the world.
We must not allow our societies to be divided.
We must stand up against all forms of intolerance and
radicalization, and we have to be united in our fight
against terrorism. In all the above points the United
Nations can and should play an even greater role. I can
assure you that Austria will continue to contribute to
that effort with all the means at its disposal.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs and
Consular of Canada.
Ms. Yelich (Canada): I thank French Foreign
Minister Fabius for mobilizing the Security Council
and international community today.
It is crucial that we address the widespread
persecution of religious and ethnic groups in the
Middle East and the wider region, particularly those
acts committed by the so-called Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) and other terrorist groups.
The region, known as the “cradle of civilization”,
has long been home to great cultural and religious
diversity, characterized by the coexistence of Sunni
and Shia Muslims, Christians, Yazidis and a host of
others. ISIL and other terrorist groups seek to wipe out
that diversity. We watched in shock as tens of thousands
of Yazidis were stranded on Mount Sinjar last August,
fleeing for their lives. In February, we witnessed the
beheading of 21 Coptic Orthodox Christians in Libya,
murdered by ISIL simply because of their religion.
More recently, ISIL kidnapped hundreds of Assyrian
Christians in north-eastern Syria. ISIL has destroyed
churches, monasteries and other sites of religious
significance, including the tomb of Jonah — a site
revered by Christians and Muslims alike. This week

S/PV.7419

also marks the one-year anniversary of the desecration
of Armenian Christian religious sites in Kessab, Syria,
at the hands of terrorists affiliated with Al-Qaida.
And of course, ISIL and its ideology of hatred have
directly threatened the citizens of countries around
the world, including Canada. These are attacks on the
global community, and by some estimates the near
total disappearance of Christians from the region is
unfolding.
The latest report from the High Commissioner for
Human Rights is stark. It states that ISIL may have
committed all three of the most serious international
crimes: war crimes, crimes against humanity and
genocide. As we have heard again today, ISIL’s
territorial expansion and religious persecution have
been characterized by acts of barbarism: executions,
gross acts of sexual and gender-based violence, and
mass displacement.
Canada condemns those acts in the strongest
possible terms. They are an affront to human dignity, to
our shared values and to the very principles upon which
the United Nations was founded. We stand in solidarity
with the victims, whose only supposed crime was to
oppose ISIL’s warped ideology of hatred and oppression.
Left unchecked, like cancer this extremism will only
grow and spread. We cannot fail to respond, to protect
our citizens and principles, to support the people of the
region who seek to preserve the pluralism and diversity
that we embrace, and to hold the perpetrators of those
heinous crimes accountable.
Together with our allies and partners in the
region, Canada is taking a stand to support the Iraqi
State, maintain stability in the region and halt ISIL’s
campaign of terrorism. And of course, Canada is part of
the international effort to counter ISIL and ensure that
Canadians at home are safe. For that reason, Canada’s
Minister of Foreign Affairs yesterday tabled a motion
in Parliament to extend our mission against ISIL.
Tragically, ISIL’s actions are part of a wider global
trend of increased persecution of religious minorities
and growing restrictions on freedom of religion or
belief. Through Canada’s Office of Religious Freedom,
we are speaking out on behalf of persecuted religious
communities, opposing religious hatred and advancing
pluralism. The need for this effort has never been
greater. Without tolerance and religious freedom, there
is little hope for the establishment of stable democracy
grounded in respect for human rights and the rule

15-0877831/78

S/PV.7419

The situation in the Middle East

of law. That is why the threat of continued religious
persecution at the hands of ISIL is so severe. The
killings and displacements seek not only to erase the
presence of religious and ethnic communities, but also
to undermine the basis for lasting peace and stability.
Accordingly, Canada considers the protection
of persecuted religious groups and the promotion of
religious freedom as imperative from both a peace
and security, as well as a human rights perspective.
We therefore welcome France’s initiative to convene
today’s debate. We support strengthened efforts by the
United Nations and this Council to address persecution
on religious or ethnic grounds. Those efforts include
briefings by the High Commissioner for Human Rights
on the situation in Iraq and the wider region, as well
as the Council’s mandate on conflict prevention, given
that restrictions on freedom of religion or belief fuel
conflict and extremism. We also support efforts to
hold accountable the perpetrators of egregious human
rights violations, and to sanction those who provide
financial and material support to terrorist groups such
as ISIL. Canada further supports the recommendation
of the High Commissioner for Human Rights that the
Security Council address, in the strongest terms, any
information that points to genocide, war crimes and
crimes against humanity.
Today’s meeting provides us with an opportunity to
stand up for what is right and just, to defend the values
of freedom, pluralism and mutual respect — values that
speak to a universal truth grounded in the inalienable
dignity of all people. We must counter and discredit the
extremist ideology of ISIL, which craves a culture of
impunity and violence, and seeks to rule by brutal and
barbaric intimidation. We must speak up for religious
and ethnic diversity — a diversity that ISIL seeks to
destroy — and recognize the imperative of religious
freedom or belief in our efforts to achieve lasting peace
and stability in the Middle East.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Armenia.
Mr. Hovakimian (Armenia): First of all, I would
like to thank the French presidency of the Security
Council and Mr. Fabius personally for this timely
initiative to discuss the deterioration of the situation of
the ethnic and religious groups in certain parts of the
Middle East.

32/78

27/03/2015

We are facing a new and evolving threat in the
Middle East in the form of mass and grave human
rights violations targeting ethnic and religious groups
and their members. It is disappointing that on the eve
of the seventieth anniversary of the United Nations,
after such tremendous efforts to strengthen peace and
security, tolerance, prosperity, fundamental rights and
freedoms, we must deal with this newly emerging wave
of violence, vandalism and hatred in a part of the world
that is the cradle of world civilization.
It was 100 years ago that three countries, which
are currently permanent members of the Security
Council, coined the term “crime against humanity
and civilization” in relation to the mass extermination
of a religious and ethnic group in the Middle East.
Unfortunately, the use of that term is relevant to current
realities as well. The concerted attempts of terrorist
groups, including foreign terrorist fighters, to deprive
religious and ethnic groups of their life, property,
religion, culture and memory can indeed be qualified
as a crime against humanity and civilization.
On 21 March 2014, Al-Qaida-affiliated terrorist
groups attacked the predominately Armenian and
millennia-old town of Kassab, situated on the border
between Syria and Turkey, resulting in the forced
expulsion of the local population from their homes.
The extremist groups have desecrated and vandalized
Kassab’s Armenian religious and cultural heritage. A
number of other violent acts took place against Christians
and other minorities, including the beheading of
21 Egyptian Copts and brutal attacks against Assyrians
in Syria and the killing and oppression of the Yazidi
minority by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) terrorist group in the Mont Sinjar region in Iraq.
We all saw the chilling video footage of ISIL militants
smashing 2,700-year-old statues in the Mosul museum,
followed by their barbaric destruction of the Nineveh
museum and other artefacts of ancient art and culture
in Iraq and Syria.
The full implementation of resolutions 2170 (2014),
2178 (2014) and 2199 (2015) is essential in the prevention
of massive and grave human rights violations against
religious and ethnic groups. Armenia, as a nation that
survived the first genocide of the twentieth century,
has a moral responsibility towards the protection of
collective and individual rights of religious and ethnic
groups and their members, particularly in situations
where their survival is at stake.

15-08778

27/03/2015

The situation in the Middle East

Genocide prevention is a high priority for Armenia.
Over recent years, we have tried to mainstream issues
of genocide prevention in efforts for international
cooperation on security and human rights. We are
glad that, two hours ago, the Human Rights Council
adopted by consensus an important resolution on
genocide prevention, which was sponsored by Armenia
and 64 other States. The issues of education on
and remembrance of genocide are important in the
prevention of mass atrocities against religious and
ethnic groups. It is not a coincidence that those who
are engaged in mass atrocities against religious and
ethnic groups associate themselves with the denial and
justification of previous genocides.
On 24 April and throughout the year, the centennial
of the Armenian genocide in the Ottoman Empire will
be commemorated around the world. A Syrian town,
Dayr Al-Zour, and its surrounding desert was the final
destination of the death march of hundreds of thousands
of the victims of the Armenian genocide. Every year,
the Saint Martyrs Armenian church in Dayr Al-Zour,
which was a sanctuary for the remains of many victims,
used to be one of the main places of commemoration.
However, in this centennial year, it will not be possible
to pay tribute to the victims in Dayr Al-Zour, since in
September 2014 terrorist groups destroyed the church
and vandalized the holy site. The destruction of the
Saint Martyrs church is a symbolic link between old
and new crimes. Faced with the continuity of such evil
deeds across time and space, we must demonstrate our
unreserved human solidarity with the victims of those
crimes. In the name of humanity and civilization, we
should fight and defeat fear, dehumanization and denial.
We are here today first to strongly condemn the
violations we have witnessed in recent times in the
Middle East and to commit ourselves fully in the fight
against ISIL, the Nusra Front and other derivatives and
associates of Al-Qaida. The international community
should work hard to address the gaps in the protection
of religious and ethnic groups and empower their
members to enjoy human rights and fundamental
freedoms and continue their valuable contribution to
humanity and civilization.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the European Union Special Representative for
Human Rights.
Mr. Lambrinidis (spoke in French): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU).

S/PV.7419

In February 2015, the Security Council firmly
condemned the barbaric terrorist acts perpetrated
by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), or
Daesh, and reiterated its determination to defeat that
terrorist group.
(spoke in English)
That is indeed my first point — condemnation.
We must unequivocally condemn, as we have done
in this Chamber, such acts of violence. Everyone
must do so: politicians, no matter what their political
beliefs; people, no matter what their ethnicity; and
religious leaders, no matter what their religion. That
condemnation pulls the rug from under the feet of those
who believe that they can be justified in using violence
We have underlined the importance of preserving the
multi-ethnic, multi-religious and multi-confessional
character of the Syrian and Iraqi societies.
The European Union supports international efforts
and initiatives to address those issues and welcomes in
this regard today’s ministerial-level meeting. I would
also extend our warm congratulations to France. We
are united in support for the work of the Council, in
particular its resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014),
and call on all countries to swiftly implement those
resolutions with full respect for human rights and the
rule of law.
That brings me to my second point. Respect
for human rights, the promotion of inclusive and
democratic societies, and support to vibrant civil
societies are the only way to guarantee full security and
stability for all people in the region. That obligation is
even greater when it comes to protecting the rights of
girls and women. Terrorists hate those things because
they deprive them of the monopoly of power. Human
rights give power to the powerless, and they do not want
that. If you want to fight terrorism, just look at what
they hate and support it. If you want to fight terrorism,
support human rights. If you want to fight terrorism,
educate girls. If you want to fight terrorism, empower
women.
My third point is that we have to counter extremist
discourse. Tackling terrorism means countering those
places where extremism resonates. This is a security
challenge, without a doubt, but we should not forget
its political, social and cultural dimensions. We must
redouble our efforts in reaching out to those who might
be vulnerable to the discourse of violent extremism. If
we want to stop the cycle of violence and human rights

15-0877833/78

S/PV.7419

The situation in the Middle East

abuse, we must also address their root causes and work
further for the realization of all human rights.
My fourth point is that, in the Middle East, grave
violations committed against the civilian population
demand accountability, justice and an end to impunity.
The European Union welcomed the ninth report
of the Independent International Commission of
Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic (A/HRC/28/69)
and condemns the crimes against humanity and
human rights violations and abuses detailed therein,
perpetrated in particular by the Al-Assad regime and
terrorist groups. We support the renewal of the mandate
of the Commission of Inquiry. We also support the
documentation of crimes in Syria to ensure that all
perpetrators are held accountable.
The European Union reiterates its call on the
Security Council to refer the situation in Syria to the
International Criminal Court. We would also like to
take the opportunity to pay a special tribute to Syrian
human rights defenders, especially women human
rights defenders, for their tremendous commitment and
tireless efforts in documenting human rights violations.
The actions of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
and Daesh are horrific and cannot go unpunished, nor
will they.
My fifth point relates to the fundamental human
rights of the freedom of religion and belief. The
kidnapping of more than 200 Christian Assyrians in the
Hassakeh region of Syria at the end of February was
just the most recent in Daesh’s long list of brutal actions
that may amount to war crimes and crimes against
humanity, according to the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic.
All of this is in complete contravention of international
human rights law and goes directly against the freedom
of religion and belief, which includes the right of
persons of all faiths to live and practise their religion
freely or not to believe, for that matter, without fear
of intolerance or attacks. In that context, the European
Union would like to express its deep appreciation for
the work done by Special Rapporteur on freedom of
religion or belief, Mr. Heiner Bielefeldt, including his
latest annual report (A/HRC/28/66), and by Mr. Zeid
Ra’ad Al Hussein, High Commissioner for Human
Rights, and his Office.
In terms of numbers, the first victims of Daesh
were Sunni Muslims. We must not forget that. At the
same time, it is clear that Daesh poses a specific and

34/78

27/03/2015

more deliberate threat to minorities in the region:
Christians, but also Yazidis, Shabak and other groups.
Daesh tries to brand theirs as a clash of civilizations,
and of course nothing could be further from the truth.
It is not some clash of civilizations that has resulted in
the terrorist atrocities; it is those terrorist atrocities that
are attempting to create a clash of civilizations among
us. We cannot allow that to happen. We will not. If we
fall into that trap, we will be falling into the hands of
the terrorists. That, of course, will not happen.
My sixth point is that we also denounce the
attacks on and destruction of world heritage sites
and the illicit trafficking in cultural properties. That
is why, on numerous occasions, we have expressed
our determination to contain and defeat Daesh and to
contribute as fully as possible, both at the individual
level of Member States and the collective level of the
European Union, to the efforts of the global coalition.
Finally, my last and seventh point is that military
action is essential, but not sufficient on its own. It is
necessary to address the underlying violence in Syria
and Iraq, which has given terrorist groups a foothold.
This is where the European Union strategy to fight
the scourge comes in. At the most recent meeting of
the Foreign Affairs Council, European Union Foreign
Ministers adopted a strategy outlining how the EU is
planning to counter the threat posed by ISIL and help
restore peace and security in Syria and Iraq. The EU
aims at a comprehensive effort to address the underlying
dynamics of the conflicts, through diplomacy and
support for political reforms, economic development
and reconciliation among various ethnic groups.
For the years 2015 and 2016, the European
Commission has allocated €1 billion to the
implementation of the strategy. We will also follow
up on the outcome of the Washington, D.C., Summit
on Countering Violent Extremism, in particular by
fostering cooperation. That includes education, by
engaging more with local communities, especially in
the Horn of Africa. We held our annual plenary session
of the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum Horn of Africa
Working Group, in Kampala on 17 to 20 March.
(spoke in French)
I would like to add a final word on lasting peace and
stability. We are engaged in in-depth discussions with
respect to the actions to be pursued in the post-2015
agenda. An agenda conveying genuine transformation
must address the importance of peace in society and the

15-08778

27/03/2015

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.7419

elimination of violence. There can be no peace without
development and respect for human rights.

its untold atrocities should not leave us indifferent or
passive.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cyprus.

As the Syrian conflict enters its fifth year, it is
evident that long-term oppression, intolerance and
lack of inclusiveness have cultivated the ground for
the flourishing of terrorism. The incomprehensible
violence caused by ISIL/Daesh, and other terrorist
groups, as well as the different militias, has created
a huge humanitarian crisis. It is vital that the
international community sends a clear and strong
messages condemning terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, including the organizers, financiers
and sponsors of acts of terrorism.

Mr. Christodoulides (Cyprus): At the outset, I wish
to congratulate France for its initiative in organizing
this timely open debate, focusing on the open wound of
attacks and abuses on ethnic or religious grounds in the
Middle East.
Cyprus aligns itself with the statement just
delivered on behalf of the European Union and would
like to add comments from its national standpoint.
Around a century ago, the poet Constantine Cavafy,
who lived in Alexandria, Egypt, in his poem Going
Back Home from Greece, wrote about “our seas,/ the
waters of Cyprus, Syria and Egypt,/ the beloved waters
of our home countries”, and went on to say, “We must
not be ashamed of the Syrian and Egyptian blood in our
veins;/ we should really honour it, take pride in it”. I
have cited this poem, as just one of the many examples
of the cultural richness of the Middle East, a birthplace
of great civilizations and religions and an area of
spiritual fermentation and fertilization. This cultural
mosaic has been the product of thousands of years of
coexistence, even in times of conflict, in an area that
had always been the bone of contention between and
regional and international powers.
Today, we are yet again experiencing tremendous
turmoil in the Middle East. This debate is an opportunity
to reflect upon the root causes of the unrest. In order to
do so, we must avoid the trap of confining ourselves
to the developments in a specific region. Ethnic and
religious clashes are nowadays a source or a pretext
for nearly every conflict around the world. It is also
being invoked as the ideological basis of terrorism,
intolerance, discrimination, racism and all forms of
hatred. If this scourge is not tackled decisively, if it
remains unaddressed, it will soon have such spillover
effects that will render the whole situation as entirely
out of control.
The times demand courageous measures by all
States individually as well as by the international
community collectively. All that we are witnessing
in the wider region of the Middle East, particularly
following the emergence of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham (ISIS), or Daesh, and the perpetration of

In Iraq, although the situation seems to be getting
under control, there a lot remainsto be done. ISIL/
Daesh can be defeated only if there is political unity
and a common fight against terrorism. Cyprus believes
that addressing the security and political crisis in
the country is key not only to its stability but also
to regional safety and security. The recent horrific
and brutal acts of terrorism in Libya have showcased
once again that terrorism knows no borders. We have
witnessed how destructive ISIL has been in Iraq and
Syria, and unfortunately, it has found fertile ground
in the growing post-revolution political instability
in Libya. The gravity of the situation in Libya must
prompt action in support of the political process in that
country. To restore stability, a political solution to the
Libyan crisis is a sine qua non.
The problem of religious persecution is most
pronounced in parts of the Middle East in the current
turbulent times, especially in places where conflict
is raging and extremist terrorist groups are active. A
resolute stance for the principle of religious freedom
everywhere is extremely important. Religious belief
is fundamental to many human identities. Freedom
of faith must be defended, irrespective of whether
the attacks come from totalitarian atheist regimes or
theocracies. For the faithful, what they believe about
God is inseparable from what they understand about
human beings. But God’s rights must never be allowed
to trample on human rights.
We have aligned ourselves with the international
coalition against terrorism, and we have been active
in promoting actions aimed at protecting the ancient
communities and the religious and ethnic minorities of
the Middle East. Our long tradition as a constructive

15-0877835/78

S/PV.7419

The situation in the Middle East

and stabilizing factor in the region is acknowledged by
all.
It is our duty towards humanity and our shared
values to steadfastly adopt a more proactive political
involvement, so as to save future generations from the
plague of blind hatred. For us, it is also a historical
responsibility to our ancestors and the beloved waters
of our homelands.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Observer of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation.
Mr. Gokcen (Organization of Islamic Cooperation):
I shall be very brief. A longer version of my statement
will be circulated.
Let me start by conveying the deep gratitude of
the Secretary-General of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC), Mr. Iyad Madani, to His Excellency
Minister Fabius for the initiative he has taken and
for the thoughtful invitation. Unfortunately, due to
his attendance at the Arab Summit today, SecretaryGeneral Madani is not able to personally attend this
important open debate.
The alarming developments in Syria and Iraq should
not be seen as a civilizational or religious confrontation.
Tragedies and violence have negatively affected every
single citizen in those countries and caused a massive
loss of human lives and great suffering. However, the
start of the terror campaign by Daesh, which targets
in particular Christian and Yazidi Iraqi citizens and
includes forced deportations under the threat of
execution, constitutes a serious threat aimed at tearing
apart the social fabric of the Iraqi people.
The OIC Secretary-General has on every occasion
publicly condemned the inhuman acts committed by
Daesh and the forced displacements, which he qualified
as a crime that cannot be tolerated. He has also been
very straightforward in stating that Daesh’s practices
have nothing to do with Islam and its principles, which
call for justice, kindness, fairness, freedom of faith and
coexistence.
Christians and other religious minorities in the
Middle East are a constituent component of their
nations as citizens who have or should have equal
rights to security, welfare and a decent life, like their
other compatriots. They have been an integral part of
the social fabric, culture, struggles and achievements,
as well as past and future narratives, of their nations.

36/78

27/03/2015

Additionally, in line with the deep-rooted tradition of
coexistence in the region, Christian clergy in Iraq and
Syria lived with honour and dignity and enthusiastically
shared the aspirations of their compatriots to peace
and prosperity. Religious and ethnic minorities in the
Middle East are valuable assets for their countries. It
would be a great loss for those countries as well as
for humankind as a whole if these precious examples
of religious pluralism, harmonious coexistence and
multiculturalism of the region were lost.
It is vital that religious leaders, as the moral
leaders of their communities, play a responsible role in
ensuring communal peace and harmony. In that regard,
let me underline two important initiatives supported by
the OIC whereby religious leaders from the region have
united in solidarity.
First, the Middle East and North Africa (MENA)
Regional Interreligious Council — the Religions for
Peace-MENA Council — remains the only regional
multi-religious mechanism that is led by the religious
leaders of the region’s religious communities to advance
citizenship, religious freedom and the protection of
minorities.
As a result of a process involving a series of
consultations, it developed MENA-region-specific
but separate Islamic, Christian and Jewish religious
warrants in support of citizenship, and OIC-sponsored
Human Rights Council resolution 16/18, on the
protection of vulnerable minorities.
Secondly, in an unprecedented demonstration
of multi-religious solidarity, religious communities
from Iraq, Syria and the larger Middle East region
were convened by the King Abdullah bin Abdulaziz
International Centre for Interreligious and Intercultural
Dialogue at a conference held in Vienna, “United against
Violence in the Name of Religion”, on 19 November
2014.
At the end of the conference, religious leaders
from Sunni, Shiite, Christian, Mandean and Yazidi
communities across the Middle East jointly issued the
Vienna declaration, entitled “United against Violence
in the Name of Religion”, to denounce, with one voice,
all violence committed in the name of religion. They
called on the international community to protect
religious and cultural diversity in Iraq and Syria.
This was a praiseworthy occasion, when religious
leaders representing different religions from a crisis
region came together as one to denounce oppression,

15-08778

27/03/2015

The situation in the Middle East

marginalization, persecution and killings in the name
of religion.
In conclusion, I would like to say that recent
developments in the Middle East, Africa and South-East
Asia in particular have shown us that despite all of the
positive efforts towards deepening and transforming
interfaith dialogue into practical cooperation, we should
be mindful that the exploitation for political aims of
religious sentiments and perceptions of injustice and
past grievances might easily alter conflicts and cause
them to acquire religious connotations. We must
encourage interfaith initiatives to develop capacity and
mechanisms in order to play a preventive role in these
types of slippery situations.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guatemala.
Ms. Bolaños Pérez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
I should like to begin by expressing our appreciation for
the participation of France’s Minister for Foreign Affairs
in this open debate, which tackles an issue that affects
the entire international community: the persecution of
minorities and the need to preserve cultural diversity,
in this case focusing on the Middle East. We are also
grateful to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and to the
other keynote speakers for their important statements
earlier in this debate.
Guatemala is of the firm conviction that diplomacy
and dialogue are the best means to achieve a long-term
solution to each of the conflicts affecting the Middle
East region. We are convinced that a political solution
to the differences that for years have divided this region
is the only path to lasting stability and security.
However, we must be aware that the conflicts in
the region are now more complex, most of the time
involving non-State actors, which leads to varied and
complex situations. Over time, the clashes, battles and
killings taking place in the streets of various cities
in the Middle East have ushered in a reign of terror
among the civilian population. Each day we see even
more disregard for the basic elements of the human
condition. We are deeply moved by each unnecessary
death, especially those of women and children, as well
as the ethnic and religious violence being experienced
in the region. My country firmly condemns all acts of
violence.
For almost four years now, we have seen an everincreasing number of reports of violence perpetrated

S/PV.7419

by non-State actors and terrorist groups, especially the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and other
associated groups against civilian populations in the
Middle East. These groups are committing war crimes,
crimes against humanity and possibly genocide against
ethnic and religious minorities in the region. The
Christian, Yazidi, Kurd, Turkmen, Shabaki and even
Sunni and Shiite communities suffer brutal persecution
at the hands of these groups, which threaten their
future and right to remain in the region. This is in
addition to the already precarious conditions that these
communities live in, after years of living in areas where
political conflicts are being waged, as we see in Syria,
Iraq, Yemen and Libya.
Against this background, the international
community is now faced with the atrocity and
brutality of the crimes committed by ISIL and
other associated groups. The killing of civilians,
abductions, rapes, torture, trafficking in women and
children and the forced recruitment of children are
but a few of the serious violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law that have been
committed intentionally and systematically against
ethnic and religious minorities. We reaffirm these
people’s inalienable right to continue to live in their
own country in peace, freedom, equality and dignity.
We also condemn such groups’ deliberate destruction
of irreplaceable religious and cultural objects. We call
for an end to the destruction of Iraq and Syria’s cultural
heritage, including the selective destruction of religious
sites and objects, as well as the looting and illicit
trafficking in such assets, which generates income for
the groups, particularly since the proceeds obtained
are then used for recruitment and to strengthen their
operational capacity.
Combating impunity must continue to be a
fundamental aspect of our efforts not just to respond to
serious violations based on ethnic and religious motives
but also to prevent them. The International Criminal
Court can help in our efforts to counter impunity. In that
regard, my delegation believes that the Security Council
must be willing to assign responsibility in a consistent
manner and to afford justice to all the innocent people
affected by the actions of groups fuelled by hatred and
violence.
At the same time, the international community must
do everything it can to eliminate the threat posed by
such groups. We must be steadfast in our commitment
to supporting the advancement of existing political

15-0877837/78

S/PV.7419

The situation in the Middle East

processes, while emphasizing the importance of
suppressing ethnic and religious hatred that demonizes
and excludes the other and instead supporting tolerance
and mutual respect among different racial and religious
groups. That is why we reacted positively to the
Secretary-General’s announcement this morning that
he would be establishing an advisory panel on these
issues.
In conclusion, we are aware of the enormous
challenges involved in stopping the threat that
radicalization and violence pose to ethnic and religious
groups. However, it is our political and historical
responsibility, as Member States of the international
community, to support every possible means of
achieving that goal. We also have an obligation to
promote truth, enlightenment and responsibility to all
those responsible for such violations and above all to do
our utmost to prevent further atrocities.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Hungary.
Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): I would like to thank
France and you, Mr. President, for convening this timely
open debate. I also wish to today’s participants in the
meeting for their informative, expressive, powerful and
emotional briefings.
While fully supporting the statement delivered on
behalf of the European Union, I would also like to add
a few observations in my national capacity.
The intentional and systematic targeting of members
of ethnic and religious communities threatens not only
peace and security but the very existence of minorities
in the Middle East. Increased religious violence has
already led to a mass exodus of Christians, Yazidis
and members of other ethnic and religious minorities
from their homelands. The preservation of the region’s
multi-religious, multi-ethnic and multi-confessional
character is of the utmost importance to the maintenance
of peace and security. Hungary strongly supports all
initiatives aimed at defeating Daesh and other terrorist
groups. We believe that a comprehensive plan of action
on the part of the international community, ideally
under the auspices of the United Nations, is essential to
preventing attacks on and abuses of ethnic and religious
groups.
Hungary has offered humanitarian aid to the
Christian communities and Kurdistan authorities in
Iraq, contributed financial and material support to ease

38/78

27/03/2015

the refugee crisis in and around Syria, and provided
immediate financial support to the families of the
Egyptian Coptic Christians beheaded in Libya. We
also support military efforts against Daesh and other
terrorist groups, and are currently examining other
ways to contribute to accomplishing security tasks in
the region. We strongly support the enforcement of
accountability for serious crimes and are convinced
that there should be no impunity for the horrendous acts
committed by Daesh and other terrorist groups in the
Middle East in Syria, Iraq, Libya and elsewhere.
Hungary welcomes and encourages the efforts of
the Government of Iraq to investigate all allegations
of violations of international humanitarian law and
human rights, and strongly recommends making the
investigation findings public and ensuring that they
lead to effective remedies for the victims. We believe
that such investigations should be conducted into all
perpetrators, not only Daesh. Bearing in mind that
primary responsibility lies with the Iraqi State, Hungary
believes that Iraq’s acceptance of the jurisdiction of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) under paragraph
3 of article 12 of the Rome Statute could also be an
option in the fight against impunity. While we note
that Hungary was one of the first countries to raise the
possibility of that option, as long ago as September, we
welcome the fact that in its recently published report
(A/HRC/28/18) the investigative mission to Iraq of the
Office of the United Nations High Commission for
Human Rights arrived at the same conclusion. With
regard to the crimes committed in Libya, the Hungarian
Government has requested that the Prosecutor of the
ICC expand her investigations — originally initiated as
a result of the Security Council’s referral in 2011 — into
the recent execution of 21 Egyptian Coptic Christians.
Finally, as my country’s former Permanent
Representative to UNESCO and former President of
its General Conference, I feel compelled to denounce
in the strongest terms the deliberate destruction of
cultural and religious sites and artifacts by Daesh and
associated groups in Iraq. Such attacks on the cultural
heritage of humankind also constitute war crimes.
They should be investigated, provided that a legal
basis for the investigations is established either by a
Security Council referral or by Iraq’s acceptance of the
jurisdiction of the Court. That is very important to us.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Iraq.

15-08778

27/03/2015

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank France for its efforts in
organizing today’s meeting and shedding light on the
humanitarian tragedy that has resulted from the actions
of Daesh in Iraq and the region. I would also like to
express the thanks and greetings of my Minister for
Foreign Affairs to His Excellency Mr. Laurent Fabius,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of France.
My delegation would also like to express its
condolences to the clergy and the Assyrian Church
of the East on the death of Patriarch Mar Dinkha IV.
We welcome the presence of Patriarch Sako and of
Mrs. Dakhil, a member of the Iraqi Parliament, at this
important meeting, and we thank Mrs. Dakhil for her
accurate and impressive remarks.
Iraq is proud of its millennia-old traditions built
on a multiplicity of cultures, religions and ethnicities,
represented by, for instance, the abundance of artifacts
on its land as well as the various elements that make
up its people, who have evolved in ethnic, cultural and
religious diversity. Our new Constitution states that all
Iraqis are equal before the law, with no discrimination
on the basis of race, nationality or gender, and that all
have the right to life, security and freedom.
The events that Iraq has experienced in recent years
and whose repercussions have increased following the
growth of the terrorist group known as Daesh, pose a
double threat to Iraqis as a whole and religious minorities
in particular. This danger threatens the traditions of
coexistence that have reigned in Iraq throughout its
history. The various segments of the Iraqi population,
distinguished by their religious identities — Christians,
Yazidis, Shabak, Baha’i, Feylis, Sunni and Shia — or by
their ethnic identities — Arab, Kurd and Turkmen — are
all part of the indigenous population and form the
basis of the Iraqi civilization. They are also part of
the inclusive elected Government, which includes all
elements of Iraqi society. Since my Government was
established and Prime Minister Haider Al Abadi took
office, they have fostered national unity and the future
and security of the country by providing Iraqi citizens
with a decent and dignified life characterized by the
rule of law.
In Iraq today, human existence is seriously
threatened. We must fight that threat. Daesh has
taken control by force, despite the existing regional
and international systems. It has managed to extend
its power over large areas of Iraq and Syria. It has

S/PV.7419

become a serious threat to those States and their
territorial integrity. Daesh initially targeted religious
minorities — Christians, Yazidis, Kurds, Feylis and
Shias. Since then, its crimes have engulfed all segments
of the Iraqi population without exception.
The events of 2014 are a case in point. It was not
enough for Daesh to kill Iraqis and seize their property,
but it also carried out systemic aggression against
private places of worship, mosques and churches and
destroyed Iraqi monuments. The degrading practices
espoused by that bloody organization have multiplied
and include forced displacement. Members of Daesh
consider others to be unbelievers and force them to
embrace their dogma. They rape women and abduct
children who refuse to comply with their laws.
Thousands of Yazidi and Christian girls have been
abducted and sold as prisoners in the areas under Daesh
control. Thousands of Shia, Sunni, Shabak and Sabians
have been victims of the brutal actions perpetrated
by Daesh, such as killings and terror. The violence,
persecution, displacement and killing to which the
Iraqi population is subject could unravel the Iraqi
social fabric and threaten the stability and harmony
among Iraqis. No group will be safe unless the terrorist
organizations that fuel sectarian tensions, tear society
apart and destroy coexistence are eliminated.
The brutal actions perpetrated by Daesh can only
be described as war crimes, crimes against humanity
and even genocide. This was mentioned in the Human
Rights Council report (A/HRC/28/18) that was issued
only days ago. At the beginning of the week, the Iraqi
Cabinet declared the crimes perpetrated by Daesh
against segments of the Iraqi population to be genocide.
As a result of the heinous crimes perpetrated by
Daesh, hundreds of thousands of Iraqi citizens have
been displaced and forced them to flee their country
as refugees. Therefore, Iraq is losing the diversity
of its culture and civilization that it has enjoyed for
thousands of years. Consequently, we must put an end
to the phenomenon of forced migration. The solution
does not lie in removing Yazidis, Christians and others
from Iraq. That simply signifies a victory for Takfiri
thinking, which is aimed at tearing Iraq apart and
eliminating its cultural, ethnic and religious diversity.
On the contrary, we must put an end to this phenomenon
by extirpating the terrorist Daesh entity.
The situation of internally displaced persons in
Iraq remains tragic and critical. It requires greater

15-0877839/78

S/PV.7419

The situation in the Middle East

relief efforts and solidarity to alleviate their suffering
by liberating the areas under the terrorists’ control
and ensuring the triumph of the message of love and
tolerance and the preservation of the dignity of Iraqis,
regardless of their religious or national identities, which
are being targeted by extremist terrorist thinking.
In conclusion, Iraq endeavours to ensure the
respect for and protection of basic rights and freedom
of religion, as enshrined in the Iraqi Constitution. We
also seek to eliminate the radical thinking that hinders
peaceful coexistence. Iraq looks forward to the day
when all Iraqis are able to freely practice their religions
without fear, be it in the Yazidi temples or by praying
in mosques, hussainias or churches.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Guilherme de Aguiar Patriota (Brazil)
(spoke in French): We thank the delegation of France
for organizing this open debate.
(spoke in English)
I thank the Secretary-General and the High
Commissioner for Human Rights for their important
presentations.
The widespread and systematic persecution of
individuals on ethnic and religious grounds is one
of the ugliest aspects of the recent surge of violent
extremism in the Middle East and elsewhere. Innocent
civilians are always the first victims of intolerance. The
reports of barbaric acts, including targeted killings,
forced conversions, kidnapping, slavery, sexual abuses
and torture committed by the so-called Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and its associated groups are
deeply shocking. The international community cannot
remain indifferent in the face of such acts of savagery.
Brazil strongly condemns the persecution of
individuals on the basis of their ethnicity or belief. We
reject any act of intolerance or incitement to religious
or ethnic hatred. We also repudiate the unjustifiable
destruction of religious and cultural heritage. As a
pluricultural, multi-ethnic nation that assumes diversity
as a defining trait of its identity, Brazil is committed
to full equality of the rights of people, regardless of
religion or faith. Our identity is the product of the
contributions of various cultures and civilizations
that were brought to bear on our history, starting
with indigenous populations, Europeans, the decisive
African heritage and significant waves of immigration.

40/78

27/03/2015

We have learned the lessons of history and above all the
value of diversity and the extent to which it represents
an asset.
The indication that crimes against humanity, war
crimes and genocide may have been committed by the
ISIL in Iraq, as pointed out by the High Commissioner for
Human Rights in his report, is particularly outrageous.
The Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on the Syrian Arab Republic, led by Mr. Paulo Sérgio
Pinheiro, has also documented the savagery perpetrated
by ISIL against the Syrian people. Because of their
religion or ethnicity, hundreds of thousands of people
had to flee their homes and their countries to escape
from the cruelty imposed by ISIL and are in desperate
need of humanitarian assistance.
This violence and destruction must end. All efforts
should be undertaken to stop and ensure accountability
for the human rights violations and violations of
international law and humanitarian law committed
by extremists. Fighting impunity is crucial to prevent
the recurrence of abuses and violations. Brazil
co-sponsored the interregional declaration recently
delivered in the Human Rights Council on supporting
the human rights of Christians and other communities
in the Middle East. Brazil’s support reflects its concern
with the severe violations of human rights of Christians
and other minorities, religious groups and several
individuals who have been victims of intolerance,
discrimination and violence in the region.
Violent extremism is a multidimensional threat.
It will only be efficiently countered if we take into
consideration its underlying causes, in particular those
associated with protracted social, political, economic
and cultural strife. Where political instability, poverty
and exclusion reign, there will be fertile ground for the
spread and growth of violent extremism.
Overcoming this threat necessarily involves
diplomatic efforts founded on justice to bring peace
to conflicts that directly or indirectly fuel terrorist
agendas. The Middle East and the whole world can no
longer bear the burden of unresolved conflicts, such as
the one between Israel and Palestine. It is time for a
political solution, not weapons, to prevail in Syria. In
Libya and Yemen, the international community should
be united in condemning violence and working with
the parties to engage in dialogue and reach a peaceful
solution to their differences.

15-08778

27/03/2015

The situation in the Middle East

As in many items on our agenda, we are convinced
that we will succeed only if we join efforts on the
basis of shared values and enhanced multilateral
cooperation. Fighting extremism and protecting ethnic
and religious groups must be done in full compliance
with international human rights law, international
humanitarian law and international refugee law.
Bending the rules and invoking exceptional rights
weaken the multilateral system and have brought much
misery to civilians. One cannot escape the fact that the
current situation was partially fuelled by the social,
political and institutional disarray resulting from a
history of foreign interventions and misconceived
strategies for the Middle East.
The importance of dialogue among different
religions and cultures cannot be overstated. Initiatives
such as the Alliance of Civilizations, which promotes
tolerance and mutual respect, can contribute to
dispelling stereotypes that tend to associate terrorism
with specific cultures, religions or ethnic groups. We
must all be wary of dangerous rhetoric and narratives
that fuel xenophobia and prejudice. Brazil joins those
Governments around the world that have risen against
such distortions.
The President (spoke in French): I would remind
all delegations that there are still 38 names on the list
of speakers and that we have another meeting after
this one. I therefore invite speakers to respect the four
minute time limit.
I now give the floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Prosor (Israel): Next week, Jewish people
around the world will celebrate Passover, which
commemorates the exodus story. In recent years, another
exodus story has unfolded, but this one is driven by a
plague of persecution aimed at the Christians, Kurds,
Yazidis, Baha’is and, of course, the Jews.
For more than 2,500 years, 1 million Jews lived
peacefully in Arab lands. In 1947, the situation changed
dramatically. Following the United Nations vote to
establish a Jewish State (General Assembly resolution
181 (II)), Arab Governments turned on their Jewish
citizens. From Baghdad to Sana’a to Tripoli, thousands
of Jews were murdered in violent riots and hundreds
of thousands more were forced to run for their lives.
Radical Islamists have a saying: “First the Saturday
people, then the Sunday people”. Having succeeded
in driving the vast majority of Jews out of Arab lands,
extremists have turned on the Christians. At the turn of

S/PV.7419

the twentieth century, Christians comprised 26 per cent
of the Middle East’s population. Today, that figure is
less than 10 per cent.
The Nineveh plains in Iraq had been home to
Christians since the first century. The Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIS) tore through the region,
desecrating churches and destroying artefacts.
Christians were given the grim choice of converting
to Islam or facing death by beheading, stoning or
crucifixion. Fearing for their lives, tens of thousands of
Christians have fled to northern Iraq and taken refuge
in Kurdistan. Kurdish forces are fighting valiantly
to defend their homes and push back the extremist
threat. In December, Kurdish fighters broke the ISIS
siege of Mount Sinjar, freeing thousands of Yazidis
and Christians. The Kurds are the leading force in
the fight against ISIS. They have shown tremendous
courage and fortitude. The Kurds need the support of
the international community and they deserve political
independence.
The persecution of minorities is not taking place
just at the hands of extremist groups. Last year, Islamist
police in Saudi Arabia stormed a Christian prayer
meeting and arrested its entire congregation, including
women and children. Arresting someone for praying
is like arresting someone for having lunch — one is
feeding his hunger and the other is feeding his faith.
In 2013, three Iranian Christians caught selling Bibles
were found guilty of “crimes against State security” and
sentenced to 10 years in prison. Also in 2013, Ayatollah
Khamenei issued a fatwa in which he branded the
Baha’is as deviants. At his direction, Iranian Baha’is
are regularly arrested, tortured and denied their most
basic rights, including the right to study at university.
There is only one place in the Middle East where
minorities have the freedom to practice their faith,
change faiths or practice no faith at all — and that is
Israel. Israel is home to the Baha’i World Centre. It is
the only place in the Middle East where Druze have
reached the highest echelons of society. It is the only
place where the Christian population is growing.
Since Israel’s establishment in 1948, its Christian
communities have expanded more than 1,000 per cent.
Israeli Christians have served in our Parliament and on
our Supreme Court.
The same cannot be said for Christians living
under the Palestinian leadership. Since Hamas took
over Gaza in 2007, half the Christian community

15-0877841/78

S/PV.7419

The situation in the Middle East

has fled Gaza. After the Palestinian Authority took
control of Bethlehem in 1995, Palestinian gunmen
seized Christian homes and looted the Church of the
Nativity. Owing to this persecution, the city’s Christian
population has fallen by nearly 70 per cent.
It does not matter where you come from, what faith
you belong to, or what politics you preach. No decent
human being can ignore the calamity facing minorities
in the Middle East. Millions of people around the world
put their faith in the United Nations. It is time for the
Security Council to break its silence and give them a
reason to believe.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): We thank the
Secretary-General and the other speakers this morning.
We offer our special thanks to the French Presidency for
convening today’s meeting, as we all need to urgently
address the issue of victims of attacks and abuses on
religious and ethnic minorities in the Middle East.
We are alarmed that extremist and terrorist groups
are creating quasi-State entities to fight against
legitimate Governments, sowing enmity and hatred
and perpetrating extrajudicial killings, torture, rape,
abductions and forcible displacement. My delegation
also condemns sexual slavery, forced conversions,
the conscription of children and other forms of
discrimination and persecution perpetrated against
vulnerable groups, in particular women and children.
We also express our deep concern about the widespread
systematic violation of human rights and the destruction
of unique cultural heritage, including sacred shrines,
and other abuses.
Kazakhstan believes that the determined and
concerted efforts of all Member States and other
relevant stakeholders, together with the United
Nations taking a leading role, are the only way to
combat violent extremism. What is required is a longterm, comprehensive approach involving the entire
international community, built on greater regional
and global cooperation in accordance with the United
Nations Charter and international law.
My delegation endorses the proposal of the
Secretary-General for setting up an international panel
of experts and that of the French presidency for convening
a global conference as a follow-up of today’s debate. We
join other delegations in calling for greater protection

42/78

27/03/2015

measures for minorities, especially for women and girls,
bringing perpetrators to justice and ending all impunity
with a greater use of the International Criminal Court.
Every effort has to be made to return expelled groups
to their homelands with the help of military security,
mobilize necessary humanitarian assistance and use
every means to limit the activities of terrorist groups,
such as seizing their assets, inter alia. The existing
resolutions of the Security Council must be followed up
with stronger political will. Likewise, United Nations
peacekeeping operations must now incorporate experts
on religious matters in these specific regions so as to
foster interfaith dialogue on the ground.
We need to widely use wisdom and the experience
of religious and spiritual leaders to promote mutual
respect and harmony in all regions, including in the
Middle East. They support and complement political
efforts to prevent hatred, intolerance and inhuman
crimes. In addition, sound foundations can only be laid
by teaching the values of human dignity and freedom at
all levels of education.
To avail itself of the potential and authority
of spiritual leaders, Kazakhstan every three years
convenes the Congress of the Leaders of World and
Traditional Religions as a dialogue platform to promote
mutual respect, tolerance and non-discrimination. In
June 2015, we will host the fifth Congress devoted to
the dialogue of religious and political leaders for peace
and development. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon is
invited to the forum. It will also be attended by political
and religious leaders from all over the world. We believe
that the outcome of the Congress will contribute to the
protection of religious groups, including minorities, in
order keep our societies stable. Its recommendations
could be considered by the international expert group
that was mentioned today.
In conclusion, once again we urgently call on all
parties, especially those having real political power and
influence, to contribute to lasting peace and security in
the Middle East, and freedom and justice for all people.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Bishnoi (India): We thank you, Sir, for having
organized today’s open debate on the victims of attacks
and abuse on ethnic or religious grounds in the Middle
East. I would like to compliment you for circulating the
useful and well-structured concept note (S/2015/176,
annex). I would also like to thank the Secretary-

15-08778

27/03/2015

The situation in the Middle East

General, the High Commissioner for Human Rights
and other briefers for the background that they have
provided.
At the outset, we would like to lend our voice
to condemning violence perpetrated in the name of
religion and ethnicity in the Middle East and elsewhere.
Religious, cultural, ethnic and linguistic diversity are
essential and indispensable components of the social
fabric of human civilization. Persecution on the basis
of such diversity strikes at our common humanity.
We express our deep concern over the activities of
proscribed outfits and radicalized and extremist groups
in the region that are critically impacting on peace
and stability while also jeopardizing human rights,
fundamental freedoms and the very lives of ethnic,
religious and other minority groups. Efforts must be
made by all parties and stakeholders in the region to
curb these dangerous sectarian and extremist trends.
We believe the consolidation of political processes and
solutions while building durable State institutions will
be the effective way of addressing such extremism and
radicalism in the region.
The international community is witness to excesses
of terrorism and violent extremism in the Middle East
and elsewhere. This further highlights that there can
be no justification for terrorism or violent extremism.
The need to collectively demonstrate zero tolerance
for terrorism and violent extremism has never been
greater. The international community must take an
unequivocal and resolute position against terrorism and
violent extremism — phenomena that are aimed at the
destruction of human rights, fundamental freedoms
and democracy, and threaten the territorial integrity
and security of States.
Further, the issue requires a consolidated,
rather than fragmented, approach, including that of
developing a legal framework for fighting terrorism at
the international level, especially by swiftly adopting
the comprehensive convention on international
terrorism, as well as developing suitable regulatory
frameworks for the prosecution of terrorist outfits and
personnel. We recall that in September last year, the
Security Council adopted resolution 2178 (2014), which
looks into the problem of the foreign terrorist fighters.
We believe that the Council needs to act robustly using
the instruments of law that it has at its disposal and
the information available to it to counter terrorism and
maintain international peace and security.

S/PV.7419

The primary responsibility to promote and protect
human rights rests with States. It is imperative that
we fully respect the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of all States Members of the United
Nations when considering our response. Member States,
for their part, should continue to take steps that are
policy-oriented and legal in nature, to ensure principles
of equality and non-discrimination for all their citizens
and to combat intolerance, negative stereotyping,
stigmatization, discrimination, incitement to violence
and violence against persons based on religion or belief.
In conclusion, we would like to reiterate that there
can be no justification for terrorism in any form. The
menace of terrorism has to be fought on all fronts
and in all places. There is also no place for violence
in the name of religion and ethnicity. Member States
and the international community should leave no stone
unturned in promoting and protecting the human rights
of all citizens to continue living in their own countries,
in peace, freedom, equality and dignity.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bulgaria.
Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): My
delegation associates itself with the statement of the
European Union delivered earlier by the European
Union Special Representative for Human Rights. I
would like to add some remarks in my national capacity,
echoing some of the sentiments expressed earlier in the
ideas of the Secretary-General and Minister Laurent
Fabius.
I warmly commend France for having taken
the initiative to organize this important debate. The
systematic and widespread persecution conducted by
Daesh against many ethnic and religious groups in the
Middle East seeks to achieve the systematic destruction
of the very fabric of the societies of the region, their
cultural diversity and their identities. I am referring,
of course, to the Christians, including the Orthodox
Christians, who are among the most vulnerable, as
well as to the Yazidis, whom the High Commissioner
of Human Rights has just noted were perhaps subject of
genuine genocide. That is truly shocking.
It is urgent that we act quickly and with
determination to defeat these monstrous designs. As
a member of the international coalition against Daesh,
Bulgaria is at the heart of the action to preserve the
multi-ethnic and multi-confessional character of the
Middle East. While we deplore the loss of life, my

15-0877843/78

S/PV.7419

The situation in the Middle East

country does not forget that Daesh’s barbarism also
represents a very serious threat against the historical
and cultural heritage of the region, which was one
of the cradles of human civilization. In this regard,
we noted with great interest the French proposal of
including cultural genocide among the crimes subject
to international prosecution.
The information regarding the widespread abuses
committed by Daesh, including killings, torture,
targeted assassinations, abductions, sexual and physical
violence, forced conversions and the recruitment of
children, are a source of deep concern. Moreover,
according to report of the Commission of Inquiry,
Daesh may have committed the three most serious
international crimes: war crimes, crimes against
humanity and genocide.
Bulgaria reiterates its call on the Security
Council to refer the cases of crimes against humanity
and genocide committed in Iraq and Syria to the
International Criminal Court. I recall that last year my
country sponsored a draft resolution on Syria before
the Council submitted by France. In that regard, my
delegation welcomes with great interest and support
the idea proposed earlier by Foreign Minister Fabius
concerning the formulation of an action plan and road
map aimed at preserving the religious, cultural and
ethnic diversity of the Middle East. It is high time for
us to act as one.
The ongoing violence has triggered a humanitarian
crisis of unprecedented scale: the worst humanitarian
crisis of our time. Bulgaria has joined international
efforts to mitigate the suffering of Syrian refugees in
the neighbouring countries and will contribute for the
third consecutive year to the activities of the World
Food Programme.
Bulgaria fully supports the Secretary-General’s
initiative to develop an action plan that addresses
matters relating to security, social and political
inclusiveness, humanitarian assistance, the fight to
combat impunity and against discrimination, as well as
to preserve the region’s ethnic and religious diversity.
The implementation of such measures requires a
strong commitment from the Security Council and
the international community to put an end to Daesh’s
persecution of individuals belonging to different ethnic
and religious groups.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.

44/78

27/03/2015

Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Sir, for your initiative in convening
today’s meeting.
(spoke in English)
Extremists such as those of the Islamic State of Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) have been deliberately persecuting
ethnic and religious minorities in the Middle East. The
convening of today’s meeting is therefore opportune
and relevant. We need to mobilize against terrorists’
attempts to eradicate the diversity of the social fabric
of the region.
The victims of violent extremism are not limited to
ethnic and religious minorities. Violent extremism has
led to the killing of a considerable number of citizens of
all backgrounds in the Middle East. At the beginning of
this year, Mr. Haruna Yukawa and Mr. Kenji Goto, both
Japanese citizens, were also brutally murdered by ISIL.
My Government firmly condemns such inhumane and
despicable acts of terrorism. ISIL and other extremists
reject the rule of law upon which the international
community is based. They pose a serious threat to the
international community. Faced with such barbaric
acts, we must work together to fight against violent
extremism. Allow me to present two efforts that Japan
has undertaken to that end.
First, Japan supports Middle Eastern countries in
building counter-terrorism capacities. To that end, Japan
has specifically decided to contribute $15.5 million with
a view to enhancing the capacity for investigation and
prosecution and border control, as well as strengthening
counter-terrorism legislation. Japan is also steadily
implementing the Security Council resolutions related
to counter-terrorism, while cooperating with partner
countries to strengthen international counter-terrorism
frameworks.
Secondly, Japan provides assistance in creating
societies that are resilient to radicalization. We believe
that the best way to nip violence in the bud is to bring
stability to people’s livelihoods by fostering a middle
class, even if it takes time. Our assistance therefore
includes a youth employment policy, the improvement
of income disparities and assistance for education.
Expanding people-to-people exchanges is also part of
our cooperation programme. For instance, we supported
the establishment of the Egypt-Japan University of
Science and Technology in 2010. That institution has
been developing human resources that are expected to

15-08778

27/03/2015

The situation in the Middle East

play leading roles in achieving economic and social
development in the Middle East and Africa.
As a country located in Asia, Japan will continue
to strengthen its partnership with the countries of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations to promote
moderation in the region. Japan will host workshops
and seminars on countering radicalization in Asia.
While undertaking efforts to combat violent
extremism, Japan will continue to carry forward its
diplomacy to promote stability and prosperity in the
Middle East. In January, in a policy speech in Cairo,
Prime Minister Shinzo Abe of Japan underscored the
idea that “the best way is in the middle”. That ancestral
Middle Eastern proverb encourages people to embrace
moderation so as to stabilize their livelihoods. In that
speech, Prime Minister Abe pledged humanitarian
assistance totalling $200 million for the countries
fighting against ISIL in the region. That money has
already been disbursed. Japan will also continue
to contribute to promoting regional cooperation in
the Middle East and to stabilizing its societies and
economies through economic assistance. Japan’s
Corridor for Peace and Prosperity initiative in Palestine,
starting with its Jericho Agro-Industrial Park project, is
part of such efforts.
The international community must stand firm
against violent extremism. I would like to reiterate
Japan’s determination to play an active part in this
endeavour.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to pay tribute to your initiative, Sir, in convening
this important Security Council debate on the victims
of persecution based on their religious or ethnic identity
in the Middle East, especially those suffering from the
crimes being committed by Daesh and other extremist
groups.
Today, the world is facing unprecedented dangers
that represent a source of genuine concern and threaten
the very existence of modern States, which were
founded on the principles of citizenship, coexistence,
equality and human rights. Such dangers seek to impose
an extremist model based on an outmoded fantasy that
relies on ethnic and religious identity as the basis for
large-scale persecution. We must adopt firm measures
to extirpate the deviant thinking that underlies

S/PV.7419

such attitudes. In order to impose their ideas, those
extremists have always sought to separate the world
into two separate camps based not solely on people’s
appearance but on their religious and ethnic identity.
They have tried to impose their concepts through
nihilistic views, insisting on certain values, such as
religious supremacy, a quest for justice and so on.
In opposing extremism, we must exercise prudence
and be careful not to attack members of religious groups,
because that could unwittingly exacerbate the sense of
injustice, intolerance or racism, all of which could serve
as an inexhaustible source of fuel for the fires of hatred
and intolerance. In that regard, it is unnecessary to
recall that the misguided thoughts of certain extremist
groups linked to the Islamic religion should not serve
as an excuse to attack Muslims or their religion. Such
a dangerous tendency, which some have adopted out of
ignorance or on the grounds of free expression, only
strengthens the idea of religious warfare.
Given its history, Egypt has always sought to foster
coexistence among various ethnic groups and religions.
We draw on our cultural heritage to counter attempts
to transform the open identity of Egypt and impose
extremist cultures that are contrary to our thinking.
These extremist groups emerged when Egyptian citizens
fell victim to the odious crimes committed by Daesh
in Libya. We cannot allow their blood to be spilled in
vain. I therefore recall that the selective treatment of
terrorism and extremism is an unacceptable, calculated
error that must be corrected. It will cause the downfall
of those who seek to use terrorism to attain their narrow
political interests. Very often, those who play with fire
burn themselves.
In this respect, although laudable, our efforts to
protect our religious minorities in the Middle East,
including the Christians, come with certain risks.
We must counter extremists and violent terrorism.
Accordingly, the classification of victims based on
their religion is contrary to the principles of religion
and humanity, which give priority to the rule of law,
because all human beings are equal. We must remember
that the Middle East is the birthplace of Christianity,
and Christians are an essential component of the
Middle East. They contributed to the appearance of
Muslim civilization because they helped enrich it, and
no one can deny — unless out of ignorance — that their
attachment to the region is firmly anchored in history.

15-0877845/78

S/PV.7419

The situation in the Middle East

Since the beginning of the twentieth century and the
revolution of 1919, Egyptians have been keenly attuned
to the meaning of citizenship, because they understand
that while religion belongs to God, the nation belongs to
everyone. We recall that the preservation of human life
is a sacred duty. We will spare no effort to protect the
entire Egyptian population from all forms of extremism
and terrorism, and we shall seek to ensure that life takes
precedence over death and destruction.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
Ms. Bird (Australia): I thank you, Sir, for bringing
this important issue to the Council’s attention today.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General and
the High Commissioner for Human Rights for their
insightful briefings, and welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s announcement of a United Nations plan
of action on preventing violent extremism and his
proposal to convene an advisory panel on inter- and
intra-sectarian dynamics.
The Middle East has long been the home of great
ethnic and religious diversity. A majority of the world’s
population belong to a creed that has its origin in the
Middle East. The peoples of that region have long taken
pride — and rightly so — in the mosaic of languages,
cultures and confessions that call it home. Through
immigration, the Middle East’s diversity has enriched
Australia, where many of the region’s peoples and their
descendants have found a home.
Sadly the Middle East’s religious diversity is under
threat as never before. The emergence of extremist
groups like Daesh and Al-Qaida has led to horrific
atrocities, forced conversions and the deliberate
targeting of those they consider unbelievers. The
reckless destruction of antiquities is an assault on
thousands of years of heritage. We note with alarm
the Human Rights Council’s recent report that Daesh
may have perpetrated genocide against Iraq’s Yazidi
community.
Australia is working in support of the Iraqi
Government and with other regional partners to
confront the threat posed by Daesh. Of great concern,
the conflicts in Syria and Iraq have taken on a sectarian
dimension. Terrorists have targeted places of worship
with shocking consequences, as we saw last week in
Yemen. Australia firmly believes that freedom of
religion is a core human right. This freedom must be
respected in all countries.

46/78

27/03/2015

Australia stands with the peoples of the region from
all religious and ethnic groups, including a great many
of those from local majorities, who wish to preserve
their rich cultural heritage. We urge Middle Eastern
States to fulfil their responsibility to protect ethnic and
religious minorities. In resolutions 2139 (2014) and 2165
(2014), the Security Council demanded that the Syrian
authorities do so. We ask that the States of the region
give particular attention to enabling the protection of
women and girls in these vulnerable communities from
sexual and gender-based violence. We urge all Member
States to look at the role they can play in supporting
freedom of religion in the region, including by helping
those States burdened by displaced populations and
preventing the travel of foreign fighters, many of whom
have been responsible for shocking atrocities.
There are, however, positive examples in the region.
Jordan has long protected religious minorities, and
Lebanon’s experience in its civil war shows not only the
high toll that conflict between religious communities
can exact, but also that, over time, wounds can heal
and followers of many religions can again share a
proud national identity. It points us to the urgency
of a political solution in Syria in which all of Syria’s
communities can have a voice in that country’s future.
Diversity, once lost, is hard to regain. All States must
do what they can to protect freedoms of religion and
respect for ethnic diversity throughout the Middle East.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): It is my
honour to deliver the Kingdom of Morocco’s statement
on behalf of the Minister Delegate to the Minister of
Foreign Affairs and Cooperation, Ms. Mbarka Bouaida,
who has been detained in Rabat by an urgent matter.
I should like to congratulate France for its initiative
and to thank you, Sir, for inviting my country to take
part in this meeting on the protection of victims of
attacks and abuses on ethnic or religious grounds in the
Middle East, an issue that demands the international
community’s attention and touches the world’s
conscience.
The atrocities we are seeing today in that region of
the world, the cradle of civilizations and monotheistic
religions, cannot leave us indifferent, much less allow
us to sit idly by as helpless spectators. Indeed, the
massacres and other persecutions of minorities and
communities, the destruction of places of worship

15-08778

27/03/2015

The situation in the Middle East

and monuments that represent a universal heritage of
humankind are actions aimed at erasing the collective
memory of humankind. These atrocities — which are
perpetrated by an entity that claims to be Islamic and
from a region that, since the dawn of time, has been a
place of peaceful and harmonious coexistence among
religions and civilizations — cannot be ignored or
tolerated, much less go unpunished.
In responding to your invitation, Sir, the
Kingdom of Morocco wishes to express its unflagging
commitment to the fight against terrorism and absolute
condemnation of the stigmatizing of religious, ethnic
and racial minorities in any form and for any reason.
However, our unanimous condemnation here is not
enough to ease our conscience. There is an urgent
need for collective and joint action to put an end to the
phenomenon and render justice, and more importantly,
to implement strategies to prevent these barbaric crimes
by attacking these problems at their root causes.
The world in which we live is in the throes of an
unprecedented identity crisis, expressed through a
conflation of prejudices and rhetoric inspired by the
so-called clash of civilizations. The economic and
financial crisis and various situations of instability,
complemented by populist ostracism, further exacerbate
this tendency to stigmatize the Other and are at the
heart of Islamophobic, anti-Semitic, anti-Christian and
other current trends.
The question that arises then is whether we want
to resign ourselves and accept this false inevitability,
or whether instead we want to mobilize ourselves and
curb it and promote a pluralistic world that draws its
richness from its diversity, where universality finds its
true and whole meaning. This is a discussion that we all
need to take up head on and turn into a daily fight on all
fronts. Political decision-makers, opinion-makers, civil
society, mass media and schools need to be at the heart
of this war against ignorance and hate speech.
The Rabat Plan of Action on the prohibition of
advocacy of national, racial or religious hatred that
constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or
violence, adopted in October 2012 in the capital of
our Kingdom, represents the conclusion of the work
and discussion of a series of workshops on this subject
matter and is edifying from a number of standpoints.
The Plan of Action is the synthesis of brainstorming
and concerted efforts by independent experts and
representatives of civil society that have been pursued

S/PV.7419

in various regions of the world. This is a first in the
body of international alliances, thereby paving the way
for promising, collective, conscious and committed
actions to promote tolerance.
Building upon the adoption of the Plan of Action,
the city of Fez, the spiritual capital of the Kingdom, will
host, on 23 and 24 April, the first forum of religious
leaders on the prevention of the incitement to hatred
that leads to heinous crimes. This is an invitation to the
members of the Council to make that moment a time of
alliances against all forms of intolerance perpetrated in
the name of what is sacred.
The Kingdom of Morocco, whose identity has
been forged throughout the centuries by inputs of
various kinds and which has enshrined its confessional,
ethnic and racial diversity in its Constitution, intends
to contribute and share its modest experience in the
management and restructuring of the religious realm
that has made it, and still makes it, a land of hospitality,
openness, tolerance and harmonious coexistence
between all its component parts.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran):
Mr. President, allow me to begin by expressing my
appreciation to you and the French presidency for
convening this meeting on the multifaceted challenges
that we face in combating violence and extremism in
the Middle East and beyond.
The Islamic Republic of Iran strongly condemns
the widespread targeting and killing of ethnic and
religious minorities by Daesh terrorists and all other
extremist groups. We also condemn the destruction of
mosques, holy shrines, churches and temples, as well
as of artefacts and archeological treasures representing
the rich cultural heritage of humanity.
Violent extremism has emerged as an unprecedented
composite of narcissistic, dogmatic and violent
entities with a global agenda and with the following
characteristics. It is a unique global terror network,
actively recruiting in as many as 90 countries, all united
in pursuing a policy of terror and destruction. They
mobilize individuals, add new members, spread their
influence and threaten places near and far. As such, this
phenomenon is reminiscent of the Arab-Afghans of the

15-0877847/78

S/PV.7419

The situation in the Middle East

1980s and could be dubbed European-Arabs. Thus, it is
indicative of failing to learn from history.
These like-minded extremists have consolidated
their networks by sharing terror tactics and
romanticizing violence and bloodshed. They continue
to use the most advanced social media to reach out
to young people and recruit many fighters from all
around the world, some starting as tourists and ending
up in terrorism. Violent extremists have committed
unparalleled brutality as they set fire to houses and
schools, enslave the free, oppress the vulnerable and
kill the innocent with astonishing cruelty. Beheading,
burning and enslaving women and children, shamefully
advertised by the groups on social media, all of this
exposes the extent of the threat they pose to the global
community.
These terrorist groups falsely call themselves
Muslims, but they have killed thousands upon
thousands of Muslims, which is unprecedented in
human history. Killing around 140 innocent Yemeni
people in two recent suicide bombings in Sana’a was
one of the latest example in their savagery. Acting in a
true Takfiri manner, they call whoever is not with them
non-believers, condemning them to death. They have
established an ever expanding list of enemies, including
Shiites, Christians, Yazidis, Kurds, Turkmen, as well as
the vast majority of moderate Sunnis, subjecting them
to slavery and death.
Until the terrorist and extremist groups are
dismantled, these extremists will continue to pose
the gravest threat to the world. The international
community’s inconsistent and incoherent policy and
strategy in combating extremist groups has not only
fundamentally undermined the effort to confront
them, but has also resulted in emboldening them. A
genuine commitment by the international community
to a serious and comprehensive approach to challenging
extremism is imperative. Any failure in this field will
doom efforts to rid the region of this malicious force. A
comprehensive strategy against Daesh must address the
ideological, social, political and economic dimensions
of violent extremism.
If there is a genuine resolve to combat extremism,
it must be translated into specific and effective actions.
It is imperative to adopt a united front, with a clear
message and a coordinated strategy. The disruption
of financial and logistical support and the sharing
of relevant information and intelligence, as well as

48/78

27/03/2015

enforcing effective and coordinated border control, are
crucial to the success of such a campaign. The failure
to take the necessary actions to disrupt support for
terrorists and destroy their networks will only lead to
more bloodshed and destruction.
At the General Assembly at its sixty-eighth session,
the President of Iran called for a world against violence
and extremism, which Iran would support in all its
aspects. We have been steadfast in our fight against
extremism and have in practice demonstrated that Iran
will be a true partner in an ardent international fight
against extremist groups.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Cardi (Italy) (spoke in French): Italy thanks
the French presidency of the Security Council for
organizing this important debate.
(spoke in English)
Italy aligns itself with the statement made by the
observer of the European Union and wishes to make the
following remarks in its national capacity.
The terrorist threats we face seek to divide us by
race, ethnicity, nationality, values and religion. The
risk is particularly high in the Middle East, where
the multiethnic and multireligious character of those
societies is under severe threat. As a close friend and
neighbour of the region, Italy stresses the importance
of preserving the inclusiveness of those societies.
We are actively engaged in projects in favour of
ethnic and religious minorities, including Yazidis and
Christian denominations, providing health care and
psychological support, rebuilding schools, supporting
educational and social reintegration and protecting
the unique multicultural heritage in Iraq and in the
region. We are also active partners in multilateral
forums to counter terrorism and violent extremism, and
we contribute to the search for the necessary political
responses to the crises affecting the Middle East.
Italy strongly condemns the widespread violence
and grave abuses of international human rights and
humanitarian law committed by Daesh, associated
groups and other terrorist organizations targeting
individuals belonging to ethnic, religious and other
minority groups. We are appalled by the brutal
persecution suffered by all of those groups, individuals

15-08778

27/03/2015

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.7419

and communities, and we recognize that the first
victims of Daesh are Muslims.

support and follow-up by the Council to promote more
effective prevention through justice.

Let me focus on some specific issues where Italy
can provide added value to the debate and to our joint
effort. First, in prevention, by promoting dialogue and
mutual understanding, especially at the grassroots
level, through education and awareness-raising
campaigns. Our fight against discrimination on ethnic
and religious grounds is first and foremost a cultural
initiative that requires long-term efforts to protect
younger generations.

The last issue is cultural heritage. The deliberate
destruction of cultural and religious heritage by Daesh
in Syria and Iraq constitutes a war crime, according
to international law, and reveals the determination
to eradicate all traces of diversity in the region. Italy
considers it a priority to stop the destruction, and we
support UNESCO’s role in that respect. Building on
our experience as the first country to create, in 1969,
a police force specialized in the protection of cultural
heritage and the fight against illegal trafficking in
cultural property, Italy is promoting, together with
Spain and other partners, a UNESCO draft resolution
on culture in areas of conflict. In the light of the
strong connection between the preservation of cultural
heritage and peaceful coexistence, Italy calls on all
States members of UNESCO to join in that effort.

In that regard, we have been working with the
Office of the Special Advisors on Genocide Prevention
and the Responsibility to Protect on updating the
Framework of Analysis for Atrocity Crimes, which
strengthens the United Nations early warning capacity
by stressing the importance of sectarian violence and
religious-based propaganda as warning signs of the risk
of atrocity crimes. The post-2015 development agenda
can also contribute to our prevention efforts. An agenda
promoting sustainable development can tackle the
root causes of violence and human rights abuses and
promote peaceful and inclusive societies.
Secondly, outreach to all ethnic and religious
communities in the Mediterranean and the Middle East is
essential. Only by winning back groups and communities
that harbour feelings of disenfranchisement, distrust
and marginalization will it be possible to seriously
affect the recruiting power of Daesh and other extremist
groups. Media can also play a key role in promoting
dialogue and tolerance, thus countering the narrative
proposed by extremists.
Thirdly, reconciliation and inclusion can promote
inclusive political processes and tolerance, diversity,
intercultural and interreligious dialogue as values and
ingredients for the stability of the region.
Fourthly, accountability is critical in fighting
impunity and promoting justice. Atrocities committed
against individuals of a different religion, belief or
ethnic background must not go unpunished. As recent
United Nations reports have suggested, such acts carried
out in violation of international human rights law could
amount to war crimes, crimes against humanity, or even
genocide. As Vice President of the Assembly of States
Parties to the International Criminal Court, allow me to
mention the role played in the fight against those crimes
by the Court and by the Security Council in referring
such situations to the Court, as well as the need for

In our capacity as co-lead country of the CounterISIL Finance Group of the Counter-ISIL Coalition, we
call for the swift implementation of resolution 2199
(2015) to counter the illicit trafficking in cultural
property. We also welcome the joint statement on the
destruction of cultural heritage proposed by a crossregional core group composed of Chile, Ethiopia,
Indonesia, Italy and Poland and endorsed by 137
countries in the Human Rights Council.
To achieve our common goal, Italy welcomes the
Secretary-General’s proposal today to draft an action
plan with concrete measures. We are ready to cooperate
to that end.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of Sweden.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I have the honour today to
speak on behalf of the Nordic countries: Denmark,
Finland, Iceland, Norway and my own country, Sweden.
First, I want to thank France for taking the initiative
to convene this important debate. I also thank Foreign
Minister Fabius and Secretary-General Ban for their
remarks earlier today.
The situation in Syria and Iraq today is a human
catastrophe with devastating consequences far beyond
the Middle East. Violent extremism and religious
intolerance are a source of untold suffering. No
community escapes that vicious cycle. The majority
communities, as well as the minorities, have seen

15-0877849/78

S/PV.7419

The situation in the Middle East

friends and family killed, immense suffering and
destruction of homes, communities and infrastructure.
Efforts must be intensified to stop that mayhem.
The war in Syria is now in its fifth year. We urge the
Security Council to push for a political solution that
can put an end to the conflict. Ethnic and religious
minorities are often especially vulnerable and prone to
becoming victims of various human rights violations
and abuses, for example, targeted mass killings,
extrajudicial executions, enforced disappearances,
torture, sexual violence and enslavement — crimes
that affect, not least, women and children. Other forms
of humiliation include vandalizing places of worship
and cemeteries as well as land-grabbing with complete
disregard for our common universal heritage. The
Nordic countries demand that those responsible for
those atrocities — many of which amount to crimes
against humanity — be prosecuted.
Recent events in Iraq demonstrate how persons
from different religious and ethnic groups have been
forcibly expelled from their homes, such as the Yazidis
and Christians on the plain of Niniveh in Iraq. Those
are, sadly, not unique examples of communities forcibly
expelled from their ancient habitats. The hundreds of
Assyrians kidnapped in Syria and whose fate remains
unknown provide another example of the brutality of
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). Nobody
who does not fit ISIL’s worldview is spared, whether
they be Christian, Muslim, Yazidi or from other
communities.
Aside from the immediate suffering of the
affected, the risks of ethno-religious cleansing are
evident. A region that was once home to a mosaic of
communities — Christian, Jewish, Mandean, Muslim,
Yazidi and Zoroastrian — risks being reduced to a
political entity of paralyzing uniformity. The ethnic
and religious diversity of the Middle East needs to be
preserved. In the absence of a political solution, we
need to address the humanitarian situation and show
solidarity with Syria’s neighbours. Lebanon, Jordan
and Turkey have shouldered a huge burden. Nordic
countries have contributed substantially to the World
Bank Multi-Donor Trust Fund for Lebanon and a
similar fund for Jordan.
We all must take responsibility for those who flee
persecution, atrocities and conflict in search of a safe
haven. Since the civil war in Lebanon broke out in
1975, the Nordic countries have received thousands of

50/78

27/03/2015

migrants and refugees from the Middle East. My own
country, Sweden, has offered a new home to more than
70,000 Syrians since the outbreak of that conflict. The
conflicts in Iraq and Syria need political solutions and
highlight the need of inclusive governance. The Nordic
countries provide strong support for United Nations
Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura in his efforts.
Policies must be inclusive and offer political space
for all — majority as well as minority populations.
Reconciliation efforts are key.
The increasing threat of radicalization in parts of
the region makes the need for a solution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict all the more pressing. As the facts
on the ground are rapidly changing, we urgently need
to send a clear and convincing message to younger
generations that there is an alternative to violence and
the status quo. We stress the importance of restarting
peace negotiations in order to achieve a comprehensive
peace agreement based on a two-State solution.
As the tragic events during the past few years
have shown, no part of the world, including the Nordic
countries, is free of the ailments of sectarian and
gender-based violence. We are all confronted with the
challenges of Islamophobia, anti-Semitism and other
forms of xenophobia. The strongest countermeasure
against polarization is inclusive participation. We
welcome the intention of the Secretary-General to
convene an advisory panel on today’s important topic.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Braun (Germany): Given the time, I shall
deliver a shortened version of my statement. The
complete text is available on our website. As usual,
Germany aligns itself with the statement made on
behalf of the European Union.
By taking the initiative to organize this important
debate, France has brought to the Security Council
agenda a subject that affects not only the Middle East,
but all of us. We stand today against the gross and
systematic violations of human rights in the Middle
East, the root of which can be found in the conflicts
in Syria and Iraq. The objective of the terrorist militia,
Daesh, is to establish a totalitarian system. Daesh will
not tolerate any model that deviates from the prescibed,
uniform way of life of a controlled and homogeneous
society. Those who cannot or refuse to comply with
that model are threatened, fought, driven out, raped,
tortured or killed.

15-08778

27/03/2015

The situation in the Middle East

The August 2014 attacks against the Yazidi
settlements in the mountains of Sinjar were
accompanied by the massacre of civilians, leading to
an exodus of epic proportions. Many Yazidi women
and children fell into the hands of Daesh and were
abducted, enslaved and sold. The commission of inquiry
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights has found evidence that the systematic crimes
committed against Yazidis by Daesh may amount to
genocide. Daesh has also mercilessly attacked Shiites,
as demonstrated by the brutal siege that was intended to
starve the population of the town of Amerli.
Christian towns and villages of Nineveh have been
abandoned. For centuries, Muslims and Christians
prayed side by side before the tomb of the prophet Jonah
in Mosul; yet that revered symbolic site was set ablaze
at the order of terrorist commanders. Neither has Daesh
spared Sunnis who refuse to submit to their inhuman
ideology. Recently, in the Syrian city of Hasakah, we
witnessed the bombings that resulted in the death of
dozens of Kurdish New Year party guests, and the
horrific massacres of members of the Sunni tribe Albu
Nimr in Iraq and the Shaitat tribe in Syria.
Some say that the only viable plan to counter Daesh
in the Middle East is the force of a dictatorial State that
imposes its version of tolerance. Yet the example of
Syria teaches us that the tyranny of a despotic regime
not only does not guarantee lasting stability but also
does not allow genuine religious tolerance to grow.
What a dictatorship achieves is a deafening political
silence, a deceptive calm before the storm. Over
220,000 deaths leave no doubt that the Syrian regime
is neither protecting its citizens nor guaranteeing
any stability; on the contrary, it is threatening and
destroying it. That is why our response to the terrorist
violence and totalitarian ideology of the Daesh terrorist
militia must take the form of mobilization for pluralism,
diversity, inclusiveness, participation and human
rights. That commitment should enable our partners on
the ground to act decisively against Daesh and other
terrorist groups, including through the use of military
means. Germany is actively involved in the anti-Daesh
coalition, including by equipping and training Iraqi
security forces to defend themselves against that
organization.
At the same time, we are supporting the new
Iraqi Government in its efforts to implement reforms
that will promote the participation and inclusion of
all groups in society. An inclusive political process

S/PV.7419

is also necessary to resolve the conflict in Syria.
The generous help received daily by those who have
been persecuted, in particular members of minority
groups, in their places of refuge in the Middle East,
from neighbours, compatriots, as well as complete
strangers, is impressive and serves as example to us all.
This immense willingness to help contradicts the false
image that Daesh seeks to convey to us and extends to
all those in need.
That example should guide us all. We must not
allow ourselves to be misled by polarizing ideologies.
Rather, we must always be guided by the respect for
the human rights of every individual. Together we must
find ways to help persecuted and displaced persons
on the ground, regardless of their ethnic or religious
background. Fleeing a country may be a necessity in
the event of an imminent danger, when there is no
other way out. That is why Germany is a host country;
since 2011, Germany has taken in some 100,000 Syrian
refugees.
Therefore we must do everything in our power to
create the conditions that would provide those suffering
from Daesh’s reign of terror or the tyranny of the
Al-Assad regime, with the realistic possibility of safely
returning to their country as soon as possible, a safe,
free country where citizens of all ethnic and religious
groups are guaranteed participation, and where all
human rights are fully respected, regardless of one’s
political conviction, gender or sexual orientation.
We also need to work together to protect the cultural
heritage of those countries, which is our common
heritage. The richness of the Middle East lies in the
diversity of its peoples and traditions. It is the cradle
of Christianity, which, like Judaism and Islam, is an
integral part of the Middle East. We must preserve that
richness together.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I will not comment on what has been said by
the colleague who just took the floor; I will, however,
comment on similar statements. Despite the fact that
the crisis in my country has entered its fifth year, the
minarets of mosques and bells of churches still call out
for peace and love in the cradle of civilizations and
religions that is Syria.
The former director of the Louvre museum, André
Parrot, called Syria the homeland of civilized men.

15-0877851/78

S/PV.7419

The situation in the Middle East

For thousands of years Syria has woven, on its pure
soil, a diverse social fabric threaded through with
love, mutual respect, brotherhood and coexistence in
a manner unparalleled in human history. The main
objective of the plot against Syria is to tear that fabric
and divide the country into city states and entities
that can then be devoured by the viruses of ethnic and
sectarian affiliations. That fabric, with all the warp and
woof of its national character, has thwarted all such
designs against Syria, although the terrorists, who have
no principles, spare no effort to undermine the country.
This is terrorism of an unprecedented nature, which has
emerged and thrives with the help of certain Member
States, some of which are members of the Security
Council. Those States are known by all. They take
pride in publicly training, arming and financing the
armed terrorist groups, be they Daesh, the Nusra Front,
the Jihadis of the Free Army or the so-called armed
moderate opposition.
The crisis has once again proven that there are no
minorities in Syria, but rather national and socially
coherent segments who oppose anyone who targets
them. They refuse to be tampered with, whatever
their names, their minority affiliation or the divisive
denomination they belonged to prior to the formation of
the modern State. Some try to distort the tolerant image
of Islam through brutal terrorist organizations such
as Daesh or seek to create imaginary fronts. The only
purpose of such acts is to buttress Israel’s objective of
establishing a racially distinct State for the Jews on
Palestinian land. Those ethnicities lived in peace for
decades, even centuries, jointly facing their common
enemies.
Whoever is keen, in deed and not simply in words,
to protect those segments of Syrian society must first
and foremost deal with the root causes of the problem of
the terrorism that has been targeting all Syrians for over
four years now. That must be done through the serious
implementation of all Council resolutions on combating
terrorism, in particular resolutions 2170 (2014), 2178
(2014) and 2199 (2015). It is not possible for some States
to continue to hold meetings and deliver statements
about protecting certain segments of society in Syria,
Egypt and other countries while they simultaneously
support those who engage in terrorism. Those who
continue to finance, arm and train the terrorists are
their partners and are thus responsible for the suffering
of the Syrian people. They cannot be part of any effort

52/78

27/03/2015

to alleviate our suffering as long as they continue such
practices.
In addition to trying to contain the terrorists’
activities, we must combat and eliminate radical
thinking in the region, in particular the Wahhabi
Takfiri thinking. There are specific Governments, in
particular those of Saudi Arabia, Qatar and Turkey,
who sponsor and propagate that lethal, cancerous
thinking. They attempt to export that exclusionist
thinking, which is alien to our tolerant society. Anyone
who thinks that Daesh, Jabhat Al-Nusra and other
terrorist organizations emerged out of the blue is
blind. There have been precursors to that emergence,
in particular Zionism, ignorant fatwas and the radical
educational curricula that are employed to carry out
their sinister political agenda in Syria and other States.
That runs counter to international law, the relevant
Security Council resolutions and the most basic values
of civilization and humankind. In addition, we should
not allow those terrorist organizations to transmit their
poisonous rhetoric and recruit people through social
networks. That option could be denied them, provided
those supporting terrorism have the moral will to do so.
In conclusion, I would like to comment on the
content of some statements by permanent members of
the Council. It seems difficult for them to understand
the situation, let alone distinguish between the terrorism
that they themselves are supporting with a view to
undermining legitimate Governments, on the one hand,
and the gargantuan efforts deployed by those legitimate
Governments, including my country’s Government, to
protect the people from their own Arab Spring and their
own terrorism, on the other.
I would like to draw the attention of Member States
to the fact that the so-called moderate armed opposition,
which was trained in Israel and Jordan, invaded Bosra
al-Sham, the historic Roman World Heritage Site, and
targeted one of the segments of the Syrian people, as
has happened in other parts of Syria and Iraq. That is
glaring proof that Daesh and the Nusra Front are allied
with Israel and its partners inside and outside the region.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): We appreciate the presence
of your Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. President,
today in the Council for the deliberations on this vital
issue. We have heard the statements of the Secretary-

15-08778

27/03/2015

The situation in the Middle East

General and the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights with great interest.
The recent escalation of violence and terrorism
against religious and ethnic groups in the Middle East
is an affront to humanity and all civilized norms. We
endorse the calls for relief and redress for the victims
of these atrocities, who have suffered grievously from
religious and ethnic bigotry and extremism. Throughout
history, millions have been killed, tortured, maimed
and dispossessed by the venom of religious and racial
hatred. Violence and atrocities against minorities
and other vulnerable groups must be unequivocally
condemned.
What is deeply offensive and unacceptable is that
some vested interests attempt to blame our great faith,
Islam, as the source of the current chaos, rather than
recall its historical and political roots. The current
chaos in the Middle East contrasts sharply with the
history and ethos of Islam. The Middle East, as many
speakers before me have pointed out, is a cradle of
major religions and civilizations. Islamic history in
the region is replete with examples of what true Islam
preaches: love, brotherhood, tolerance and humanity.
Over the course of history, the rights of minorities
have been preserved and prosperity promoted when
effective authority and order have combined with an
enlightened governance of nations, empires or States.
The weak — minorities, women and children — have
suffered the worst excesses whenever order and justice
have collapsed.
It is now clear that disorder and the collapse of
State authority across North Africa and the Middle East
have transformed the Arab Spring into a brutal winter.
The partial or complete breakdown of State authority in
Iraq and Syria has allowed for the rise of violent groups
such as Daesh, which are inured to extremist ideologies
and radical agendas. The quest for power by cynical
and brutal leaders wrapped in religious cloaks is not
surprising under the circumstances. What is surprising
and alarming is the fatal attraction that some of those
groups hold for disaffected and alienated youth within
and outside the Middle East.
Military and police action can deal with the
symptoms of the phenomena, but not the disease. That
requires a more comprehensive approach, one that offers
a path for the constructive involvement and engagement
of young people in the economic, social and political
life of their societies and States. Most importantly, it

S/PV.7419

requires an effective and thoughtful response to the
narrative of many of these extremist groups, a narrative
that they cynically seek to deploy. That narrative is
that Muslims have been historically oppressed and can
regain their rights and freedoms only through violent
means. The narrative will not be neutralized by solemn
declarations alone. It can be credibly countered only
through genuine efforts to resolve the underlying
political problems, among them, a solution for the
Palestine issue and other conflicts raging across the
Levant and beyond.
Historical and recent experience has demonstrated
that the challenges posed by the current chaos in
the Middle East will not be overcome by foreign
intervention. The sovereignty and territorial
integrity of countries will have to be fully respected.
Ultimately, durable peace can be restored through
national reconciliation in each affected State and
can be encouraged and promoted with regional and
global support. The Security Council can contribute
to restoring peace and defeating the extremist and
violent groups by helping to develop a global consensus
on the principles and structure for the solution to the
challenges confronted in Iraq, Syria, Yemen and, most
importantly, in Palestine. To achieve that, the Council
must adhere to the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and its own unimplemented resolutions.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Thailand.
Mr. Plasai (Thailand) (spoke in French): Thailand
appreciates France’s initiative to convene this timely
debate, as we are shocked and alarmed by the growing
number of brutal attacks in recent months and of abuses
of people simply because they belong to different ethnic
groups, religions, faiths or civilizations. I wish to thank
the Secretary-General, the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, Patriarch Sako and Mrs. Vian Dakhil
for their valuable and insightful briefings.
During the past six or more decades, chronic
conflicts in the Middle East have claimed too many
lives and deprived peoples of their right to live in
dignity. That horrific situation is now exacerbated by
the increasing, widespread and systematic persecution
of innocent people based on ethnic groups or religious
grounds. In the process, many historical and cultural
objects and sites have also been destroyed. Nothing can
justify such acts.

15-0877853/78

S/PV.7419

The situation in the Middle East

Peace can prevail only when the principles of human
rights and justice are fully observed. Thailand strongly
supports the rights-based approach to intercultural and
interreligious dialogue. We believe that all religions
and faiths can coexist peacefully because, in essence,
they are based on common values, in particular, love,
kindness and compassion. It is therefore possible and
desirable to promote and strengthen understanding,
mutual respect and tolerance among people of different
religions and faiths, and thus to bridge any gap that might
exist. Solely in that way can we ensure harmonious and
inclusive societies based on cultural diversity, freedom
of religion or belief, equality and human dignity.
From that perspective, we strongly believe that the
international community must take concerted measures
to promote the peaceful coexistence of cultures,
religions, beliefs and faiths and to stop terrorism and
violent extremism. Together, we must send a strong
message to the effect that disrespect for or intolerance
of religious, cultural or ethnic differences, no matter
what the motivations are, must end. The necessary
steps must also be taken to ensure that those who
perpetrate brutal and deliberate persecutions of people
based on such disrespect and intolerance must be held
accountable for their acts.
Diversity among cultures, ethnic groups, religions
and civilizations constitutes a blessing and the common
heritage of humankind. The Middle East is endowed
with the beauty of diversity, which should be inherited
by the next generation. The international community
must not turn a blind eye to the ongoing brutality in
the Middle East. We must take effective action together
and now.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belgium.
Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Sir, for organizing this debate on a major
challenge of the twenty-first century. Belgium endorses
the statement given on behalf of the European Union
and wishes to add to it in order to complete its own
statement.
The Security Council has had several opportunities
to address the situations in Syria and in Iraq and the
countless victims of conflicts in the Middle East, mostly
Muslims of various denominations. In the past century,
the proportion of Christians in the East, a faith that
once held a secular presence in the region, has fallen
from 30 per cent to 5 per cent of the total population.

54/78

27/03/2015

The emergence of radical Islamist groups, of which
Daesh is the most reprehensible, has dramatically
accelerated that trend and has radicalized it to the
point of horror in their desire to eradicate, physically,
culturally and historically, anyone who is not like them.
Whether Christian, Yazidi or others, minorities pay an
enormously high toll.
That global ideology, both radical and dehumanized,
and the threat to the world that it creates, recall the
worst period of twentieth-century European history.
With an awareness of the horrors committed and that
global threat, Belgium decided in the summer of 2014
to actively participate in the political and military
coalition against Daesh. We cannot fall into the traps
set for us by those radical groups:
The first trap is to believe that we are facing a clash
of civilizations or a new religious war. That trap is the
primary objective of those radical groups. Based on it,
they draw their strength and increase their capacity to
mobilize. What we are dealing with is their exploitation
of religion to gain power. If we are to fight against and
escape that trap, we must make every effort necessary to
ensure that our citizens do not fall prey to such rhetoric.
The second trap is to believe that we must choose
between the brutality of repressive military regimes
and that of radical Islamic regimes. They are, however,
the best of enemies and feed off each other. Yet other
options, so often defended by the United Nations and
my country, are open to us. We must ensure that we
promote inclusive democracies, the rule of law and
equitable economic development. We must also ensure
that public authorities protect all their citizens, ensure
respect for human rights and ensure the freedoms of
expression, religion and belief. Those are the best
weapons at our disposal. We must strongly promote
all of them, given our political responsibility to our
peoples and to our international commitments. If we
are to tackle those threats, concrete actions must be
taken without delay. I should like to highlight three of
them.
First, we must bring to life our values within our
societies, especially among young people. Belgium,
serving as President of the Committee of Ministers of
the Council of Europe, will organize a conference on
8 May on the theme “Tolerance is stronger than hatred”,
which will show how the diversity of our societies is
an asset rather than a liability. My country, which
also has its own share of foreign combatants, has been

15-08778

27/03/2015

The situation in the Middle East

developing a new strategy to prevent radicalization, and
we are committed to working at the national, regional
and international levels towards that goal. Cooperation
with the other countries concerned will be essential.
The second action is to tackle impunity. There
can be no lasting peace in the region if this condition
is not met. Daesh’s actions are tantamount to crimes
against humanity, if not genocide. The international
community must pay special attention to the need to
bring to justice those responsible for crimes, regardless
of who they may be. To that end, we support the work of
the United Nations Commission of Inquiry and call on
all countries of the region, Iraq in particular, to accede
as soon as possible to the Rome Statute. The Security
Council can also play a key role by referring the
situation in Syria to the International Criminal Court.
Thirdly and lastly, we must ensure that persecuted
minorities can eventually return to their homes. While at
present humanitarian assistance and the efforts of some
countries to host them are the only realistic responses,
their rightful place is in their own homes. Given the
seriousness of the conflicts and their duration, the road
ahead will no doubt be rough.
The countries of origin, assisted by the international
community, will have to find creative means to rebuild
the bridges between the various components of their
societies. To that end, Belgium encourages the new
Iraqi Government to continue its efforts towards greater
inclusiveness . The new European Union strategy
on Syria and Iraq, which Belgium fully endorses, can
certainly help in this regard.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mminele (South Africa): At the outset, let me
congratulate you, Mr. President, for ably steering the
work of the Security Council for the month of March
and for hosting this important debate.
In the same breath, I wish to thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Prince Zeid Ra’ad
Zeid Al-Hussein, and other briefers for their insightful
and informative briefings.
Today’s debate takes place against the backdrop of
a world that in recent months has witnessed deplorable
systematic persecutions of individuals belonging to
different ethnic, religious or other minority groups. Like
the rest of the world, South Africa has been appalled

S/PV.7419

by the cold-blooded public execution of religious
and ethnic minorities throughout the region. We are
dismayed by the report of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights of 13 March, and again today, that
it appears that the Islamic State in Iraq and Sham
(ISIS) may have committed war crimes, crimes against
humanity and genocide.
ISIS’s threat of violence against ethnic and religious
minorities and the rape of women and girls, who are
often captured as sex slaves, are deplorable, as are the
forced conversions and the forced recruitment of child
soldiers. It is our collective duty as States Members of
the United Nations to reject all forms of intolerance
and its manifestations, regardless of where they occur.
Our own country’s history has taught us that racial,
religious and ethnic intolerance is immoral. It is
therefore imperative that the international community
reaffirm the rights of the individuals who are suffering
persecution to live in peace in their countries.
As we move towards the seventieth anniversary
of the Organization, which was built on the ashes of
the most devastating war and the most horrific crimes
against humanity, we are obliged to uphold and enforce
the principles of the Charter and to reaffirm the
fundamental human rights of all humankind. We should
also be particularly firm in focusing on the eradication
of the root causes of all forms of intolerance and find
ways of addressing fundamental ideologies that create
hatred.
South Africa comes from a past that is defined by
racial discrimination and racial intolerance. Chapter 2
of our Constitution states that everyone has the right
to freedom of religion, belief and opinion. Section 9
of the Constitution prohibits unfair discrimination on
various grounds, including religion. Section 39 protects
the right of persons belonging to a religious community
to practice their religion in peace, and Sections 185 and
186 provide for the promotion and protection of the
rights of cultural, religious and linguistic communities.
South Africa believes that these principles are sacred,
and will continue to promote them in all of our
engagements.
South Africa is also of the view that in addressing
terrorism, it is important to focus on its fundamental
causes. There is a need to understand and address the
conditions that make terrorism an attractive option to
the disaffected and to develop appropriate strategies
to address them. In that regard, concerted efforts must

15-0877855/78

S/PV.7419

The situation in the Middle East

be made to resolve conflicts in all parts of the world,
including the Middle East.
In conclusion, South Africa would like to reaffirm
its commitment to working with the international
community in our collective quest to fully eradicate all
forms of intolerance.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Zehnder (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland would like to thank the French presidency
of the Security Council for having organized this open
debate. The diversity of the social, ethnic and religious
fabric of the Middle East must be defended against all
forms of identity-based aggression.
Switzerland would like to raise five points.
First, my country condemns in the strongest
possible terms the human rights abuses and violations
of international humanitarian law committed by
Government armed forces and non-State armed groups
in the Middle East and elsewhere. It is extremely
concerned about the credible allegations made by the
Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic
and the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights that the self-proclaimed Islamic State and other
extremist groups may have committed war crimes,
crimes against humanity and the crime of genocide.
The murder of children, women and men and the
immense suffering inflicted on the civilian population
are unacceptable.
Secondly, Switzerland calls on all parties to armed
conflicts to meet their obligations under international law
and to respect humanitarian principles. Humanitarian
assistance must benefit the persons affected, without
any discrimination. The measures taken as part of
the struggle against terrorism should not criminalize
humanitarian aid or any contacts established with
non-State armed groups for humanitarian purposes.
Thirdly, Switzerland condemns all human rights
violations, whoever the perpetrators may be, and calls
on all actors to stop the violence. We would point out
that respect for and the protection of human rights is
the primary responsibility of States. Counter-terrorism
efforts cannot justify any weakening of the measures
aimed at ensuring the protection of and respect for
human rights and the rule of law.

56/78

27/03/2015

In all conflicts and unstable situations, members
of vulnerable groups, including religious and ethnic
minorities, run a greater risk of suffering human rights
violations.
Fourthly, Switzerland stresses the importance
of accountability, nationally and internationally, for
all violations and abuses committed against civilians
and for attacks against cultural property and places
of worship. We emphasize the need to prosecute
such crimes at the national level and encourage all
States to ratify the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court. In accordance with the principle of
complementarity, we invite the Security Council to
consider referring the situation in Iraq to the Court. We
reiterate our call for the situation in Syria also to be
referred. We deem regrettable the rejection of the draft
resolution submitted to the Security Council in that
respect and will pursue our efforts in this area.
The prevention of violent extremism is one of
Switzerland’s priorities in its efforts to promote peace
and combat terrorism. In addition to participating in
global security efforts in this field, we are committed
to promoting alternatives for young people who might
be tempted to join extremist groups, in particular by
strengthening efforts to build the capacities of at-risk
societies. For that reason, Switzerland supports the work
of the Global Community Engagement and Resilience
Fund, which seeks to implement a long-term strategy
to create jobs and therefore future prospects, so as to
make all forms of extremism appear less attractive.
Such preventive engagement is also clearly encouraged
by resolution 2178 (2014).
The Security Council has a key role to play
in combating extremism and protecting civilian
populations and minorities in times of conflict.
Switzerland therefore welcomes the efforts and unity of
the Council in facing the escalation of extremism.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Colombia.
Ms. Mejía Vélez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to thank you, Mr. President, and your country for
convening this important debate. We listened closely
to the statements made this morning by the SecretaryGeneral, the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and His Beatitude and to the moving
words of parliamentarian Dahkil.

15-08778

27/03/2015

The situation in the Middle East

Colombia would like to join its voice with those
of many previous speakers today, for in the face of
barbaric acts that show complete disregard for the
values of the human condition we cannot be silent.
The seriousness of the violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law in the areas affected
by the presence of the Islamic State of Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL), and the groups associated with it require
us to speak with one voice and commit to protecting
the values ​​and principles shared by humankind. The
people and Government of Colombia offer their sincere
condolences to the families and Governments of the
victims of this terrorist group. There were Colombian
nationals among the victims of the recent attack on the
Bardo Museum in Tunis, so we share the pain of those
who have suffered at the hands of terrorist groups. Their
murder shows that terrorism affects us all. The case of
Boko Haram is another manifestation of this serious
problem, and we firmly condemn that terrorist group’s
abduction of women and children and its murder of
thousands of innocent people.
As the reports of the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights and its investigative
mission on human rights in Syria show, violence and
the persecution of minorities and ethnic or religious
groups are one of the manifestations of ISIL’s recurring
violations of human rights, such as the beheading of
Coptic Christians in Libya, the persecution, murder
and forced displacement of Yazidis in Iraq and the
abduction of hundreds of Assyrian Christians in Syria.
They are just a few of the examples that indicate the
existence of repeated attempts to exterminate ethnic
and religious minorities and groups, which, as the High
Commissioner said, could constitute genocide, crimes
against humanity or war crimes. As many have said
before me, we cannot resort to facile categorizations
or identify a particular religion or culture with
violent extremism, terrorism or genocide. These are
unacceptable acts on the part of individuals and groups,
not cultures or religions per se.
We must consider the effectiveness of the
mechanisms we have to combat these situations of
human barbarity, and we must recognize that we are
dealing with an enemy that shocks us with its lack of
boundaries. We have seen acts and deeds that we did not
imagine were possible in the twenty-first century, and
we wonder how well prepared we are to combat them.
The Secretary-General and the High Commissioner

S/PV.7419

have made specific proposals that deserve our
consideration and analysis.
We are concerned by the fact that we seem unable
to respond together. We must put aside the divisions
that create obstacles to the international community’s
ability to take concrete action together. Consistency
between discussion and action is crucial to responding
to barbarism, and we must show ourselves capable of
overcoming our differences, since terrorists can exploit
them to their advantage. The basis of our action should
be ensuring that the legitimate interests of the various
sectors of the population are served. We should therefore
identify the areas we must work on with States where
such acts have occurred in order to make progress with
investigations, ensure that the situation will continue to
be monitored and that we will work to build societies
that are inclusive and that respect diversity, and in which
the rights of all citizens are respected and guaranteed
without discrimination.
Finally, we cannot forget that in the short term there
is an urgent need for response to the dire humanitarian
situation. Millions of refugees and displaced persons
need help, and while the international community’s
response has been generous, the magnitude of the
situation requires a sustained, flexible and timely
commitment.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Greece.
Mrs. Boura (Greece): I would like to thank the
French presidency of the Security Council for taking the
initiative to convene this timely and important debate.
I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
statement and the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights for his comprehensive presentation.
Greece aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union. We would also like
to speak from our national point of view to emphasize
our concern about the unprecedented humanitarian
crisis, the impact on minorities and ethnic and religious
communities of the protracted conflicts in Syria and
Iraq, and the horrendous crimes committed by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and other
terrorist groups. As those groups display, in the most
brutal way, their determination to erode every trace of
civilization in the region, we are witnessing heinous
persecutions, violence, mass killings and the deliberate
destruction of the historical and cultural heritage of
ethnic and religious communities.

15-0877857/78

S/PV.7419

The situation in the Middle East

Christian, Yazidi, Kurdish, Shabak and other
Muslim communities that have coexisted for centuries
are now being displaced or forced to flee, while many
others have been kidnapped and executed. Women and
children in ethnic communities have been targeted by
violent extremists through abductions, hostage-taking,
rape, human trafficking and slavery, despite numerous
calls internationally for an immediate end to all sexual
and gender-based violence. Today we have heard
dramatic messages and testimonies about the torture
and suffering of Yazidis, Chaldeans and members of
other Christian communities who have been forced to
flee their homes. It is noteworthy that half of Iraq’s
1.4 million Christians have already left their ancestral
land, while 400,000 Yezidis have been violently
persecuted and displaced. In Syria, ISIL and other
terrorist groups have perpetrated all sorts of abuses and
inhuman acts against Christians, while at the same time
Muslim communities and citizens have also been the
victims of vicious and barbaric abuse.
Greece supports the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral and those of the United Nations through its
resolutions, as well as the relevant European Union
statements and action, and we condemn the human
rights violations and acts of barbarism perpetrated
against religious and ethnic groups and the denial of
their right to remain in their homeland. We condemn the
deliberate destruction and looting of cultural heritage
assets such as monuments, museums, churches and
religious shrines and sites. Along with our firm stance
in the fight against terrorism and violent extremism,
we believe we should consider arrangements for
closely monitoring the situation of religious and
ethnic communities, as a first step to preventing their
persecution and oppression in the region. The situation
of religious and ethnic groups can serve as an indicator
for measuring the overall political environment in the
Middle East.
Efforts to achieve peace in the region and prevent
violence from spilling over into neighbouring countries
will require a regional consensus on supporting the
historical presence of these communities in their
homeland. In that spirit, the efforts of religious
institutions, including the ancient Churches, and of
civil society, to promote reconciliation and moderation
in the region and preserve peaceful coexistence for all
religious and ethnic communities, merit our attention
and support. In that context, Greece has undertaken an
initiative to convene an international conference with

58/78

27/03/2015

the aim of contributing to addressing the issue in a
comprehensive way.
On the occasion of the seventieth anniversary of the
United Nations, and as we celebrate the fundamental
values and principles of the Organization, we should
make it our duty to prevent the loss of diversity and of
the invaluable cultural heritage of the Middle East, part
of which dates back in time to the very origins of our
civilization.
The President (spoke in French): I call on the
representative of the United Arab Emirates.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for presiding over this
important debate. I would also like to thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon and High Commissioner Zeid
Ra’ad Al Hussein for their remarks and for their efforts
to promote and protect human rights, which is at the
heart of the issue before us.
Today the international community has come
together in the Security Council to discuss the situation
of persecuted religious and ethnic minorities in the
Middle East. In doing so, we are also sending a message
to all citizens of the world that we stand by their
inalienable human rights — whatever their religion or
ethnicity and wherever they may be. But we must also
recognize that today in our region the terrible acts that
have brought us here are being perpetrated through the
cynical exploitation of religious and ethnic differences
by extremists to further their brutal and violent
aims. This is not a new, nor a regional phenomenon;
extremists throughout history and across the world
have manipulated differences to achieve their agendas.
As many of today’s speakers have affirmed, the
current crisis is not representative of the region’s
history. Yet, a generation of children are growing up
in a world where there is a widespread perception that
discord is the natural state of being in the Middle East.
They do not know or believe that the region was once a
vast interwoven mosaic of communities characterized
by different faiths, tribes and ethnicities living in
harmony side by side. And I fear that as civil wars rage
and violent extremism persists in the Middle East, an
even darker perception will prevail that our region
is hopelessly divided and that Islam is an inherently
intolerant religion.
That is simply not true. Islam recognizes and
honours the great faiths that preceded it. Throughout

15-08778

27/03/2015

The situation in the Middle East

our history, religious minorities have been protected in
Muslim communities from those who sought to harm
them because of their beliefs. The same broad tolerance
that gave refuge to the Jews who were expelled with
Muslims from their homes in parts of Europe in the
fifteenth century also protected the adherents of other
religions, not only people of the Jewish and Christian
faiths, but also Yazidis, Samaritans, Mandeans, Druze
and Alawites. In historic Alexandria and Damascus,
the great cosmopolitan capitals of the region, all
could freely practice their faith and govern their own
communities, coexisting peacefully alongside Islam.
That peaceful coexistence was perhaps best
exemplified in the holy city of Jerusalem at the apex of
its history. While Jerusalem has often been the focus
of stories of division and conflict among people of
different religions, all are united in their reverence for
that holy ground. That is why the General Assembly
last year adopted resolution 69/24, which reiterated that
the international community has “a legitimate interest
in the question of the City of Jerusalem and in the
protection of the unique spiritual, religious and cultural
dimensions of the city”. The great civilizations, religions
and peoples of the world are part of Jerusalem’s rich
history, and it cannot be allowed to turn into the next
theatre of conflict. Jerusalem is a symbol not only of
our shared history of spiritual coexistence, but also a
shining beacon of hope that peace and tolerance can be
achieved in the holy land once again.
It is against that rich tide of history that Daesh has
emerged today to commit unspeakable atrocities against
defenceless people in Iraq, Libya and Syria. Their
ambitions extend even further, beyond the boundaries
of those countries, threatening to engulf the entire
region in their totalitarian and Takfiri worldview, as
was so eloquently described by the High Commissioner
this morning. Their behaviour — the brutal persecution
and systematic attempts to erase any trace of cultural
diversity in the name of Islam — is the antithesis of
our region’s proud past. Attempts by Daesh to justify
murder and mayhem through the language of our
religion should be seen for what they are: the desperate
lies of a demented few. As long as Daesh continues
to survive, all communities are under threat. Violent
extremism knows no boundaries.
Yet, the rich cultural tapestry of the Middle East,
which we hold dear, does not have to be relegated to
antiquity. It is possible today. I know this because it
exists in the United Arab Emirates. More than 200

S/PV.7419

different nationalities live and work and worship in
their own faiths freely in the United Arab Emirates.
And, while our infrastructure is modern, the values of
tolerance, moderation and unity that are the foundation
of our country’s multi-ethnic, multi-religious diversity
are ancient.
Fostering such a model requires a conception of
State-building that is underpinned by educational
opportunity, economic development and the respect for
human rights, the rule of law and the prominent role of
women as partners in these endeavours. In the United
Arab Emirates, we have also found that visionary
leadership and strong institutions are the pillars of
stability. It is vital to sustain those pillars in the many
countries undergoing transition in our region. Our lives
and faiths have always been and will always remain
interconnected in our region. That is why we cannot
isolate ourselves from injustice when it occurs around
us. In Egypt, whose stability the United Arab Emirates
believes to be the cornerstone of the stability of entire
region, as well as Iraq and Syria and Yemen, our long
history of harmony is threatened by the actions of
extremists.
Underlying the shifting landscape in the Arab
scene, the ongoing injustice of the Palestinian question
fuels the narrative of Daesh’s recruitment efforts, both
in our region and globally. An end to that tragic conflict
must be achieved, and we commend France’s leading
diplomatic efforts to secure a meaningful resolution of
that tragic injustice. In our region, but elsewhere too,
it is vital to shore up the economic, social, legal and
institutional infrastructures of States. They provide
the framework of critical protections for people when
societies break down, and they deliver the means to
prevent and stop violence and disorder, even when
leadership fails. That must be our focus as we shape the
broad ambitions of the post-2015 development agenda.
In that context, the United Arab Emirates would
like to offer some recommendations for addressing the
problem. First, the Security Council must consistently
condemn the systematic persecution of minorities
wherever it takes place. And in finding solutions, we
must respect the Charter of the United Nations, the
paramount document of common principles that we
have as an international community. Member States
must have the courage to do what is right and not only
what is politically convenient. The United Nations can,
however, only fulfil its mandate if it is empowered to
do so by its membership.

15-0877859/78

S/PV.7419

The situation in the Middle East

Secondly, it is imperative to consult and listen
closely to the States of the affected region itself. We
understand the issues and the context, and we will bear
the consequences in the long term.
Thirdly, the impunity enjoyed by the perpetrators
must be addressed through the formation of resolute
international coalitions. Secure and stable societies are
the cornerstone of good governance, and we must help
our region to stabilize during this turbulent period.
Fourthly, Governments must be encouraged to
extend their protections to all their citizens and uphold
their freedoms.
Fifthly, strong institutions and mechanisms that
protect human rights and provide early warning to
prevent and respond to violations must be built and
maintained.
The responsibility for implementing those
recommendations nationally and supporting them
internationally lies with all of us, if we wish to continue
to emulate the model of the human values of tolerance,
moderation and diversity that began with our forebears.
Let me end by congratulating the delegation of
France on the successful stewardship of the Security
Council during its presidency across a broad range of
issues that are fundamental to international peace and
security.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor the representative of Slovenia.
Mr. Marn (Slovenia): I would like to join other
delegations in commending the French presidency for
its organization of today’s important and urgent debate.
Slovenia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union.
Violent extremism, religious and ethnic hatred and
intolerance have gained ground in recent months, in
particular in the Middle East. We therefore share the
concerns of the international community regarding the
widespread and systematic human rights violations
and persecutions by Daesh and other terrorist groups
and organizations. We are appalled by the misuse of
religion to fuel provocation, confrontation, religious
hatred and extremism. The victims of violence come
from many different ethnic, religious and minority
groups, as stated by the majority of speakers today. As
the recent report (A/HRC/28/18) of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights on actions of

60/78

27/03/2015

the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant has shown, the
grave human rights violations committed by ISIL and
associated groups have included killings, torture, rape,
sexual slavery, forced conversions and the conscription
of children.
Many women and girls belonging to various
religious minorities have been the victims of rape,
torture, sexual enslavement and forced marriages
with Daesh fighters. They have also been subjected to
forced conversion and other cruelties. The violence and
atrocities committed by Daesh have triggered massive
displacements of people in Iraq in Syria. The extent and
nature of those crimes may already be seen as crimes
against humanity, war crimes, ethnic cleansing or even
genocide.
The international community must find a way to
end impunity for these crimes. In that regard, we would
like to underline the crucial role of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) in fighting impunity. We call on
all States in the region to accede to the Rome Statute.
The ICC also has an important preventive role, as the
launching of investigations could have an impact on
perpetrators or criminal groups. It is essential that the
Security Council refer the situation to the ICC.
We are also very concerned about the growing
number of incidents where Daesh has intentionally
destroyed important religious, cultural and historical
sites, such as archaeological sites, places of worship,
churches, mosques and shrines belonging to different
ethnic and religious groups and minorities in Iraq and
Syria. We have to do our outmost to preserve the rich
and ancient diversity of the cultures and religions that
have existed in the Middle East for over 2,000 years.
In formulating our response to the tragic events
resulting from international terrorism we should keep
in mind that we are dealing with a multifaceted and
fluid phenomenon that should not be directly associated
with any religion, race or belief. We should avoid
generalizations and the creation of stereotypes with
respect to particular ethnic or religious groups, as they
often lead to a vicious circle of intolerance and hatred.
Civil society and the media have an important role to
play in such endeavours.
In addition, our response should not take a solely
repressive approach, as the conditions conducive
to the spread of violent extremism, radicalism
and terrorism need to be analysed and addressed
comprehensively with a view to tackling the root

15-08778

27/03/2015

The situation in the Middle East

causes of radicalization. We should also work towards
fostering a culture of respect and religious diversity,
particularly among the young. Our response should also
include humanitarian assistance to those fleeing their
homes in fear of terrorist groups and to those surviving
atrocities. Slovenia provides humanitarian assistance
in a continuous manner, following the principles of
humanity, neutrality, impartiality, independence and
efficiency. We are focusing particularly on medical
rehabilitation and psychosocial assistance to children
who have been the victims of armed conflicts.
Slovenia would like the United Nations to be
better equipped and able to properly counter attacks
and abuses made on ethnic or religious grounds. We
welcome the Secretary-General’s proposal to convene
an advisory panel of respected women and men and
prepare a plan of action aimed at preventing violent
extremism, but the plan of action should focus on
situations worldwide, not only in the Middle East. The
current need to efficiently tackle such threats may
give a new impulse for exploring ways to finalize the
draft of the United Nations Comprehensive Convention
on International Terrorism, which would include a
definition of terrorism.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Portugal.
Mr. Mendonça e Moura (Portugal): Manifestations
of religious-based intolerance and violence are
increasing in many regions of the world. Violent
incidents targeting individuals, communities and
sites on the grounds of ethnicity, religion or belief are
occurring in increasing numbers in various countries.
This situation is exacerbated in situations of armed
conflict, where persons belonging to minority groups
often disproportionately suffer the effects of hostilities
and are particularly vulnerable to displacement through
population relocations and forced migration. They often
form a considerable part of the refugee flows.
It is a global scourge. No region is free from that
phenomenon, but the widespread and systematic
violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms
in the Middle East, a region with very diverse ethnic
and religious groups, is of particular concern. We must
act together and promptly in order to tackle it.
We are appalled at the increasing violations of
international humanitarian law and serious humanrights abuses, including mass killings, extrajudicial
and summary executions, the deliberate targeting of

S/PV.7419

civilians, mass expulsions, forced conversions and
other forms of the targeted persecution of individuals
on the basis of their religion, belief or ethnicity. The
attacks against the Yazidi community in Iraq, the
abduction and killing of Christians in Syria, the
beheading of Coptic Christians in Libya, the deliberate
targeting by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIS) of ethnic and religious communities, such as
Sunni Muslims, Christians, Yazidis, Shabaks and other
groups in Syria, are some of the unspeakable examples
that demand a collective and urgent action from all of
us. Tactics to foment terror and fear are also being used
by ISIS and other extremist groups to exert control
over communities by vandalizing and destroying what
is most sacred — places of worship and religious and
cultural heritage sites.
Human rights violations by States can contribute
to radicalization and recruitment. Hatred and violence
towards ethnic or religious communities do not occur
without the prior stigmatization and dehumanization
of targeted groups and the incitement to hate. It is
the result of a social, cultural, economic and political
legacy that usually finds expression in discriminatory
policies and practices of exclusion and marginalization,
State repression, endemic corruption, lack of trust
in public institutions, a culture of impunity and the
denial of human rights and the tenets of international
humanitarian law.
It is the obligation of States to ensure that persons
belonging to national or ethnic, religious or linguistic
minorities
“may exercise fully and effectively all their human
rights and fundamental freedoms without any
discrimination and in full equality before the law”,
as proclaimed in the Declaration on the Rights of
Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic, Religious
and Linguistic Minorities. Furthermore, States have
the responsibility to protect their populations from
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes
against humanity, and from incitements to commit
such acts. Human-rights abuses are the first signal of
alert that genocide and crimes against humanity may
follow. The international community should hold States
and non-State armed groups to account and make them
aware of their existing obligations under international
law, including human-rights, humanitarian, criminal
and refugee law.

15-0877861/78

S/PV.7419

The situation in the Middle East

Overcoming a culture of impunity must be a priority.
Those who commit or are complicit in acts of violence
must be brought to justice. Portugal believes that the
International Criminal Court should continue to play a
fundamental role in deterrence, complementary to the
role played by courts at the national level, by holding
perpetrators accountable and by investigating and
prosecuting those responsible for committing atrocities
against civilian populations.
Addressing the threat posed by non-State armed
extremist groups and terrorists calls for a comprehensive
approach to the underlying causal factors, including by
engaging in an effective communication strategy to
prevent the evolution from radicalization to terrorism,
to suppress the flow of foreign fighters, but most of all
to promote political and religious tolerance, economic
development, and social cohesion and inclusiveness.
We obviously welcome the proposal announced by the
Secretary-General this morning to establish a panel of
experts to draw up guidelines to better tackle violent
extremism.
Long-term stability in the Middle East requires
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms, as
well as tackling the root causes of extremist ideologies
derived from ethnic and religious discrimination
and exclusion. Concerted action, including through
interreligious dialogue initiatives, on the part of all
relevant stakeholders — States, religious communities,
civil society organizations, media representatives, and
so on — is crucial in that regard. The promotion and
protection of the rights of persons belonging to national
or ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities contributes
to political and social stability and peace and enriches
the cultural diversity and heritage of a society. States
must promote a culture of tolerance, inter alia, through
education, in particular human-rights education.
Accordingly, respect for pluralism can only become a
reality when social, economic and political inclusion
and cohesion in societies occurs.
The right to the freedoms of thought, conscience,
religion or belief is a fundamental right of every human
being. As a universal human right, the freedom of
religion or belief safeguards the respect for diversity,
and its free exercise directly contributes to democracy,
development, the rule of law, peace and stability. We
must strive to promote and protect those rights in line
with the core values enshrined in all key international
human-rights instruments adopted by this Organization.

62/78

27/03/2015

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Romania.
Mrs. Miculescu (Romania) (spoke in French): I
would like to begin by thanking the French presidency
of the Security Council for having convened this debate.
Romania associates itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union, but I would like to
add some remarks in my national capacity, which I will
keep brief in the interests of time.
The world is looking on in horror at the massacres,
beheadings, arson, rape, stonings, conversions at
gunpoint, the revival of slavery, mass expulsions and
forced migration being perpetrated against Christians,
Yazidis and Shia Muslims, including Shabaks,
Turkmens and others.
The strategy of the criminal gangs responsible, such
as the so-called Islamic State or Daesh, is simple, as
their beliefs exemplify barbarity. By destroying the rich
religious heritage and ethnic diversity that make up the
complex social fabric in the Middle East, as well as the
remains of a glorious past, they aim to totally subjugate
and manipulate all people within their reach. Their
actions are part of a campaign to erase diversity, and
it is being conducted in the name of Islam, with which
those savages have absolutely nothing in common.
Let us not forget the victims of the barbaric attempts
to hunt and potentially eradicate entire religious
communities from their historical lands. The tragedy
of the Yazidis is perhaps the largest-scale tragedy that
any one community has suffered since the emergence
of Daesh.
Christians have been a part of Syria since the
conversion of the Apostle Paul on the road to old
Damascus. The central role of Arab Christians in the
development of Arab civilization and culture, leading
to the Al-Nahda Arab renaissance of the nineteenth
century should not be ignored. Nevertheless, today
the very survival of Christianity in the Middle East is
in danger. Due to the limited time available, we can
only recall a few of the collective tragedies, such as the
violent expulsion of thousands of Armenian Christians
from the coastal town of Kessab one year ago, or
the recent cowardly murders, this time in Libya, of
21 Egyptians of the Coptic Christian faith.
We must urgently step up efforts aimed at preserving
the mosaic of religious and ethnic communities that
have enriched the Middle East for centuries. The

15-08778

27/03/2015

The situation in the Middle East

international community must do more to reverse the
trend in the region towards expelling or exterminating
people of different ethnic and religious backgrounds,
who are all under the terrible threat of an extremism that
is guided by narrow-mindedness and blind violence. We
encourage the United Nations to expand its activities in
that connection, primarily by raising awareness around
the world of such tragedies as the fate of undesired
minorities, including through tools that already exist,
such as the Alliance of Civilizations.
I would like to express the support of Romania
for the initiative of the Secretary-General to prepare
an action plan to be prepared by a panel of religious
leaders, as well as for France’s announced plan to
convene a conference on the topic.
Faced with the imminent danger of sectarianism,
tolerance and inter-religious dialogue must be
encouraged and strengthened robustly by secular and
religious representatives — prerequisites for creating
and ensuring a peaceful environment based on mutual
respect. Such messages must also reach the younger
generations in war-torn areas, which are unfortunately
expanding, as the daily horrors evidence. Young
people must be gently turned away from the effects
of the culture of violence and reminded of the values
of tolerance and understanding that have enabled
millennia of coexistence in our shared space for the
benefit of all.
We would like to see more discussion on this topic,
at the national level in the countries affected, as well
as at the international level. The aim should be that
discrimination based on religion or ethnicity should be
not only prohibited in law but also clearly understood
as such by the majority of society. We must build on
the fact that the vast majority of Muslims denounce
extremist ideology and are themselves terrified by the
atrocities committed by such groups. But societies, in
particular in the countries affected, must speak openly
about how terrorism exploits the universal impulse
of young people to seek opportunity and justice, in
contrast to the marginalization, discrimination and
corruption they witnesses on a daily basis.
Meeting the economic and social grievances of
those people is the key issue. We must focus strongly on
education, especially in post-conflict situations and in
areas liberated from terrorism, so as to prevent further
atrocities in the future and to enable persons belonging

S/PV.7419

to ethnic and religious minorities to resume their places
in their societies and in their territories.
In conclusion, let me recall the words of the
legendary Secretary-General, Dag Hammarskjöld, who
once said that the United Nations had not been created
to bring humanity to heaven, but to save humanity
from hell. To do so and to save the minorities under
threat in the Middle East from hell, we must follow our
consciences and show determination in stepping up
our efforts to that end, especially taking into account
the very complex and specific proposals made during
today’s very important debate.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Tsymbaliuk (Ukraine): At the outset, I
would like to thank you, Sir, for having convened this
important and timely open debate, which reresents
a valuable contribution to the common efforts of the
international community to address violent extremism,
religious and ethnic hatred, and intolerance in the
Middle East.
Ukraine fully supports the position of the
Security Council that terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations constitutes one of the most serious
threats to international peace and security and that
all acts of terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable
regardless of their motivations, or of where or by whom
committed. Ukraine supports the provisions of the
latest Security Council resolutions concerning threats
to international peace and security caused by terrorist
acts, in particular resolution 2199 (2015), adopted on
12 February and devoted to the activities of terrorist
organizations such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL).
Ukraine remains committed to achieving lasting
peace, stability and security in Syria, Iraq and the
broader region, as well as to countering the ISIL threat.
We share the idea that an inclusive political transition
in Syria and inclusive political governance in Iraq are
crucial to sustainable peace and stability in the region.
In that respect, Ukraine is deeply concerned about ISIL
and other associated terrorist entities and the negative
impact of their presence, violent extremist ideology
and actions on the stability of Iraq, Syria and the
entire region, including the devastating humanitarian
impact on the civilian populations, which has led to the
displacement of millions of people. The acts of violence

15-0877863/78

S/PV.7419

The situation in the Middle East

27/03/2015

being committed by ISIL foment sectarian tensions and
are extremely alarming.

However, I would like to add a few comments in my
national capacity.

We strongly condemn the widespread and
systematic persecution of minorities in the Middle East
on ethnic or religious ground and the indiscriminate
attacks, atrocities, killings and human-rights abuses
being perpetrated by ISIL and other terrorist groups,
in particular against Christians and other religious and
ethnic groups.Ukraine also expresses its deep concern
regarding the destruction of the cultural heritage in
Iraq and Syria, in particular by ISIL, including the
targeted destruction of religious sites and objects. We
support the Security Council decision that all Member
States shall take appropriate steps to prevent the trade
in Iraqi and Syrian cultural property and other items of
archaeological, historical, cultural, and rare scientific
and religious importance.

Poland attaches great importance to the protection
of the human rights of individuals belonging to
religious and ethnic minorities. We have quite a long
tradition of tolerance and interreligious dialogue. Let
me just mention one document: the declaration of the
Confederation of Warsaw of 1573, which granted the
freedom of religion to all the citizens of the PolishLithuanian Commonwealth. It was the first legal act of
that kind adopted in Europe.

Ukraine supports the Security Council in
condemning the abduction of women and children, their
exploitation and abuse, which have been committed
by ISIL and other associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities. All such activities must be
stopped by all possible measures. This issue should
remain on the Security Council agenda and receive the
Council’s due attention.
In its Foreign Ministry statement of 16 September
2014, Ukraine welcomed the outcome of the
International Conference on Peace and Security in
Iraq, held on 15 September 2014 in Paris. We expressed
our support concerning the efforts of the new Iraqi
Government aimed at strengthening the rule of law, at
ensuring inclusiveness for all political forces within the
federal institutions of power, and at fighting without
compromise manifestations of terror.
Ukraine, which is involved in a decisive fight of
its own against foreign-backed terrorists on its territory
and faces direct external aggression, shares the view
that the terrorist group ISIL is a threat not only to
Iraq and Syria, but also to the entire international
community. Ukraine supports all efforts aimed at
combating terrorism, unconditionally, regardless of
where or in what form it occurs.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Poland.
Mr. Winid (Poland): Let me thank you, Sir, for
convening today’s debate. Poland aligns itself with the
statement made by the observer of the European Union.

64/78

My Government is gravely concerned by the
current violence against ethnic and religious groups in
the Middle East. Poland contributes to the aid delivered
to members of persecuted minorities by the United
Nations and European Union agencies. We have also
taken unilateral actions, as in August last year when
we sent over eight tons of assistance to Christians in
Northern Iraq in reaction to their dramatic situation
and the persecution they were facing. We are very
grateful to the authorities in Erbil for helping us with
that project.
Unfortunately, every day brings new horrors to
the people in the Middle East and North Africa. All
religious and ethnic groups have been suffering from
unprecedented violence, including Christians, Shias,
Sunnis, Yazidis, Kurds and others. The widespread
violence affects everyone from Iraq to Libya and,
recently, Tunisia. I condemn, in the strongest terms,
the horrific act of terror in Tunis, in which three Polish
nationals lost their lives, among over 20 other people.
Every day we also witness other chapters of the
barbaric destruction of the cultural heritage of the
Middle East perpetrated by the so-called Islamic State
and other extremists groups. I would like to mention
one event that is extremely sad for Poland. Last year,
the Al-Nusrah Front ruthlessly demolished the fourthcentury Church of Saint Sergius and Bacchus in
Malula, near Damascus. The attack destroyed two icons
presented to that church in 1943 by General Wladyslaw
Anders, commander of the Polish army, who shortly
before had escaped the inferno of Stalinist Siberia.
The Polish army was on its way to Monte Cassino to
fight there for the freedom of Poland and the liberation
of Italy. Today, the church is burned, the paintings
destroyed.
We cannot underestimate such actions. Their
ultimate goal is not only to intimidate the unfaithful,

15-08778

27/03/2015

The situation in the Middle East

but to change the social and ethnic composition of the
region forever. The history of the twentieth century
teaches us about the need to take action in the face
of such developments to prevent even larger-scale
atrocities.
It is now more than five years since the beginning
of the war in Syria, and we urge the Security Council
to live up to the obligations that the Charter of the
United Nations imposed on this body, and finally to
take the necessary actions that can help put an end to
the conflict in that country. The situations in Iraq and
Libya also requires concrete actions by the Council.
Further inaction will only fuel extremism and deepen
the suffering of millions of people across the Middle
East. It will also enable the spillover of the sectarian
violence across the region and globally. After all the
acts of terror that have taken place in recent months,
we should all be well aware that no country is safe from
the threat of extremism. It is in our common interest to
respond adequately to these challenges.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Luxembourg.
Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank France for organizing this
open debate on a topic of concern to all of us. I also
want to thank the speakers who bore witness today to
the violence that minorities are suffering in the Middle
East. Luxembourg fully supports the statement made
by the observer of the European Union.
All forms of extremism represent a blinding of
thought. It can only survive when cut off from the
real world and shielded by ignorance. Extremism does
not tolerate either difference or diversity; it abhors
culture and knowledge. Everything that differs from it
threatens its very existence. Shocking as it may seem,
the brutality that Daesh is demonstrating in Iraq and
Syria against minorities and ethnic or religious groups
is not surprising. Those minorities and groups represent
the religious, ethnic and cultural plurality that is so
characteristic of the Middle East. By the very fact of
their existence, they are a challenge to the nihilistic and
totalitarian ideology of Daesh.
In its destructive madness, Daesh attacks men,
women and children of all minorities, be they Christian,
Yazidi, Kurdish or Turkmen. Its will to annihilate all
trace of those communities leads Daesh to also attack
the sanctuaries and cultural heritage of the Shiites, the
Christians and even the Sunnis. As the concept note

S/PV.7419

before us (S/2015/176, annex) rightly indicates, this is
an attempt to systematically destroy the diversity of the
social fabric in the regions concerned.
The recent report of the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights on the situation
of human rights internationaln Iraq (A/HRC/28/18)
concludes that the acts committed by Daesh there
against minorities are akin to war crimes, crimes
against humanity and acts of genocide. Those findings
echo those of the ninth report recently issued by the
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic (A/HRC/28/69). Women and children of
minorities are particularly affected. Their life has no
value for the Daesh fighters; it is simply a means of
exchange. Boys are recruited and indoctrinated before
being used in the conflict. Women and girls, especially
Yazidis, are seen as the spoils of war and are raped and
offered as sex slaves to Daesh fighters.
We vehemently condemn all the atrocities that
Daesh and other parties to the conflict have committed.
In that context, we support the idea that the United
Nations should draft an action plan to protect minorities
in the Middle East with all the tools at its disposal.
Luxembourg is prepared to provide its support,
particularly in the humanitarian field.
The rise of Daesh in the Middle East cannot be
separated from the regional political context. Daesh
has fed on the brutal repression committed by the
Al-Assad regime against its own people in Syria and on
sectarian tensions in Iraq. Countering Daesh therefore
also means seeking a political solution to the multiple
crises that affect the region and the socioeconomic
challenges facing the people. That is all the more urgent
because there is a real risk of the spread of the scourge
of extremism.
In adopting resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014)
and 2191 (2014) last year, the objective of the Security
Council was to work to significantly improve the
humanitarian and human rights situation in Syria. If the
solution to the conflict in Syria can only be political,
that does not release the parties, primarily the Syrian
authorities, from their responsibilities in terms of
protecting civilians. The Security Council must act to
ensure full compliance with resolutions 2139 (2014),
2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014), as well as with resolutions
aimed at countering the terrorist threat in the region,
particularly resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014).

15-0877865/78

S/PV.7419

The situation in the Middle East

Over the long term, it is by doing justice that we
will best respond to injustice. It is by righting the
wrongs against the innocent that the victims will be
rehabilitated in their dignity. That is why Luxembourg
continues to call for the Security Council to refer the
situation that has prevailed in Syria since March 2011
to the International Criminal Court (ICC). That is also
why we encourage Iraq to accede to the Rome Statute
of the ICC, or at least make a statement recognizing the
Court’s jurisdiction. Those who today threaten the very
existence of the minorities that are the mosaic of the
Middle East should know that justice will eventually
catch up with them.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Eler (Turkey): For centuries, the Middle East
has been the cradle of peaceful coexistence for different
communities. People of the Middle East lived side by
side, considering their differences to be a richness.
Today we are witnessing a dramatically different
atmosphere, and we all need to try to understand the
root causes of this situation.
Sectarian policies and brutal responses to the
legitimate demands for democracy in the region have
been coupled with feelings of resentment due to the
growing discrimination, xenophobia and Islamophobia
in other parts of the world. This has created a poisonous
mixture that has eroded the culture of tolerance and the
social fabric of the region and has acquired dimensions
that affect global security.
We should be clear on two facts: first, terrorism
and extremism are not a Middle Eastern phenomenon.
Terrorism cannot and should not be associated with any
religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic group.
Secondly, as violence and terrorism have no
religion, we should not treat their victims differently
or selectively based on their identity, nationality or
religion. Even though the majority of the victims of
violence and persecution in the Middle East are Muslim,
our empathy, solidarity and efforts of protection should
encompass all.
With this understanding, let me briefly touch upon
some particular situations.

27/03/2015

I will not take up the Council’s time by responding to
one delegation’s renewed baseless allegations, which
we categorically reject.
The focus of most of the interventions today was
the shocking persecutions and abductions committed
by Daesh. The brutality of its actions should not lead
to any illusions about the conditions that have caused
the emergence of this terrorist organization. The
regime brutally suppressed the legitimate demands of
Syrians and, in an attempt to prolong its grip on power,
continues to employ all kinds of instruments, including
chemical weapons and barrel bombs, and to commit
mass violations of human rights.
Nor should Daesh’s appalling actions mislead
us about our priorities on the way forward. The
international community and the Security Council
need to address the root cause of the problem in Syria
through resolute action. A genuine political transition
in accordance with the Geneva communiqué is the only
solution in that regard.
In Iraq, Shiite and Sunni Muslim communities
were among the first to be persecuted by Daesh. These
persecutions, which targeted all segments of Iraqi
society, have forced 2.2 million civilians to flee their
homes. We support the Iraqi Government with respect
to the challenge it faces. We have so far provided 750
truckloads of humanitarian aid to Iraq for all Iraqis,
including Sunnis, Shiites, Turkomans and Christians.
In response to the aid appeals made by the governorate
of Mosul and the Kurdish regional Government of Iraq,
they were delivered to populations in need in Mosul,
Telafer and Sinjar, in addition to the aid channelled
to the central regions of Iraq affected by the ongoing
crisis.
We have also built three camps in northern Iraq for
internally displaced persons, with a total capacity of
37,500. We are in the process of building a fourth camp
in Kirkuk in coordination with the local authorities.
These efforts will continue. Last but not least, we have
opened our doors to the victims. Almost 200,000 Iraqis,
including Christians and 20,000 Yazidis, have sought
refuge in Turkey.

The conflict in Syria has just entered its fifth year.

This figure is in addition to the over 1.7 million
Syrians whom we are hosting without any regard for
their ethnic or religious background.

The situation has gone from bad to worse and
become a threat to global peace and security. That said,

In the framework of this important open debate,
we cannot ignore the plight of the Palestinians who

66/78

15-08778

27/03/2015

The situation in the Middle East

are living under occupation. They are deprived of their
basic rights and are subject to discrimination. We need
to keep in mind that the historical injustice against the
Palestinian people is fuelling hatred, alienation and
radicalism. The resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict based on the two-State vision would not only
enable the Palestinians to enjoy their basic rights
and freedoms, but also constitute a key step towards
tackling instability and radicalism in the region.
In today’s world, no region or community is
immune to violence and persecution. We are witnessing
a global phenomenon, and we need to address it through
global cooperation. Our common struggle against
discrimination, intolerance, racism, xenophobia,
anti-Semitism and Islamophobia is more relevant than
ever.
With this understanding, we co-launched the
Alliance of Civilizations initiative in 2005. We have
insistently argued that our commonalities outweigh
our differences and that fostering intercultural
understanding can help create an environment of
mutual respect.
The fundamental rights and freedoms of the peoples
in the Middle East can be secured by eliminating the
conditions that provide a fertile environment for Daesh
and other terrorist groups. Political, democratic and
inclusive solutions to the multiple crises in the region
will be essential in this regard.
Despite all of the difficulties, we believe that the
peoples of the Middle East will succeed in their efforts
to revitalize their deep-rooted culture of tolerance and
peaceful coexistence.
Lastly, in relation to the remarks made by the
Deputy Foreign Minister of Armenia, let me make the
following points, which were also highlighted in the
messages by President Erdoğan and Prime Minister
Davutoğlu in April 2014 and last January, respectively.
Turkey shares the suffering of the Armenians and is
endeavouring, with patience and resolve, to re-establish
empathy between the two peoples. It is indisputable that
the last years of the Ottoman Empire were a difficult
period, full of suffering for Turkish, Armenian,
Kurdish, Arab and millions of other Ottoman citizens,
regardless of their religion or ethnic origin. It is the
duty of humankind to acknowledge that the Armenians
remember the suffering experienced during that period,
just like every citizen of the Ottoman Empire.

S/PV.7419

However, we disagree as to the portrayal of events
as genocide. The narratives of the parties do not as yet
converge. What we need to do is forge a shared and just
memory. In that regard, let me once again stress that
our desire to share in the pain, to heal the wounds and
to re-establish friendship is sincere. Our course is set
towards a horizon of friendship and peace.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): The Kingdom
of the Netherlands aligns itself with the statement made
earlier by the European Union (EU).
I will read out a short version of my statement. My
full text will be available via my Twitter account in
view of time constraints.
First of all, I would like to thank France for
organizing this very important open debate on this very
urgent issue, which directs our attention to the violent
extremism, intolerance, religious and ethnic hatred that
have gained ground in recent months, in particular in
the Middle East. The Kingdom of the Netherlands, as
a partner for peace, justice and development, applauds
the inclusive nature of this debate.
I will make three points: on human rights, on the
actions my Kingdom has taken, and on accountability.
On human rights, every individual must have the
freedom to express his or her identity. This includes the
right to have any religion, the right to change religion
or to have no religion at all. Human rights, in our view,
apply to all. To exclude any person belonging to a
particular group would undermine the universality of
our common human rights.
My Government is therefore deeply worried about
the deteriorating security situation in the Middle East.
The brutality of the crimes committed by extremist
groups in the region is unparalleled in recent history.
The future of the multi-ethnic and religious landscape
of the Middle East is under imminent threat.
My second point concerns the actions taken by my
Government.
We are committed in our fight against violent
extremism in the region. As a member of the international
coalition against the Islamic State in Iraq and Sham
(ISIS), we have contributed 250 military personnel and
six F-16 aircraft. Furthermore, we have deployed 130
Dutch military trainers to train local coalition forces to

15-0877867/78

S/PV.7419

The situation in the Middle East

fight these extremist groups. Furthermore, the Kingdom
of the Netherlands co-chairs the Foreign Terrorist
Fighters Working Group within the anti-ISIS coalition.
Of course, we also provide humanitarian assistance to
countries facing the challenge of hundreds of thousands
of refugees as a result of this violence. To the Syrian
crisis alone, my Kingdom has contributed more than
€114 million since 2012, and at the Kuwait pledging
conference next week my country will further step up
its efforts to contribute to humanitarian assistance in
the region. We hope other States will do the same.
The international community has a collective
responsibility to protect civilian populations from
international crimes. That holds especially true for
vulnerable groups in society, like ethnic and religious
minorities. My Government urges the permanent
members of the Security Council to agree to refrain
from the use of their veto in situations where civilians
are threatened with mass atrocity crimes. We salute the
initiative to that effect of the Government of France.
My third point centres on accountability. Military
action is not enough. Efforts must be made to strengthen
the rule of law and to build inclusive societies.
Furthermore, we need justice. The perpetrators of those
heinous crimes need to be held accountable. Justice and
accountability should be included in the political process
from the start. Impunity would simply create a new
breeding ground for new violent extremism. National
capacities to deal with justice and accountability must
be strengthened as part of the transition and posttransition process. If accountability cannot be achieved
domestically, the Netherlands calls on the Council to
request the International Criminal Court in the Hague
to play its role as a court of last resort.
In conclusion, the future of the multi-ethnic and
religious landscape of the region is under threat. This
needs a firm collective response from us, the States
Members of the United Nations. The principles of the
United Nations Charter are at stake. The Kingdom of
the Netherlands, as a partner for peace, justice and
development, will continue to contribute to that firm
response.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Croatia.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): I would like to thank
France for convening this important meeting, which
has provided us with many constructive and valuable
proposals. We hope that today’s debate will help to

68/78

27/03/2015

further mobilize the international community against
the actions of Daesh and other terrorist groups in the
Middle East.
Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered on
behalf of the European Union. However, I would like to
make some additional remarks in my national capacity.
Let me start by expressing our grave concern over
the situation of Christian, Yazidi and other religious
and ethnic communities in the Middle East, especially
in Iraq and Syria, whose very existence and survival
is seriously threatened. We have seen horrific acts of
violence and unspeakable barbarism committed in
the name of religion by Daesh and associated groups
against individuals belonging to disfavoured religious
and other minorities. We strongly deplore those actions
as well as the destruction of precious religious and
cultural heritage. The actions of Daesh constitute
serious violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law, and may constitute a crime against
humanity and genocide, for which there must be
accountability. In that regard, we believe that the role
of the International Criminal Court in the fight against
impunity is indispensable.
We highly commend the efforts of the United
Nations and other international organizations and
non-governmental organizations, in raising awareness
of, documenting and reporting violence and crimes
against minority communities in the region. We
believe that more concerted efforts are needed to
combat all forms of religious fundamentalism and
manipulation of religious beliefs for terrorist purposes.
In that context, we fully support the initiative to
prepare a comprehensive action plan on preventing
violent extremism and to create a panel of experts, as
announced today by the Secretary-General. We believe
that the action plan should encompass security aspects,
humanitarian actions, sociopolitical inclusivity, the
fight against impunity, the fight against discrimination,
and the preservation of ethnic and religious diversity.
It is of vital importance to protect and preserve
lives and the tradition of intercultural, interethnic
and interreligious coexistence in the region. Those
centuries-old traditions are treasures of mankind;
various religious minorities in the region are part of
our common human heritage. Judaism, Christianity
and Islam were all born in the Middle East, are
inextricably linked to one another, and have a long
celebrated tradition of coexistence. The situation in the

15-08778

27/03/2015

The situation in the Middle East

Middle East is very complex, but it is important to keep
the focus of the international community not only on
security issues, but also on the suffering of religious
and other minority groups. We cannot ignore the fact
that Christians in the Middle East are increasingly
being targeted by Islamist fundamentalists, and that the
Christian population of the Middle East has decreased
dramatically and continues to do so.
Croatia supported the Joint Declaration Supporting
the Human Rights of Christians and Other Communities,
particularly in the Middle East, issued at the twentyeighth session of the Human Rights Council in Geneva
on 13 March. It was the first time that the plight of
Christians was specifically addressed by the Human
Rights Council. It has to be stated clearly that Islam
cannot be used as an ideological excuse for violence
against Christian and other minorities, or any other
religion for that matter. Aziz Hasanovic, mufti of the
Islamic community in Croatia, has said recently that the
terrorists who use Islam as an excuse are harming and
abusing their religion. They betray the faith, the essence
of which is love, dialogue, coexistence and offering
assistance to people in need. Hatred and exclusivity of
any kind have no place in Islam. Therefore we should
all, regardless of our faith and beliefs, unite our efforts
to fight against those who distort and abuse any religion
as justification for their terrorist acts. We all have to
work together for the sake of peace and respect for the
dignity and rights of every single person, and the values
of diversity and peaceful coexistence.
Let me conclude by reiterating our strong support
and solidarity with the persecuted religious and ethnic
minorities of the Middle East.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in
French): First, I would like to congratulate you on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
this month.
(spoke in Arabic)
I would also like to thank you for convening this
meeting on the victims of attacks and abuses based
on ethnic or religious affiliation in the Middle East. I
would also like to thank Mr. Laurent Fabius, Minister
of Foreign Affairs of France, specifically, for attending
and presiding over this meeting.

S/PV.7419

The Middle East is experiencing a period of
unprecedented chaos and difficulty. Islam is facing
attack from two fronts, both from within and without.
Within, extremist groups cloaked falsely in religious
garb, such as Daesh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant,
Al-Qaida, Hizbullah and others, are carrying out the
worst forms of killing and persecution, the primary
victims of which are large numbers of Muslims. The
flames of those acts are reaching many members of
other communities.
From without, Islam is confronting a provocative and
inflammatory media campaign that includes violence
against Muslims in some parts of Europe, Myanmar,
Palestine and other places. That campaign also includes
practices that, though not violent, are no less harmful.
Those practices include the distortion and disrespect
of Islamic holy and religious sites and figures, such as
the publication of caricatures that are offensive to the
Prophet Mohammed, peace be upon him. Therefore, we
would have wished that the perspective of this meeting
had taken all of those items into consideration and did
not limit itself to the question of attacks and abuses on
minorities in the Middle East, despite the importance
of that subject.
If we were to look more broadly at this topic
and try to understand its historical dimensions, we
would realize that Islam is a religion of tolerance and
openness. It is a religion that does not distinguish or
discriminate among religions. God says in his noble
book, The Koran, that the messenger, the Prophet,
believed in what was revealed to him from his Lord,
and have the faithful have done likewise ever since. All
of them have believed in Allah, His angels, His books
and His messengers, saying that we must make no
distinction among any of his messengers.
Islam requires all its adherents to be rightful and
just to others, as God All Mighty says:
“God does not forbid you to deal justly and
kindly with those who have not fought against you
on account of religion and have not driven you out
of your homes, and does not forbid you from being
righteous towards them and acting justly towards
them.”
This religion does not consider its followers’ faith
complete unless also they believe in the message of
Jesus, Moses and other prophets of God. Islam is a
religion that recognizes religious freedom. As God
Almighty says, “There is no compunction in religion”.

15-0877869/78

S/PV.7419

The situation in the Middle East

Islam is the religion that has looked after religious
minorities throughout the centuries, including
Christians in Palestine and Jews in Andalusia and
others. Therefore, what the persecution of religious
minorities in the Middle East today is a clear and grave
violation of the law of the noble religion of Islam. The
hateful exploitation and distortion of Islam and its
principles are also often used to justify the oppression
and marginalization suffered by Muslims themselves,
whether at the hands of oppressive and unjust regimes,
such as the Syrian regime, which has killed hundreds of
thousands of Syrians and has displaced millions of them
regardless of their faith, ethnicity or sectarian beliefs;
or at the hands of Israel, which continues to persecute
the Palestinian people, Muslims and Christians alike,
and to practice the most heinous forms of killing and
ethnic cleansing against them.
Combating violence and attacks against religious
minorities in the Middle East and everywhere else
in the world must be based on two main pillars. The
first is the fight against all forms of terrorism and
the isolation of its supporters; the second is the
restoration of rights and the principles of international
justice and the rule of law among and within States.
The Middle East, which suffers from violence and
attacks on minorities, requires and needs from the
Council a profound remedy and solution to its political
problems, first among which is the acknowledgement
of the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people and
the enablement of Palestine to exercise its legitimate
right to self-determination and the establishment
of an independent State within the borders of 4 June
1967, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif, noble Jerusalem, as its
capital. It also requires reaching a political solution for
the plight of the Syrian people, based on the Geneva
Declaration, which calls for the establishment of a fully
empowered executive authority that would lead the
Syrian people towards the realization of its aspirations
in justice, freedom and prosperity. It is also important
to prevent extremist forces, such as Hizbullah and the
Houthis, from enforcing their political will over other
groups through the use of armed force. It is important
to combat terrorism everywhere, without hesitation and
with all possible means.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia recognizes and
understands the importance of dialogue with the
followers of other faiths and cultures. Therefore,
in cooperation with the Kingdom of Spain and the
Republic of Austria and with the participation of the

70/78

27/03/2015

Vatican, we have established the King Abdullah bin
Abdulaziz International Centre for Interreligious and
Intercultural Dialogue in Vienna to foster dialogue
and understanding among the various religions and
communities. We have also sponsored and continue
to sponsor channels of dialogue within the various
communities of Islam. We have combatted terrorism
through participation in the coalition that is confronting
Daesh in the north of our region and the Houthis in the
south. We have participated in the establishment of the
International Centre for Counter-Terrorism, under the
auspices of the United Nations. We have launched our
peace initiative for Palestine. When the bands of Daesh
overwhelmed large tracts of territory in Iraq, we rushed
to provide assistance to our brothers in that country,
and contributed $500 million to assist those who
were harmed by the terrorist attack, regardless of the
religious, communal or ethnic identity of the victims.
Thus, my country continues to combat those who
oppress and persecute minorities, while at the same
time, it continues to try to reach political and cultural
solutions so as to promote understanding, coexistence
and dialogue. That is our path; that is what we call for
with wisdom and good practices.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Ružička (Slovakia): At the outset, Slovakia
aligns itself with the statement presented earlier on
behalf of the European Union. I would also like to
thank the French presidency for taking the initiative in
organizing this important debate.
Before I narrow my statement to focus on the
victims of attacks and abuses on religious and ethnic
grounds in the region of the Middle East, I would like
to point out the following reasons for the brutality
of the radical groups Daesh and Boko Haram. The
victims of those attacks were disgracefully killed by
individuals —
­ it is very difficult to call them human
beings — motivated by pure hatred. The victims were
abused and tortured, and they suffered in a way that
none of us here is probably able to imagine.
Terrorism and extremism are often linked with
religion, but that is wrong; it is a mistake. There may
be other links to a combination of many elements,
like globalization, migration and social problems,
lack of education, desperation or the lack of decent
perspectives for one’s life. Slovakia rejects all racial
or religious intolerance, radicalism and extremism, as

15-08778

27/03/2015

The situation in the Middle East

well as the linking of terrorism to religion. Hostilities
targeting civilians — members of different religious
communities and minorities — are a serious offense
against basic human rights. Nor should we speak about
the clash of civilizations. It is a clash of humanity
versus brutality, which is often based on personal or
group destructive hatred against society, other groups
or individuals.
The Middle East region, religion and ethnicity are
the subjects of today’s debate, and not incidentally. The
region has given birth to some of the most important
world religions. That unique diversity faces an
existential threat from the so-called Islamic State and
from Al-Qaida and affiliated terrorist groups, which
disrupt the lives of all the communities in the region.
Millions of people have been either displaced or forced
to leave their ancestral lands. Those who stay in conflict
zones or areas controlled by terrorist groups live under
the permanent threat of human-rights violations,
repression and abuses. Terrorist groups target anyone
and everyone. There is no escape from their hatred.
Muslims, Christians, Jews, Yazidis, the elderly, men,
women, children — terror knows no difference there
and no boundaries. Unfortunately, so far, the terrorists
know only one thing; there is almost complete impunity
for the crimes they have already committed.
Religious and ethnic fanaticism is a danger
that may exist in any religion or belief. Slovakia is
of the opinion that it is the duty of the international
community, Governments, religious institutions and all
relevant stakeholders to speak out promptly, clearly and
loudly against any acts of violence committed in the
name of religion. We must take all necessary actions
in order to combat extremism and incitement to hatred
more effectively.
Terrorism represents one of the gravest threats not
only to the Middle East but also to us in Europe and the
whole world. In the fight against terrorism, the world
stands on the same side and only joint efforts will lead
to the desired results. The international community
has a duty to assist in building the capacity of States
to fulfil their commitments to the responsibility to
protect their populations from genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity. The
international community should hold States and
non-State armed groups to account and make them
aware of the existing tools and instruments under
international law, including punitive ones, that must

S/PV.7419

be used to protect human rights. The community must
apply humanitarian, criminal and refugee law.
Slovakia is ready to support any action in that
regard. Once again, I call upon the international
community to take action immediately, because, as
we speak, victims of abuse continue to suffer. Hatred,
fuelled by desperation and false interpretations of
religious beliefs, can be easily implemented against a
tortured soul, especially of a child. Any hesitation to
take an active step increases numbers of those who may
be misled by some who intentionally rupture ideals of
good faith and seed hatred among people.
To conclude, it is the rich unprecedented Middle
East history which has brought Muslims, Christians
and Jews to live in the same cities. Diversity is the
fortune of the region and we must not let it become the
reason of its decline.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the Permanent Observer of the observer State of the
Holy See.
Archbishop Auza (Holy See) (spoke in French):
On behalf of His Holiness Pope Francis, I greatly thank
the French presidency for convening this debate on the
victims of attacks and abuses on ethnic or religious
grounds in the Middle East.
(spoke in English)
The debate is not only timely, but also most urgent,
especially when calling to mind those who have already
lost their lives, for whom this open debate has come too
late. Their fate urges us to do all that we can to prevent
further victims of attacks and abuses based on ethnic
and, or, religious grounds. Christians and other religious
minorities of the Middle East seek to be heard by the
Council and other international forums, not in some
abstract form, but in a manner that is truly conscious
of their pain and suffering and their existential fear for
survival in the Middle East and elsewhere.
We must acknowledge that the problem exists
and that the hour is grave. Ethnic and religious
communities — including Turkmen, Shabak, Yazidi,
Sabaean, Kaka’e, Feyli Kurd, Shiite Arab and even
Sunni Arab and Kurd — face extreme pressure, abuse
of their human rights, torture, killing and all forms of
persecution, purely due to the faith they profess or the
ethnic group to which they belong.

15-0877871/78

S/PV.7419

The situation in the Middle East

The Christians in the Middle East have been
specifically targeted, killed or forced to flee their homes
and countries. We have helplessly watched as Assyrian
Christians have been kidnapped in Iraq by the so-called
Islamic State group, Egyptian Coptic Christians have
been beheaded by organizations affiliated with the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in Libya, and the
Christians in Mosul have been nearly eliminated. Only
25 years ago, there were 2 million Christians living in
Iraq, while the most recent estimates are less than a
quarter of that figure.
Faced with the unbearable situation of living in
a conflict zone controlled by terrorist and extremist
organizations that constantly threaten them with death,
and with a deep sense of feeling abandoned to their
fate by the legitimate authorities and the international
community, entire communities of Christians,
especially from northern Iraq, have been brutally
forced to flee their homes and have sought refuge in
the Kurdistan region of Iraq and in the neighbouring
countries of the region.
The Holy See expresses profound gratitude to
countries and leaders in the region that have openly
defend the Christians as an integral part of the
religious, historical and cultural fabric of the region.
For 2,000 years, Christians have called the Middle
East home; indeed, as we know, the Middle East is the
cradle of Christianity. Thus, it pains us deeply that the
ancient Christian communities in the region — many
of which still speak Aramaic, the language of Jesus
Christ — are among those threatened with extinction.
Their uninterrupted existence in the region is testimony
to many centuries of coexistence, side by side, with
Muslims and other religious and ethnic communities.
Those communities are an integral part of the
cultural and religious identity of the Middle East,
thus their disappearance from there would not only
be a religious tragedy, but the loss of a rich cultural
and religious patrimony that contributes so much
to the societies to which they belong and which the
whole world has much interest in preserving. The Holy
See therefore calls on all of the leaders and people of
goodwill in the region and throughout the world to act
before it is too late.
In 2005 at the World Summit, the entire
international community agreed that every State has the
primary responsibility to protect its populations from
genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity and

72/78

27/03/2015

ethnic cleansing and related incitement. Moreover, the
international community recognizes its responsibility
to assist States in fulfilling their primary responsibility.
However, when a State is unable or unwilling to
uphold that primary responsibility, the international
community must be prepared to take action to protect
populations in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations.
As Pope Benedict XVI underlined in his address
to the General Assembly in 2008 (see A/62/PV.95),
the responsibility to protect is not a novel creation in
international law, but rather is rooted in the ancient ius
gentium — the law of peoples — as the foundation of
every action taken by those in Government with regard
to the governed. Building on that ancient tradition and
its reiterations in international humanitarian law and
in today’s United Nations forums, Pope Francis has
repeatedly called upon the international community to
do all that it can to stop and to prevent further systematic
violence against ethnic and religious minorities.
The Holy See avails itself of this opportunity to
convey its deep appreciation to the countries in the
region and to all those who work tirelessly, even risking
their lives, to provide assistance to some 2.5 million
internally displaced persons in Iraq, to 12 million
Syrians in need of humanitarian assistance, of whom
4 million are living as refugees and 7.5 million are
internally displaced. Let us help these neighbourly
countries as they care for and welcome the refugees.
Delayed action will mean only that more people will
die, or be displaced or persecuted. Pope Francis exhorts
us all to join our efforts to support a Middle East that
will continue to be a welcoming home for all of its
ethnic and religious groups.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of Ireland.
Mr. Mawe (Ireland): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing today’s debate on
this important subject. Ireland aligns itself with the
statement delivered earlier on behalf of the European
Union and its member States. I would also, at the outset,
like to thank the speakers who have provided here firsthand testimony of the persecution they have suffered
for their beliefs.
Ireland’s Minister for Foreign Affairs, Charles
Flanagan, in his address to the General Assembly last
September (see A/69/PV.18), condemned all forms
of persecution or discrimination based on religion or

15-08778

27/03/2015

The situation in the Middle East

belief and specifically highlighted the persecution of
religious minorities in the Middle East, as well as the
rise of anti-Semitic attacks in European countries.
However, as we have heard today, attacks on
individuals and communities for their religious beliefs
or ethnic background have become a tragically regular
occurrence. While the phenomenon is seen across the
globe, it has taken a particularly virulent and deadly
form in a number of countries in the Middle East.
The breakdown of established State and community
structures and the emergence of radical groups with
seemingly unfettered access to arms, have significantly
increased the vulnerability of minorities across the
region.
The Middle East, birthplace of many of the world’s
most significant religions, remains the homeland of
many diverse religious communities. However the
descent of Syria, Iraq and Libya into violence and
disarray has left numerous religious communities
exposed to violence. Recent sectarian atrocities include
the despicable murder of 21 Egyptian Copts in Libya,
the kidnapping of more than 150 Assyrian Christians
in eastern Syria, the massacre of Shiite worshippers
at mosques in Sana’a, as well as the ongoing abuse
of Yazidi women at the hands of the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant. Such acts are entirely abhorrent.
Those and other actions jeopardize the survival of
the multi-ethnic and multi-religious character of the
Middle East and the prospect for inclusive stability in
the long-term. The fact that many of the perpetrators of
the violence claim to do so in the name of religion only
exacerbates the situation.
While many countries, especially in the
neighbourhood, have provided refuge for individuals
and groups, the relocation of entire communities is
not the answer. It is essential to preserve communities
where they have survived, in many cases since antiquity.
It is where they belong and where they have a right to
belong. The protection of the fundamental rights of
all communities, including the very many Muslims
victimized by religious persecution and terrorism
across the wider Middle East, is a fundamental duty of
all States in the region.
As the observer of the European Union said earlier,
respect for human rights, promotion of inclusive and
democratic societies and support to vibrant civil societies
is the only way to guarantee full security and full
stability for all people in the region. The international
community must also bear its responsibility. The United

S/PV.7419

Nations must utilize all tools at its disposal to protect
vulnerable communities and to ensure that those who
have the capacity fulfil their obligations.
We must also pay special attention to the role of
women, not only as victims of extremism but also as
agents of transformative change. Just two weeks ago
in New York, Ireland partnered with El Karama, a
platform of women’s organizations from the Middle
East and North African region, in highlighting the
need to expand the influence of Arab women as
leaders. Inspiring women from Syria, Libya and Sudan
spoke to rooms filled to capacity and brought a very
clear message with them: women must be included
at the highest levels, from peace and reconciliation
negotiations, to post-conflict decision-making, to
representation in the formation of new Constitutions.
We must now act on their message.
Ireland is committed to defending the right to
freedom of religion or belief and seeks to ensure that
focussed attention is given to this issue, including
through our current membership of the Human Rights
Council.
Finally, as we continue work on the post-2015
development agenda, we must recognize the strong
linkages between peace, development and respect for
human rights. And while we work to counter the current
series of attacks and abuses, the longer-term challenge
to us all is in giving effect to a development agenda in
a manner that systematically tackles the root causes of
such attacks.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bahrain.
Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by thanking you, Sir, for convening this
important meeting of the Security Council. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General and the
High Commissioner for Human Rights for their very
comprehensive briefings at the opening of this debate.
The Bahrain Declaration (A/68/959, annex),
reiterated the outcomes of the Alliance of Civilizations
Forum, held last May, with the participation of eminent
representatives of several religions and doctrines as
well as a worldwide network of universities. The Forum
reiterated the fact that humanity is something that all
persons share, no matter what their race, ethnic group,
linguistic or other origin may be Dialogue is the very
basis that brings people together in all their diversity to

15-0877873/78

S/PV.7419

The situation in the Middle East

achieve peace, security, justice, development, equality,
liberty and democracy.
The use of hate speech is incompatible with
humanity and civilization. Unfamiliarity with those
who are different from us leads to hatred, which in
turn leads to exclusion, discrimination, terrorism,
confrontation instead of dialogue, violence instead of
peace, and hatred instead of solidarity and friendship.
Bahrain is an oasis of multiculturalism and
multiracialism in the region that was the cradle of
civilization. We have woven a social fabric that is
open and welcoming to all, no matter what religion
or doctrine they may belong to. The mosque, the
synagogue and the church sit close together in our
capital Manama, within less than one square kilometre.
One can see Christians and Jews in Parliament and as
representatives abroad. Our leader, His Majesty King
Hamad bin Issa Al Khalifa, reiterated the need to build
a new human civilization, which will serve as the basis
of our fraternity and bind all of us together under the
flag of human values to be protected from extremism
and terrorism.
Bahrain firmly believes in the need to fight
extremist thinking, which not only degrades human
nature but also damages the precepts of the Islamic
religion, as we can see from the actions of Daesh and
others. Men of religion and knowledge must respond to
that mentality. It attacks not only individuals but ethnic
and religious minorities as well. Such people are being
displaced and their cultural heritage is the being looted
and destroyed. All of this is completely incompatible
with the precepts of any religion.
As mentioned in the concept note (S/2015/176,
annex), the international community must assume its
responsibility to ensure that the Middle East remains
welcoming and open to all — a centre that protects
minorities, both ethnic and religious, and allows them
to flourish because of their variety and their cultures.
This is why we are providing humanitarian assistance
to groups that have been preyed upon by discrimination
and displacement.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Botswana.
Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): At the outset, allow me
to congratulate France on assuming the presidency of
the Council for the month of March. We commend you,
Sir, for having convened this very important debate on

74/78

27/03/2015

an issue that remains one of the most serious threats to
national, regional and international peace and security.
We deeply appreciate the presence of and briefings
by the eminent persons who have joined us here
today, all of whom have imparted tremendous insight,
which has greatly broadened our understanding of the
subject matter. We wish to acknowledge specifically
the presence earlier today of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of your great country, Sir.
It is deeply regrettable that the world has become
more brutal and vicious. We are witnessing an
unprecedented pattern of violence among religious
groups, across regions, from Africa to Asia to the Middle
East, where people are turning against each other in the
name of religion and culture. The beheadings by the
Islamic State in Iraq and Syria captured on video, as well
as the killings and major displacements of Christians
and Yazidis in Iraq, are just some of the appalling
crimes that have been committed in the Middle East
region. These acts of violence further complicate the
long-standing conflicts in Syria and between Israel and
Palestine.
The efforts of the United Nations, including the
deployment of peacekeeping operations and special
political missions, the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency, and the Security Council’s adoption of
presidential statements and resolutions on the various
situations, are truly commendable.
While it is difficult to identify the precise cause
of some of those violent conflicts, we have seen that
in most of them large numbers of Christians have been
abducted, sexually and physically abused or killed;
moreover, their churches have been destroyed, and
some have been forced to change religion. We join the
international community in condemning those acts in
the strongest terms. We believe that freedom of religion
is a basic and fundamental human right that should
never be violated.
Societies have different values, beliefs and
religions. They should therefore be allowed to live
without fear and to practice their religions. For that
reason, it goes without saying that Governments have
the responsibility to protect their populations from
mass atrocities and human rights violations, especially
those linked to religion and ethnicity. The victims of
such attacks deserve justice. The International Criminal
Court remains their only ray of hope. We therefore call

15-08778

27/03/2015

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.7419

on the Court to continue to conduct investigations and
prosecute the perpetrators of such heinous crimes.

to ensure civilian protection while fighting against
impunity.

In conclusion, Botswana joins the international
community in strongly condemning acts of terrorism
in all their forms and manifestations. Terrorism cannot
be contained within national borders. Therefore no
country is immune from being either the target or the
victim of terrorism.

During the Republic of Korea’s presidency of
the Council in May 2014, we voted in favour of draft
resolution S/2014/348 referring Syria to the International
Criminal Court for crimes against humanity. Although
that draft resolution was not adopted, the Republic of
Korea supported the need for accountability, because
we believed that sustainable peace is not possible
without justice. We still hold that belief.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Republic of Korea.
Ms. Paik Ji-ah (Republic of Korea): The Republic
of Korea remains deeply concerned about the continuing
volatile situation in the Middle East. The rise of
violent extremism based on religious hatred and ethnic
intolerance, as witnessed in the recent series of tragic
events in Syria, Iraq and Libya is a cause for serious
concern for the entire international community.
My delegation believes that a culture of tolerance
and harmony must prevail, and that efforts should be
made to foster a dialogue to overcome the deep rifts
that exist along religious, ethnic, and tribal lines. We
also share the views expressed by many Member States
in the Council today that more needs to be done to
address that issue in order to ensure that the Middle
East remains both diverse and inclusive. As detailed in
various United Nations reports, including the report of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees on the human rights situation in Iraq
(A/HRC/28/18), abuses committed by the Islamic State
of Iraq and the Levant and associated groups that have
specifically targeted Yazidis, Christians, Turkmen,
Kurds and Shiites, among others, could in fact constitute
genocide, while other incidents “may amount to crimes
against humanity and war crimes”.
With respect to such crimes, the Council has taken
firm positions in the past, recognizing that those who
are most vulnerable, such as women, children and
minorities, bear the brunt of the suffering and are in
dire need of protection from the broader international
community. One of the concepts that arises from that
recognition is the idea of the responsibility to protect,
which places primary responsibility on States to
protect their populations from genocide, crimes against
humanity, war crimes and ethnic cleansing, while
imposing a corresponding duty on the international
community to assist States in fulfilling that obligation
and to take action when such crimes are committed.
In that vein, we urge the Council to consider ways

Strengthening the international community’s
tool kit to effectively respond to the widespread and
systematic persecution of individuals based on ethnic
and religious grounds is in everyone’s interests. In that
regard, the Republic of Korea supports France’s efforts
to build on the outcome of the Summit on Countering
Violent Extremism that was held in Washington, D.C., on
19 February, in which the Republic of Korea expressed
its commitment to contribute in the areas of education
and private sector partnership. We look forward to the
opportunity for additional discussions on that issue in
this Chamber in the near future.
In conclusion, the Republic of Korea pledges to
remain focused on the plight of vulnerable populations
in the Middle East and will make every effort to call
for increased civilian protection, greater accountability
and eventual justice vis-à-vis crimes perpetrated on
ethnic or religious grounds.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Latvia.
Mr. Mažeiks (Latvia): I thank the SecretaryGeneral and the High Commissioner for Human Rights,
as well as Ms. Vian Dakhil and His Beatitude Louis
Raphaël I Sako, for their statements. I also thank
the French presidency of the Security Council for
organizing this important debate on the widespread and
systematic targeting of persons belonging to ethnic and
religious minorities in the Middle East.
Latvia aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union.
In the twenty-first century, the world is experiencing
new and emerging challenges in the form of the rise of
radicalization and violent extremism. Today’s debate
with a special focus on the vulnerable groups affected
by that scourge in the Middle East region is particularly
timely and pertinent. The unjustifiable violent attacks
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)/

15-0877875/78

S/PV.7419

The situation in the Middle East

Daesh and other armed groups against ethnic, religious
minority groups and other vulnerable groups, including
women, children and the lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender and intersex community, are shockingly
widespread and extremely severe.
Christians, Yazidis, Kurds, Turkmen, Shabaks,
Sunnis, Shiites and others are deliberately targeted only
because of their religious or ethnic origin. According
to the reports, the atrocities committed by ISIL/Daesh
include killings of civilians, torture, abductions,
rapes, slavery and trafficking of women and children,
as well as the forced recruitment of children. Sexual
violence has been part of ISIL’s strategy of spreading
terror, persecuting minority groups and suppressing
and forcibly displacing communities that oppose its
ideology. Such grave human rights violations may
amount to war crimes, crimes against humanity
or genocide, as reported by the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights. They cannot be
tolerated by the international community.
Latvia strongly condemns all forms of violence,
persecution, discrimination and intolerance based
on religion or belief, ethnic origin or other grounds.
We condemn in the strongest terms the unspeakable
atrocities committed by ISIL/Daesh and other terrorist
groups, in particular those against vulnerable groups.
The destruction of religious and historical sites,
characterized by UNESCO as a campaign of cultural
cleansing, is also deplorable.
The human rights violations and abuses committed
by ISIL/Daesh and other armed groups against civilian
populations in the Middle East must be properly
investigated and the perpetrators for such crimes must
be held accountable. It is the primary responsibility
of States to protect their civilian populations and to
promote and protect human rights, including those of
persons belonging to religious and ethnic minorities
and other vulnerable groups.
Concerted international action is vital to counter
violent extremism. Latvia has therefore joined the
global coalition to counter ISIL. It is also important
to address the underlying causes of violent extremism
and religious intolerance and to implement preventive
measures to reduce radicalization and recruitment,
especially of young people. The humanitarian needs of
forcibly displaced populations, primarily of religious
and ethnic minority groups, as well as support to
victims released from ISIL/Daesh captivity, including

76/78

27/03/2015

social reintegration and the medical and psychological
care of women and children, are the areas that require
our greatest attention and more coordinated efforts.
Religious and ethnic minority groups living in
the Middle East have the inalienable right to continue
living in their historical areas, where they have
coexisted peacefully for centuries. Peaceful, inclusive
societies, rich in their diversity, must be at the centre
of global efforts to promote tolerance in the region and
to counter the transnational scourge of terrorism and
violent extremism.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
First, we thank France for having convened this
substantive debate and for having circulated the concept
note (S/2015/176, annex) to serve as a guide for our
discussions. Allow me also to greet the members of the
Security Council. We are also grateful for the briefings
by the Secretary-General and the other briefers, who
this morning enriched our perspective and deepened
our commitment to this debate.
We express our deep concern at the report of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
on the situation of human rights in Iraq in the light
of the abuses committed by the Islamic State of Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) and associated groups, which
confirms the commission of serious violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law and
cases of extreme violence that constitute international
crimes of the utmost gravity.
On 13 March, in the Human Rights Council, my
country expressed its firm support for the declaration
entitled “Supporting the human rights of Christians
and other communities” proposed by Russia, Lebanon
and the Holy See, which recognizes the serious threat
to various religious communities in the Middle East,
particularly Christians, who have been displaced or
forced to leave their ancestral lands and are the victims
of acts of extreme violence. The declaration calls on
the international community to support the deeply
rooted historical presence of all ethnic groups and
communities in the Middle East, in the face of the
serious threat from the Islamic State, Al-Qaida and
affiliated terrorist groups, which create the risk of
complete disappearance for the Christians. It also calls
on States to reaffirm their commitment to respecting
the right to freedom of religion.

15-08778

27/03/2015

The situation in the Middle East

Argentina rejects and continues to reject the
repeated violations committed by ISIL against religious
and ethnic minorities, with their consequent negative
impacts on regional stability and international peace
and security. We reiterate our emphatic condemnation
of all terrorist acts carried out by that group, in all
their forms and manifestations, and express our deep
solidarity with the vulnerable civilian population, who
are the victims of the cruelty and barbarous actions of
this terrorist group and its associates.
We are speaking in this debate with a single voice
because it must be made clear that multilaterally and
in the context of regional, subregional and bilateral
relations, as well as in our domestic politics, our
legislation and our way of life as a society, my country
respects and honours the ethical and legal standards that
we view as universal and inalienable, which are also the
moral, ethical and legal basis of our Organization.
For instance, we fully respect the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, which states in article
2 that:
“Everyone is entitled to all the rights and
freedoms set forth in this Declaration, without
distinction of any kind”;
in article 18 that:
“Everyone has the right to freedom of thought,
conscience and religion”;
and in article 7 that:
“All are equal before the law and are entitled
without any discrimination to equal protection of
the law”.
We also respect and abide by the principles
contained in the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action, which recognizes in paragraph 8 that
“religion, spirituality and belief play a central role
in the lives of millions of women and men, and in
the way they live and treat other persons. Religion,
spirituality and belief may and can contribute to
the promotion of the inherent dignity and worth of
the human person and to the eradication of racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance”.
We also agree with paragraph 9, which notes with
concern that

S/PV.7419

“racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance may be aggravated by, inter alia,
inequitable distribution of wealth, marginalization
and social exclusion”,
and paragraph 10, which reaffirms that everyone is
entitled to all human rights.
In different parts of the world, the reprehensible
recurrence and gravity of the terrorist and other
degrading acts inspired by extremist fundamentalism
and the narratives of hatred that use religions and
beliefs as an excuse to justify the unjustifiable and
mask bloodthirsty power struggles, although they are
nothing new or exclusive to our times, represent one of
the most serious issues facing us in the present and in
future.
This is not only because these actions contravene
and violate the ethical principles and legal norms that
the entire international community has recognized
as valuable and necessary, but also because the
recognition of diversity and respect for differences is
a prerequisite for the advent of a fully human world,
since, as Pope Francis said, true peace calls for a world
in which we all feel free to express our concerns, needs,
aspirations and fears. But to that end, the most important
thing is that we all be prepared to accept one another
other, to respect legitimate differences and learn to live
as one single family with a common humanity. This is
not a naive utopia; it is an imperative responsibility and
a call to action.
We are not being overly simplistic; we agree with
the Special Rapporteur on freedom of religion or belief
that such acts of extreme sectarian violence are not
natural disasters or perennial religious antagonisms. As
Saint Jerome said, the corruption of the best is the worst
corruption. Indeed, this suits some people.
My delegation would like to highlight three issues.
First, we believe that serious crimes, crimes against
humanity and terrorist acts committed by groups
that base their actions on extremist fundamentalist
narratives of hatred, fallaciously attempting to use
religion to justify such heinous conduct, must be
absolutely condemned by the entire international
community, and its perpetrators cannot go unpunished.
Let me once again cite the words of Pope Francis,
who, when asked about the reprehensible attacks
against Charlie Hebdo carried out in your country,
Mr. President, said that one cannot kill in the name of

15-0877877/78

S/PV.7419

The situation in the Middle East

God, that killing in the name of God is an aberration.
Religion must be practiced with freedom, without
offending, without imposing and without killing. I
believe that this also goes for national and international
policy.
In this framework, we deem it necessary to
combat these most serious violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law within a strict
framework of legality, using the tools and mechanisms
available to this body, including sanctions and the
referral of cases to the International Criminal Court.
We fully agree with the recommendations made in the
report in that respect.
We believe that the measures that States adopt to
combat terrorist groups must fully respect international
law, especially international human rights law,
international humanitarian law and the right of refugees,
as well as the principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations.
Secondly, Argentina reaffirms that groups that
commit terrorist acts, hate crimes and crimes against
humanity cannot and must not be associated with a
given religion or religious community.
Thirdly and lastly, Argentina, as a member of
the Council for the past two years, repeatedly called
for and stressed the necessity of stopping the flow of
arms to all parties to the Syrian conflict. Once again
we would warn, not only on principle but also because
of empirical evidence, and at the risk of not being
heard, that if the flow of arms continues or, worse, if it
increases, either in the Middle East or any other region
in conflict, the consequences for human beings will be
even more devastating and cruel, and the possibility of
a lasting peace will become increasingly remote.

78/78

27/03/2015

Like others who spoke earlier, we believe that the
emergence of ISIL and other extremist groups has
demonstrated what we are saying, because it is clearly
impossible to predict all of the repercussions of a conflict
and the risks involved in creating and empowering
groups that, sooner or later, will be prepared to commit
the most heinous, cruel and degrading crimes.
Finally, we do not believe that a military solution
or the militarization of conflicts is the best or the only
way to achieve peace. The evidence bears me out. A
genuine, lasting peace can be achieved not by causing
more death and suffering but through societies that
are willing and able to remember, seek the truth and
ensure justice, and through an international community
that acts not in order to wreak new vengeance, but to
build inclusive societies in which human beings are not
wolves in disguise but diverse communities in which
we all are perceived as equal in dignity and rights, both
to ourselves and to one another.
The Argentine Republic reiterates its firm
conviction that only international cooperation can
effectively address the scourge of terrorism in all its
manifestations within a framework of absolute respect
for human rights and international law. We have hope
for and support the President of the General Assembly
and the Secretary-General’s initiative to bring together
leaders of different religions and beliefs in a special
meeting at which all, believers and non-believers alike,
can work to promote a culture of peace, tolerance
and dignity for all. I know I took 14 minutes, but this
substantive debate to which we were invited enabled
me to exceed the time limit once again.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
more speakers on my list.
The meeting rose at 6 p.m.

15-08778
