S/PRST/2006/56

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
20 December 2006
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5600th meeting of the Security Council, held on 20 December 2006, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Threats to
international peace and security caused by terrorist acts”, the President of the
Security Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reaffirms that terrorism constitutes one of the
most serious threats to international peace and security, and that any acts of
terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable, regardless of their motivation,
wherever, whenever and by whomsoever committed.
“The Security Council reiterates its determination to combat all forms of
terrorism, in accordance with its responsibilities under the Charter of the
United Nations.
“The Security Council reaffirms the importance of resolution 1373
(2001) as well as its other resolutions concerning threats to international peace
and security caused by terrorist acts, and calls on States to implement their
obligations under those resolutions as a matter of priority.
“The Security Council reiterates its call on States to become parties to all
relevant international conventions and protocols relating to terrorism, and to
make full use of the sources of assistance and guidance, which are available.
“The Security Council further reaffirms the need to combat by all means,
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, threats to international
peace and security caused by terrorist acts.
“The Security Council reminds States that they must ensure that any
measures taken to combat terrorism comply with all their obligations under
international law, in particular international human rights, refugee and
humanitarian law.
“The Security Council recognizes the importance of cross-United
Nations cooperation on counter-terrorism issues, and confirms that it stands
ready to play its part in the implementation of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy (A/RES/60/288).
“The Security Council calls upon the relevant United Nations
departments, programmes and specialized agencies, as appropriate, to
consider, within their existing mandates, how to pursue counter-terrorism
objectives.
06-67324 (E) 201206

*0667324*

S/PRST/2006/56

“The Security Council welcomes the Counter-Terrorism Committee’s
renewed focus on enhancing the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001)
through a proactive fulfilment of its mandate to promote and monitor States
implementation.
“The Security Council recalls its resolution 1624 (2005) and encourages
the Counter-Terrorism Committee to continue its work on implementation of
this resolution.
“The Security Council calls on the Counter-Terrorism Committee to
report on the status of implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). In particular,
the Security Council encourages the Counter-Terrorism Committee to report to
the Council on any outstanding issues, when necessary and on a regular basis,
in order to receive strategic guidance from the Council.
“The Security Council recalls its resolution 1535 (2004) by which it
decided to establish the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(hereinafter “CTED”) as a special political mission under the policy guidance
of the Committee, to enhance the Committee’s ability to monitor the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) and effectively continue the
capacity-building work in which it was engaged. The Security Council stresses
that the mandate of the Counter-Terrorism Committee’s Executive Directorate
flows from that of the Counter-Terrorism Committee.
“The Security Council further recalls its presidential statement
S/PRST/2005/64, which included the conclusions of the Council’s
comprehensive review of CTED in 2005, and decided to carry out another
comprehensive review of CTED by 31 December 2006, prepared by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee. During today’s consultations, the Security
Council endorsed the report prepared by the Committee and forwarded to the
Council in S/2006/989 and agreed with its recommendations and conclusions.
“The Security Council welcomes the letter from the Secretary-General
dated 15 December 2006 (S/2006/1002) with regard to CTED’s reporting lines.
The Council has considered this matter and endorses the Counter-Terrorism
Committee’s recommendation with regard to CTED’s reporting lines so that
CTED would henceforth present its draft work programmes and its semiannual reports directly to the Committee.
“The Security Council notes with appreciation the enhanced cooperation
among its three Committees (1267, CTC and 1540) that deal with counterterrorism and their expert teams. It encourages the three Committees to ensure
that, in their dialogue with States, they present a consolidated message from
the Council on its efforts to fight terrorism. Also, it encourages the three
Committees and their expert teams to avoid duplication, including in their
requests for information from Member States about their implementation. In
this regard, it encourages the three Committees and their experts teams to
continue to strengthen the sharing of information among themselves,
specifically information reported by States regarding implementation. The
Council will continue to evaluate how its counter-terrorism efforts can be
organized most efficiently.”

2

06-67324
