Cyprus. lbe membcrs of the Councii agreed to keep this
issue under urgent review."

dence, territorial integrity and non-alignment of the Republic
of Cyprus, the exclusion of union in whole or in part with any
other country and of any fonn of partition or secession and the
establishment of a new constitutional arrangement for Cyprus
that would ensure the well-being and security of the Greek
Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot communities in a hi-communal
and hi-zonal fcderation;

At its 3022nd meeting. on 12 December 1991. the Coun.:il
decided to invite the representatives of Canada, Cyprus. Greece
and Turkey to participate, without vote, in the discussion of the
item entitled ''The situation in Cyprus: report of the Secretary-·
General on the United Nations operations in Cyprus (S(232<i:1
and Add.1)".r

4. Reaffums further that its position on the solution to the
Cyprus prohlem is based on one State of Cyprus comprising
two politically equal communities as defined by the SecretaiyGeneral in the eleventh paragraph of annex I to bis report of
8 March 1990;1!8

At the same meetmg, the Council also decided to cxtend
an invitation to Mr. Osman Ertug undcr ruic 39 ol lht: prov•sional rules of procedure.

5. Calls upon the parties to adhere fully to these principles and to negotiate within the framework of them without
introducing concepts that are at variance with them;

Resolution 723 (1991)

or 12 December 1991

6. Reaffirms that the Secretary-General 's mission of good
offices is with the two communities whose participation in the
process is on an equal footing;

The Security Council,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations operation in Cyprus of 30 November and lZ
December 1991,120

7. Endorses the Secretary-General's intention to resume
discussions in early Novembcr with the two parties in Cyprus
and Greece and Turkey to complete the set of ideas on an
overall framework agreement;

Also taking note of the recommendation by the Secretary General that the Security Council extend the stationing of the
United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cypms for a furthcr
period of six months.

8. Considers that convening a high-level international
meeting chaired hy the Secretary-General in which the two
communities and Greece and Turkey would participate
represents an effective mechanism for concluding an overall
framework agreement on Cyprus;

Noting that the Government of Cyprus has agreed that in
view of the prevailing conditions in the island it is neces.<;ary to
keep the Force in Cyprus beyond 15 December 1991,

9. Requests the leaders of the two communities and
Greece and Turkey to cooperate fully with the Secretary-General and bis representatives so that the high-level international
meeting can be convened before the end of this year;

Reaffirming the provisions of rcsolution 18ô ( 1964) of 4
March 1964 and othe:r relevant resolutions,
1. Extends once more the stationing in Cyprus of the
United Nations Peace-keeping Force established under resolution 186 (1964) for a further period ending on 15 June 1992:

10. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Security Council in November 1991 whether sufficient progress
bas been made to convene the high-level international meeting
and, should conditions not be ripe, to convey to the Council the
set of ideas as they will have evolved by that time with bis
assessment of the situation.

2. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his mission
of good offices, to keep the Security Council infonned of the
progress made and to submit a report on the implementation
of the present resolution by 31 May 1992;

Adopted unanimously al the 3013th
rntttin&

3. Ca/Lr upon ail the partit>,s concerned to continue to
cooperate with the Force on the basis of the present mandate.

Declslons

Adopted unanimously "' the .?()22:nd
m«tin&

On 12 Deœmber 1991, following consultations of the
Security C,0uncil, the President of the Council made the
following statement on behalf of the members of the Council
to the media, in connection with the item entitled "1be
situation in Cyprus": 119

Decisions

At its 3024th meeting, on 23 December 1991, the Council
discussed the item entitled "The situation in Cyprus: report of
the Secretary-General on bis mission of good offices in Cyprus
(S/23300)". 27

"ln the light of the discussion at the informai consultations of mem bers of the Security Council, it was concluded
that the necessary agreement did not currently exist in the
Council for a decision, to be adopted on a change in the
financing of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in

At the same meeting, the President of the Security Council
made the following statement on behalf of the Council: 121
30
