S/PV.9366

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9366th meeting

Wednesday, 5 July 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Dame Barbara Woodward . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Zhang Yun
Mr. Montalvo Sosa
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mrs. Shino
Mrs. Frazier
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Children and armed conflict
How to prevent and respond to grave violations against children in armed
conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict (S/2023/363)
Letter dated 23 June 2023 from the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General (S/2023/470)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-19296 (E)
*2319296*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9366

Children and armed conflict

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President: I would like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the Council, to
Her Excellency Mrs. Lana Zaki Nusseibeh, Permanent
Representative of the United Arab Emirates, and her
team for their service as President of the Security
Council for the month of June. I am sure I speak for
all members of the Council in expressing our deep
appreciation to Ambassador Nusseibeh and her team
for the great diplomatic skill with which they conducted
the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Children and armed conflict
How to prevent and respond to grave violations
against children in armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on children
and armed conflict (S/2023/363)
Letter dated 23 June 2023 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2023/470)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Algeria, Andorra, Argentina,
Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Czechia, Denmark, the Dominican
Republic, Egypt, Estonia, Ethiopia, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, India, Indonesia, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Mexico,
Morocco, New Zealand, Pakistan, the Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, the Republic of Korea,
Romania, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Türkiye, Ukraine,
Uruguay and Yemen to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in the meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
2/32

05/07/2023

There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mrs. Virginia
Gamba de Potgieter; Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict;
Mr. Omar Abdi, Deputy Executive Director for
Programmes at the United Nations Children’s Fund;
and Ms. Violeta, child civil society representative.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Olof Skoog,
Head of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2023/363, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict,
and document S/2023/470, which contains the text
of a letter dated 23 June 2023 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note
on the item under consideration.
I now give the floor to Mrs. Gamba de Potgieter.
Mrs. Gamba de Potgieter: I thank Ambassador
Woodward for her remarks and for hosting today’s open
debate. I deeply appreciate the United Kingdom’s longstanding support to the children and armed conflict
mandate, as well as the collective commitment of
Security Council members. I also thank my co-briefers
and all participants for their presence here and online
today. I value the attention given to this important issue.
In 2017, the year I took office, the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2017/821) covered 20 situations
across four geographical regions and documented
21,000 grave violations verified the previous year. The
mandate has since grown significantly; it now spans
five geographical regions and covers 26 situations.
Two new situations — Haiti and the Niger — have been
added given the worrisome and unfolding security
situations on the ground. Detailed information on both
will be included in next year’s report, as was done for
Ethiopia, Mozambique and Ukraine, which were added
in 2022 and are featured for the first time in the report
(S/2023/363) before the Council.
23-19296

05/07/2023

Children and armed conflict

The challenges that the world is facing also
increased and layered on each other. Just to mention a
few: climate insecurity added a layer to the fight over
resources and forced displacement; the accumulation
of explosive remnants of war and mines added new
dimensions to the killing and maiming of children;
and terror tactics of armed groups were played out
against children and their education rights, particularly
those of girls. And the situation outlined in this year’s
report of the Secretary-General on children and armed
conflict reflects on all of those. The United Nations
verified 27,180 grave violations against 18,890 children
last year. They include 2,880 violations that were
late-verified. As well, 8,630 children were either killed
or maimed, 7,622 children were recruited and used, and
3,985 children were abducted. Those three violations
remained the ones verified at the highest levels; and all
of them increased in 2022.
Children were killed or injured in airstrikes, by
explosive weapons, by live ammunition, in crossfire
or in direct attacks. In many cases, they fell victim to
explosive remnants of war. Rape and sexual violence
against children, although chronically underreported,
was also verified at high levels — 1,165 children,
almost all of them girls, were raped, gang-raped, forced
into marriage or sexual slavery or sexually assaulted.
Some cases were so severe that they resulted in the
death of the victims.
The crimes committed against those children are
horrifying. Overall, the United Nations verified attacks
on 1,163 schools and 647 hospitals. That represents a
112 per cent increase as compared to the year before.
Fifty percent of those attacks were perpetrated by
Government forces.
In addition, the use of schools and hospitals for
military purposes remains a major concern. It exposes
teachers, students, medical personnel and patients to
harm, and it often leads to damage to, or the complete
destruction of, civilian infrastructure. The United
Nations verified a sharp increase of over 60 per cent
of such cases last year, conducted by both armed forces
and armed groups.
In situations of conflict, when protection, education,
health care, food production systems, water facilities
and essential services are weakened or broken down,
the only hope left for children and communities often
comes in the form of humanitarian assistance. But that
too is increasingly under threat. The United Nations

S/PV.9366

verified 3,931 incidents of the denial of humanitarian
access to children in 2022. Humanitarian workers were
killed, assaulted and abducted. Humanitarian supplies
were looted, and assets and vital infrastructure were
destroyed. Bureaucratic impediments and restrictions
on movements further complicated the delivery of
humanitarian aid. Given the increasing control over the
work of humanitarian actors and restrictive laws, that
unfortunately is a deteriorating trend as well.
We should never forget that behind each verified
violation is the life of a child, with their own individual
story. Last year 18,890 children were affected, yet their
stories are not told, as is the case of the three girls gangraped in South Sudan during five days of terror, the boys
killed by an improvised explosive device in a school in
Afghanistan, the 14-year-old girl in Myanmar abducted
and burned alive and the girl with amputated limbs as
a result of airstrikes in Ukraine — and so many more.
That is why we must remember that behind the figures
are the faces of children suffering from armed violence
around the globe. We must do more to prevent and
protect our children from the ravages of armed conflict.
Despite the need to protect our children better, there
are simply too many areas that we do not have access
to; too many situations where the demands far outweigh
our monitoring capacities; and too many victims and
witnesses have been silenced. All too often, children
and their communities either do not have access to safe
reporting channels and assistance or are too afraid to
make use of them. Boys are often taught that being
a victim undermines their masculinity. Societies
shame girls for the harm done to them. Communities
are put under pressure. Human rights defenders and
humanitarian workers are threatened. And therefore
those most in need of our support are left alone in their
suffering, without receiving care or justice.
In some cases, instead of receiving protection,
child victims are punished for their circumstances.
Last year, 2,496 children were deprived of liberty
for their actual or alleged association with parties to
conflict. Being particularly vulnerable at the hands
of authorities, children under detention were exposed
to further violations of their rights, including torture
and sexual violence. In some cases, they were even
sentenced to death.
Finally, justice and accountability continue to elude
children. Despite progress in some situations, grave
violations against children continue to go unpunished,

23-192963/32

S/PV.9366

Children and armed conflict

and perpetrators are unchecked by the national and
international legal systems. We owe it to children to
guarantee them access to justice.
And while acknowledging that armed groups,
including those designated as terrorists by the United
Nations, were responsible for 50 per cent of grave
violations, I would like to underscore that the main
perpetrators of the killing and maiming of children,
attacks on schools and hospitals and the denial of
humanitarian access in 2022 were the armed and
security forces of Governments, whose primary
responsibility is to ensure the protection of civilians,
including children.
In the face of ongoing tragedies that children
endured, our hope remains unwavering. The relentless
commitment of my Office and the United Nations on the
ground, actively engaging with parties to conflict, has
not only given us purpose but has also empowered us
to strengthen our efforts. For instance, upon assuming
my Office in 2017, a total of 8,052 incidents of the
recruitment and use of children were documented.
Nevertheless, by 2022 that number had decreased to
7,622 incidents, despite the fact that we are reporting on
six more situations than in 2017. Those figures attest to
and reinforce the ongoing significance of our mandate
and its effects when consistently applied.
Allow me to also underline the positive achievements
accomplished thanks to United Nations engagement
with all parties to conflict, which led to concrete results
in multiple situations last year. In Yemen, we signed an
action plan with the Houthis — who call themselves
Ansar Allah — to end and prevent violations. That is
the third commitment signed in Yemen, meaning that
the United Nations has engaged concretely with all
three major parties to the conflict. In the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Mai-Mai Machine signed
unilateral commitments to protect children. In Iraq, the
Government signed an action plan to end and prevent
the recruitment and use of children by the Popular
Mobilization Forces. In addition, 1,448 Iraqi children
were repatriated from north-east Syria.
The United Nations is engaging actively in other
situations and with parties to those situations, such as
in Ethiopia, Mozambique, Ukraine and the Russian
Federation, all of which I recently visited, to secure
concrete and practical commitments to protect children
and put in place prevention plans and/or protection plans.
4/32

05/07/2023

In other situations, progress was achieved through
the adoption of handover protocols, the development
of child protection policies, the strengthening of
legislation and the integration of child protection in
peace processes and national dialogues. United Nations
engagement also focused on training and awarenessraising, reaching thousands of stakeholders. Notably,
12,460 children formerly associated with armed forces
or groups were released and provided with protection
or reintegration support. Those achievements are
important and meaningful, and I commend every single
person who was involved in attaining them.
Going forward, however, much bigger strides are
required. We urgently need bold and resolute action.
We must build on the international consensus on
child protection and rally behind the instruments that
have already been agreed upon widely. That includes
defining as a child everyone under the age of 18, as
enshrined in the Convention on the Rights of the Child,
which must be protected.
I urge everyone to embrace peace and the
peaceful resolution of conflicts, which remains the
only sustainable way to reduce and prevent violations
against children. I call on everyone to boost financing
for child protection programmes, including meeting
the enormous needs for reintegration programmes,
which far outpace the resources currently available. It
is heartbreaking when children who have been released
from recruitment and use, or encountered after enduring
other violations, find that there is in fact no safe place
for them to go and no support available. The financing
of demining action programmes and mine education
should also be a priority, given the devastating impact
of explosive remnants of war on children globally.
I would also like to underline that the Monitoring
and Reporting Mechanism (MRM) is only as strong as
the resources and capacities given for its operations,
including budgetary resources and staff positions
and capacity-building. That is particularly salient as
between 2022 and 2023 five new situations have been
added to the agenda of children and armed conflict,
including the Niger and Haiti this year. It is important
for friends of the mandate to support the MRM in
budgetary decisions, including in the Fifth Committee
of the General Assembly and in United Nations mission
budgets. Furthermore, the resources of UNICEF
country offices specifically dedicated to the MRM,
monitoring and response and the reintegration of
children also need to be preserved and sustained, while
23-19296

05/07/2023

Children and armed conflict

building similar child protection capacity and expertise
in other United Nations entities as part of country
task forces for monitoring and reporting on violations
against children in armed conflict.
Lastly, we need to put children at the centre of our
efforts and hear their voices. I am therefore committed
to working on four major areas during 2023 and forward:
advocating for the peaceful resolution of conflict,
improving the directives for monitors to best identify
grave violations, increasing the resources available
for child protection expertise on the ground and the
development of a new public awareness campaign that
aims at putting the voices of children at the centre of all
our work. That campaign will be child-focused and will
include their participation, their views and their voices
for us to better respond to their concerns. In that regard,
I thank Violeta for being here today to share with all of
us her recommendations on how to involve children in
peacebuilding processes.
I for one remain hopeful that our joint engagement,
dedication and action can lead to positive change for
children trapped in war. I remain deeply committed to
their protection. I invite everyone to join me in that.
The President: I thank Mrs. Gamba de Potgieter
for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Abdi.
Mr. Abdi: Today is a difficult day in the history
of the children and armed conflict agenda. This
year’s report (S/2023/363) of the Secretary-General
includes both the highest number of grave violations
ever verified by the United Nations, at over 27,000,
and the highest-ever number of situations of concern,
at 26. UNICEF is gravely concerned by the plight of
children in the situations most recently added to the
report, including Haiti and the Niger this year, and
Ethiopia, Mozambique and Ukraine in 2022. However,
we should bear in mind that the highest numbers of
grave violations against children were verified in longstanding protracted conflicts, including those in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Israel and the State
of Palestine and Somalia.
Those three situations have consistently appeared
in the Secretary General’s report since the Monitoring
and Reporting Mechanism was established, in 2005,
meaning that children in those contexts have faced
unrelenting grave violations for years, and in some
cases, like the children in the State of Palestine, for

S/PV.9366

decades. Due to recent escalations, we expect verified
violations in at least some of those situations to increase
over the coming months.
And while the eruption of a new conflict in the
Sudan occurred outside of the reporting period for this
year’s report, UNICEF is also gravely concerned about
the impact of the ongoing conflict on the country’s
21 million children. More than 1 million children
have now been displaced by the fighting, and the
United Nations has received credible reports, under
verification, that hundreds of children have been killed
and injured.
The children and armed conflict agenda is
effective, as we discussed at last year’s open debate (see
S/PV.9096), there are countless stories of the positive
impact that the children and armed conflict agenda has
had on children affected by conflict globally. At least
180,000 children have been released from the ranks
of armed forces and groups since the year 2000. And
39 action plans have been signed since 2005, in 18
different situations of conflict. Those action plans have
succeeded in preventing and ending grave violations
against an untold number of children through proactive
measures taken by parties to conflict. In the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, for example, the implementation
of the 2012 action plan led to a significant reduction in
the number of children recruited and used by the Forces
armées de la République démocratique du Congo
(FARDC), including the screening and separation
of over 1,100 children, leading to the delisting of the
FARDC for that violation.
One of the greatest strengths of the children and
armed conflict agenda is the United Nations Monitoring
and Reporting Mechanism for grave violations, which
serves as the evidence base for the present report. The
data is reliable and robust. It measures up to the scrutiny
that comes with United Nations verification. Trained
child protection experts meticulously collect that data
impartially, independently and neutrally, in line with
fundamental humanitarian principles. We stand behind
the veracity of the data and call on Member States to
do the same.
Critically, that data enables the United Nations and
its partners to better target our efforts at preventing
grave violations and supporting children who have
experienced grave violations. For example, it helps
UNICEF target prevention actions and responses to
tragic incidents like the one that killed 27 children and

23-192965/32

S/PV.9366

Children and armed conflict

injured 53 others last month in southern Somalia after
ordnance exploded at a playing field. While UNICEF
reached more than 9 million children globally with
explosive ordnance risk education in 2022, the perils
of widespread weapon contamination require us to do
more. Similarly, our understanding about where the
recruitment and use of children is happening allows us
to engage with parties to conflict for their release and to
provide those children with support. In 2022, UNICEF
and partners provided more than 12,460 children with
reintegration or protection support.
The United Nations-verified information reflected
in the Secretary-General’s report also serves as the
United Nations entry point for engaging with parties
to conflict to urge them to take measures to better
protect children. Over the past 18 months, several
parties have committed to steps for the protection of
children because of the United Nations engagement.
For example, handover protocols adopted in Burkina
Faso and Nigeria last year outline steps necessary to
protect children encountered, detained or identified
in the course of conflict, including their swift transfer
to civilian child protection actors responsible for their
care and protection.
We also applaud Member States that made bold
commitments to keep children safe during last month’s
Oslo Conference on Protecting Children in Armed
Conflict. They included South Sudan, which committed
to endorsing the Paris Commitments and Principles
and the Vancouver Principles, and incorporating them
into national legislation; Somalia, which committed to
ratifying the Optional Protocol to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child on involvement of children in
armed conflict; and the Government of Norway, which
committed NOK1 billion to programmes that prevent
and respond to child rights violations in situations of
armed conflict.
Those countries should be commended and
supported in their commitments to strengthening
protections for children, and we encourage others to
follow their lead. But those commitments, whether
they be action plans, prevention measures, handover
protocols, endorsement of key instruments or adoption
of legislation, must be implemented and backed by
the political will of parties to conflict and their allies
if meaningful change for children is to be effected.
With over 27,000 violations verified this year, up from
24,000 last year, existing commitments are clearly not
6/32

05/07/2023

enough. UNICEF calls on parties to take meaningful
and unambiguous action for children.
We are disappointed by the lack of progress by
the Security Council’s Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict in adopting conclusions from
the Secretary-General’s country reports, despite the
commendable efforts of Norway and Malta as chairs of
the Group. Conclusions are an important tool for senior
leaders and practitioners on the ground to strengthen
advocacy with parties to conflict, donors, community
leaders and beyond. We call on members of the Security
Council to place the protection of children above other
political considerations, including through expediting
the adoption of Security Council’s Working Group’s
conclusions that are robust, meaningful, and swift.
As the report of the Secretary-General notes,
non-State armed groups were responsible for more than
50 per cent of grave violations last year. In Burkina
Faso, for example, almost 85 per cent of all violations
were attributed to armed groups. Yet far too often, we
encounter State actors that wish to prevent or curtail
United Nations engagement with armed groups or de
facto authorities for political reasons. Let me be clear:
United Nations humanitarian engagement does not
legitimize these actors. In order to continue to make a
difference for children in conflict, including through
the provision of services and dialogue to end violations,
we call on Member States to enable and support United
Nations engagement with armed groups, including with
armed groups that may be designated as terrorist.
As the number of countries on the children and
armed conflict agenda grows, so does the number of
children in need of our protection and support. UNICEF
co-leads this work in all of the more than 26 countries
that are part of the agenda. As we announced at the Oslo
conference, we are investing our core resources in the
work of monitoring and reporting on grave violations
against children to ensure that we can meet the needs
of affected children. But the United Nations depends on
the support of donors to sustain our efforts to provide
children with the humanitarian services they need
and to document grave violations. We call on Member
States to scale-up support for United Nations efforts.
Today there are more children at risk than at any other
time in the last 75 years. The reason for this is plain to
see: children are suffering and dying because of cruelty
and indifference to their plight, because some political
leaders and parties to conflict are simply failing to
observe the principle of humanity in times of conflict.
23-19296

05/07/2023

Children and armed conflict

In conclusion, on behalf of UNICEF, I urge all
States and entities to join us in putting children first
and protecting them today so they can grow up to create
a more peaceful world for future generations.
The President: I thank Mr. Abdi for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Violeta.
Ms. Violeta (spoke in Spanish): Hello, I am Violeta,
and I take the floor on behalf of all the boys, girls,
adolescents and young people who live in Colombia.
I am a female adolescent, which we celebrate, because
in most forums, including this one, representation is
usually by adult males.
Talking about conflict, war and peace in a country
such as Colombia is basically talking about the entire
history of the country. The armed conflict in Colombia
has left millions of victims throughout the country,
with the people living in the countryside being the most
affected. Being a child, adolescent or young person
living in the Colombian countryside, belonging to AfroColombian Indigenous communities, being a refugee
or migrant, or simply belonging to the LGBTIQ+
community, is not easy. We live with the constant fear,
when going out to play with a ball in a park or an open
space, that we might step on a mine or get caught in the
middle of a confrontation. That is very powerful. It is
also not easy to go to school and have to be alert all the
time because there may be more clashes, and you may be
affected, or because an armed group may arrive at your
school and recruit some of your classmates. It is also
not easy to see how the physical structure of schools is
deteriorating day by day thanks to clashes, or how the
educational equipment, which is already scarce and not
very efficient, has also been compromised. And it is
not easy to see how, as the days go by, the chairs in the
classrooms emptying as children and adolescents are
recruited, killed or displaced, or have to go to a city to
look for better opportunities. These young people pack
their dreams in a suitcase and leave their roots, their
dreams and their ancestors behind in their territories of
origin. Nor is it easy to suffer harassment or physical
or verbal attacks for being a girl, for having different
tastes, for having a different skin colour, for speaking
differently or having different customs.
On the other hand, violence in cities, while
somewhat different, is just as significant. Living
in remote, stigmatized or hidden areas of the cities
is not easy either. The existence of armed groups or
gangs undoubtedly limits the life and development of

S/PV.9366

adolescents and young people living in these areas,
because there is a constant fear of crossing an invisible
barrier without realizing it, or of being attacked or
threatened for looking this way or that. And just
like in the countryside, after a while, the chairs start
emptying, because in cities there is another type of
recruitment — by gangs. It becomes commonplace to
see classmates lying dead on the sidewalk, and just like
in the countryside, there are clashes near recreational
areas, schools, parks and hospitals. And often the
scarcity of resources, poor educational methodologies,
lack of opportunities, school dropouts and violent
dynamics of the environment become translated into a
great non-conformity in young people and adolescents
who want to build a life free and far from violence.
Those young people affirmed their strength, resistance
and yearning for a dignified life through shouts and
chants as they led a great social demonstration in 2020
and 2021 to express a vision of justice and safety from
the war that had stigmatized them, silenced them,
kidnapped them or exterminated them physically and
politically. Something that is also very striking about
this vision is that it is also present in the dynamic of
the territories and their inhabitants, where the spouse
or child of a family member could easily be one of
the 6,402 victims of extrajudicial executions or false
positives, according to figures released by the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace in 2021.
It is impossible to make an exact calculation of the
number of victims of the armed conflict in Colombia,
but it is possible to make approximations. According
to figures documented by the Commission for the
Clarification of Truth, Coexistence and Non-Repetition,
as of 2019, more than 3 million children, adolescents
and young people were victims of the conflict, either
by recruitment, forced disappearance, kidnapping,
displacement, murder or violence. More updated figures
show us that the war in Colombia is still ongoing. In the
first quarter of the year, according to official figures
from the Coalición contra la vinculación de niñas, niños y
jóvenes al conflicto armado en Colombia — the coalition
against the involvement of children and adolescents in
the armed conflict in Colombia — there have been at
least 4,583 child and adolescent victims. The statistics
show that there were 18 incidents of forced recruitment,
leaving approximately 36 victims; 17 incidents of forced
displacement, leaving approximately 1,283 victims;
and 15 attacks on and occupations of schools, leaving
approximately 1,126 child and adolescent victims.

23-192967/32

S/PV.9366

Children and armed conflict

However, most of these injuries could be prevented
in future if children, adolescents and youth had the
opportunity to participate in peacebuilding processes.
Between September and February, through a project
supported by Save the Children, studies and surveys
were carried out with children, adolescents and young
people in different countries that once had some kind
of internal armed conflict, including Colombia, Yemen,
the Philippines, Mali and Nigeria. Almost all the people
surveyed believe that children should be involved in
peacebuilding processes. Why is that? Basically, it is
for the following reasons.
First, children have the right to freely express their
opinions and are capable of speaking on these issues.
Secondly, sharing views increases the likelihood of
building peace.
Thirdly, in that process, children can learn
information and skills that they can share with their
families and communities.
In addition to that, we also asked about the
factors that usually hinder children and adolescents’
participation in peace processes, and we found that
there two main reasons.
First, adults think that children, adolescents and
young people are not mature enough to contribute
to the conversation about peacebuilding and peace
agreements, and for that reason they do not invest in
their participation.
Secondly, most adults do not know how to work
with children and adolescents; neither do they have the
methodologies or the tools to do so. They do not know
how to reach those communities.
And finally, what I think may be the most important
result of the project is that nearly 95 per cent of the
people surveyed are interested in working for peace. In
other words, there really is a great interest — people
truly want to do this — and that is why we should invest
in that kind of process.
As I approach the end of my briefing, I will
continue by making recommendations. And there are a
lot of recommendations, given that such a long history
of conflict has shown and taught us what works and
what does not.
As a first recommendation, it is necessary to
condemn and prevent recruitment, as well as to free
children and young people who are in the ranks of
8/32

05/07/2023

any armed groups, in order to prevent the continued
use of children, young people and adolescents in war,
including those from Indigenous, Afro-Colombian,
refugee and migrant communities. In that regard,
we call for the funding and swift implementation of
efforts aimed at re-establishing the rights of children
and young people who are former members of those
groups in a comprehensive manner. Moreover, children
and young people belonging to those groups must be
recognized both as victims of conflict and as agents
of change and peacebuilding, because we are usually
recognized in two ways: as victims and as conflict
multipliers — war machines. But we are not recognized
for our most important role, that is, as agents of change.
As a second recommendation, we call for a
restructuring of my country’s vision of security in order
to prevent future violence against young people, such
as the violence that occurred during Colombia’s great
social upheaval and in the context of the extrajudicial
executions and the “false positives” scandal. To do that,
it is necessary to provide information to both legal and
illegal groups in the conflict in order to enable them to
fully respect international humanitarian law. We also
call for the release and restitution of rights of the victims
and their families, as well as the release of the young
people imprisoned during those events. Basically, we
call for the political prisoners to be released.
As a third recommendation, we recommend
strongly condemning the sexual violence committed
against children and adolescents during the conflict and
taking immediate measures to prevent such violence, as
well as to provide redress to the victims quickly through
both physical and mental health services, in addition to
legal procedures.
As a fourth recommendation, we call for taking
the necessary reforms to guarantee coverage, access,
quality, permanence and relevance in education,
especially in rural and remote areas, enabling children
to pursue life projects far from the realm of armed
confrontation and illegal acts. That work can be
facilitated through compliance with the guidelines of
the Safe Schools Declaration, which, even though it has
already been signed by Colombia, is something that
needs to be monitored and implemented throughout the
country’s territory. It may have already been signed,
but how is it working? We also call for monitoring the
recommendations of the Colombia’s Truth Commission
on the restructuring of the rights to the education of
23-19296

05/07/2023

Children and armed conflict

children and young people in the areas affected by the
armed conflict.
As a fifth recommendation, we want to guarantee
the presence of the State in terms of its focus on
children and young people’s integral development and
peace education in rural areas. That will enable them
to develop life plans in peace, outside of the conflict,
and ensure that State presence is not for defence
purposes only.
As a final recommendation, we call on the Security
Council and its member States to be guarantors of
compliance with the peace agreements signed in 2016
and to continue generating possible solutions to the
armed conflict that has been resurging in our national
territory. We propose the creation of a commission
that has knowledge of security and peace issues and
is committed to defending human rights and the
social rule of law. Such a commission should support
possible peace negotiations and ensure the participation
of children in the current and future processes,
because although previous processes included some
participation by children, that participation was neither
integral nor fully representative. There were no roundtable discussions in remote and rural areas, and the
process was not integral or representative — and that
is what we are asking — for the future representation
to be fair and for our voices to be fully taken into
account — and not merely for the purposes of filling a
role. Furthermore, we call for the participation of young
people, humanitarian organizations, victims, ethnic
peoples, young women and people from the LGBTIQ+
community, as well as representatives of the military,
police and intelligence agencies.
The normalization of violence, the conflict and the
resulting consequences we face are the result of many
years of war. We reiterate that, despite the fact that a
peace agreement has already been signed in Colombia
and that Colombia is seen as a post-conflict country,
nothing could be further from the truth, because the
conflict is still ongoing in Colombia, and it continues
to affect communities. Establishing and maintaining
peace is not the responsibility of a single group of
people only. It is everyone’s responsibility. And peace
is not established merely by signing a paper with
certain groups and then being done with it. Peace must
be established throughout a country’s territory. Peace
is maintained by all of us, and it is necessary that we
all work for it. It is also very important to work from
the foundational stages — childhood, adolescence

S/PV.9366

and youth. Because a country that does not allow its
children, adolescents and young people to work on
peacebuilding and peace processes is a country that
condemns itself to a future at war.
The President: I thank Ms. Violeta for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I would like to begin by
thanking the United Arab Emirates for its excellent
work in June as President of the Security Council, and I
wish the United Kingdom all the best for a fruitful and
successful presidency in July.
I thank the United Kingdom presidency for
convening today’s open debate. I also thank Special
Representative Gamba de Potgieter, UNICEF Deputy
Executive Director Abdi and Ms. Violeta for their
insightful yet sobering briefings.
We are alarmed by the growing number of grave
violations against children that were verified in 2022.
Threats and attacks against monitors, which prevent
them from reporting on the full scale of violations against
children, are unacceptable. It is equally worrisome that
Government forces were the main perpetrator of the
killing and maiming of children, attacks on schools and
hospitals and the denial of humanitarian access.
The Special Representative’s progress in engaging
parties to conflict to protect children is encouraging.
However, we are deeply concerned by the deterioration
in many situations faced by children, such as in
Myanmar, South Sudan and Burkina Faso. The high
number of grave violations against children in Ukraine,
which does not represent the full scale of incidents, is
also shocking. Malta calls for the continued objective,
impartial and transparent listing of perpetrators in
the annex to the Secretary-General’s annual report on
children in armed conflict (S/2023/363).
Moreover, as the Security Council, we must make
sure that United Nations peacekeeping operations and
special political missions have sufficient capacity and
robust mandates to ensure that child protection concerns
are addressed. That includes during the drawdown and
withdrawal of any peacekeeping operation. Malta is
actively collaborating with the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict on child-protection capacitytraining and will continue to do so in the coming
years. We further encourage the Special Representative

23-192969/32

S/PV.9366

Children and armed conflict

05/07/2023

to further deepen the analysis of how gender norms
have shaped children’s exposure to each of the grave
violations across various contexts.

have been recruited by gangs. We must respond to these
situations by collectively implementing the instruments
available to us to ensure the protection of children.

As the drivers of conflict become more complex,
including owing to both new armed actors and chronic
crises, we call on Member States to cooperate at all
levels to mitigate the impact of armed conflict on
children, intensify efforts to preserve peace and find
political solutions to war. We also call on all the parties
to conflicts to conclude and implement action plans
and comply with their obligations under international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
It will be crucial to invest in United Nations efforts
to prevent and respond to grave violations, including
by monitoring and reporting on them. Humanitarian
access must always be facilitated, and actors should be
able to engage with all parties, including armed groups.
As Chair of the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict, Malta urges continued strong support for the
children and armed conflict mandate in the Council
and will do its utmost to ensure a consensus on the
protection of children in all country situations.

France urges all States to ratify and implement the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and its Optional
Protocols, as well as the Rome Statute, all of which are
critical tools. Together with UNICEF, we have launched
a campaign for the universalization of the Paris
Principles and Commitments, which have so far been
endorsed by 115 States. Their universal endorsement,
as well as that of the Safe Schools Declaration, is
imperative if we are to combat such violations. We must
continue to take action. The Council should continue
to support the work of the Monitoring and Reporting
Mechanism, which must be provided with the resources
necessary to enable the Secretary-General to draw
up a comprehensive and impartial list of violators.
The Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict
must be able to work rapidly to adopt outcomes to be
implemented on the ground, and I commend the efforts
of Malta’s chairmanship in that regard. We must combat
the impunity that continues, and we support the work of
the International Criminal Court to that end. Lastly, we
must support projects to protect children. We must do
more in terms of prevention and reintegration.

Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, Madam President, let me assure you of France and
my delegation’s full support for your presidency of the
Security Council for the month of July. I also thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, the
UNICEF Deputy Executive Director for Programmes
and our young briefer.
The Secretary-General’s annual report (S/2023/363)
reminds us of the urgent need to combat the suffering
of children in times of conflict. Children continue to
be the primary victims of war, and France is deeply
concerned about the continued grave violations
committed against them. Russia’s aggression against
Ukraine is having devastating consequences for
children. As the report underscores, Russia has been
responsible for the killing, maiming and forced transfer
of children, for sexual violence committed against them
and for attacks on schools and hospitals. Its inclusion
on the infamous list of the annual report affirms the
seriousness of the crimes it has committed. France
urges Russia to respect international law and put an
end to those abuses immediately. As children continue
to fall victim to atrocities in Burma, Yemen and Syria,
our support must not waver. France condemns the
segregation policy that girls are facing in Afghanistan.
We should also come to the aid of the children in Haiti
who have become the victims of sexual violence and
10/32

France will continue to commit to implementing
the children and armed conflict agenda, as protecting
future generations is a prerequisite for ensuring lasting
peace. Since 2005, as an indication of the Council’s
success, more than 200,000 children have been removed
from conflict. We must do more.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I congratulate the United Kingdom on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
would also like to express my appreciation to the United
Arab Emirates for its excellent work in presiding over
the Council last month. I thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Virginia Gamba de Potgieter
and UNICEF Deputy Director for Programmes Omar
Abdi for their briefings. I also listened closely to the
briefing by Ms. Violeta.
Children are the future and hope of humankind,
and armed conflict has shattered the dreams of
countless children. Every day we hear reports of
violations against children, and the six types of
grave violations, as defined by Security Council
resolutions, persist, which is truly heartbreaking. In
recent breaking news, more than 20 children have been
23-19296

05/07/2023

Children and armed conflict

shot and killed in the occupied Palestinian territory
this year. On 3 and 4 July, Israeli military operations
in Jenin led to the death of four Palestinian children.
In Haiti, half a million children live at the mercy of
gangs who shoot students in classrooms and abduct
children near schools and have forced a large number
of schools to close. In the Sahel, terrorists have trained
thousands of children to be killing machines, forcing
them to pick up rifles when they should be holding
pens. In Afghanistan, foreign military operations have
done terrible harm. Many children have been injured
by landmines and other explosive devices left behind
by foreign troops. Unlawful unilateral sanctions have
further left humanitarian agencies in dire straits.
Children who need prosthetic limbs wait in long lines
outside humanitarian aid hospitals.
The list goes on, and those I just mentioned are only
the tip of the iceberg, from the Middle East to the Horn
of Africa, from the Caribbean to the Mediterranean and
from Ukraine to Iraq; many other children in conflict
areas are suffering without respite. Many have lost their
lives on the path of migration or have suffered from
inhumane treatment at holding centres. The Convention
on the Rights of the Child — the most important
instrument of international law for the protection of
children — has yet to be universally endorsed, as there
is a single country remaining that has still not ratified
it. The international community has a long way to go in
protecting children and must do so with a heightened
sense of urgency, taking concrete actions and shoring
up safeguards so that every child is shielded from war
and harm and can grow up safely and happily. I would
like to emphasize the following three points.
First, stopping grave violations is the most
immediate form of protection. Protecting children from
harm is an obligation under international law that must
be fulfilled by all the parties to a conflict. We call on
all parties to conflict to strictly implement the relevant
Security Council resolutions, end all indiscriminate
attacks and violence that could harm children, refrain
from the use of explosive weapons in densely populated
areas and address the problem of impunity for those
who violate children’s rights. We encourage the
countries concerned to use judicial protection, social
relief and other means in the process of post-conflict
peacebuilding, prioritize the protection of the rights
and interests of vulnerable groups, including children,
and work closely with the United Nations to develop

S/PV.9366

policy frameworks and implementation mechanisms for
the protection of children.
Secondly, achieving lasting peace is the ultimate
form of protection. As long as conflict remains
unabated, there is no guarantee for the safety of children.
The international community should make full use of
political dialogue, mediation, good offices and peace
talks, strengthen preventive measures, support regional
and subregional organizations in playing a greater
role and work to promote peaceful ways in which the
parties to conflict can resolve tensions and clashes and
eliminate the scourge of war. The goal is to provide
a safe environment for children’s healthy growth and
development. In that process, we should fully respect
the sovereignty and ownership of the country involved
in conflict, support the people of those countries
in their exploration of institutions and development
paths, in line with their national context, and avoid the
imposition of external solutions.
Thirdly, supporting the all-round development
of children is the most effective form of protection.
Relevant United Nations agencies’ reports indicate that
this year 1.1 billion children worldwide are in urgent
need of humanitarian assistance. We call on traditional
donors to step up their emergency assistance to help
those children meet their immediate needs. At the
same time, it should be noted that efforts should not
stop at crisis response. The international community
should focus on children’s future development and help
the Governments of the countries concerned to take
effective measures to eradicate hunger and poverty,
provide universal basic education and ensure that
children in conflict have access to basic necessities
and education.
It is also imperative to step up investment in
health care for children in conflict and pay attention
to mental health support, in particular to help children
resist extreme terrorist ideologies. UNICEF and
relevant agencies should effectively discharge their
responsibilities in that regard.
The Secretary-General’s annual report (S/2023/363)
on the matter is an important reference for the Council
in carrying out its work. The report should be aimed
at helping the Council to obtain a full picture of the
situation on the ground, adhere to the principle of
non-politicization and avoid double standards and
selective blind spots. We note that this year’s report
does not pay sufficient attention to the long-standing

23-1929611/32

S/PV.9366

Children and armed conflict

problem of violations being committed against children
in Haiti.
The occupied Palestinian territory has the secondhighest number of violations against children out of
the 25 conflict situations. Yet no perpetrators are
listed. China finds that to be deplorable and hopes that
improvements will be made in the next report. China’s
stands ready to work with the international community,
make every effort to maintain international peace and
security and create a favourable environment for the
healthy growth and comprehensive development of
children in all countries.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Madam President, and the United
Kingdom on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of July. I also express
Ghana’s appreciation and thanks to Ambassador Lana
Nusseibeh for the United Arab Emirates exceptional
leadership of the Council during the month of June.
As the Council considers further measures it can
take to advance the protection of children in armed
conflict, we should be compelled to do more. Across
all conflict situations, our children are not in a good
place and have been forced to grapple with immense
physical and mental challenges that they do not have
the capacity to address. Ghana therefore commends
the United Kingdom for convening today’s open debate
on children and armed conflict. We thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Virginia
Gamba de Potgieter and Deputy Executive Director
Omar Abdi for their briefings, as well as Ms. Violeta
for her additional perspectives from the Colombian
experience. The words and grave stories that have been
shared with the Council today should lead us to act on
our commitments and promises for the benefit of the
world’s children.
Ghana remains deeply concerned about the
atrocious violations and attacks that children growing
up in conflict communities continue to suffer at the
hands of armed groups and actors who have chosen to
exploit social disorder and power vacuums to purvey
their unimaginable horrors. Killing and maiming
children, putting children in the crosshairs of conflict
and using them as weapons of war are unacceptable and
rob them of their future.
While the opportunities to bring about positive
changes have often not been accepted by parties to
conflicts, Ghana is encouraged by the outcomes that the
12/32

05/07/2023

Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, UNICEF and
other partners have managed to achieve. We encourage
the Special Representative’s continuing engagement
with parties to conflict, regional organizations, civil
society organizations and United Nations actors,
which has led to successful outcomes, including the
development and implementation of relevant protocols
and action plans in countries such as Burkina Faso,
Nigeria and Yemen. The past outcomes inspire hope.
In furtherance of the objective to strengthen the regime
for the protection of children in armed conflict, we
would like to share four key messages.
First, we call on the Secretary-General to facilitate
more systematic reporting to the Security Council
on early-warning indicators of potential violations
and abuses against children. Child protection and
the prevention of violations can be truly successful
if risk factors that lead to grave violations against
children are identified and adequately addressed
before and during conflict. An example of a major
risk area that can be focused on and addressed is the
impact of socioeconomic factors, such as poverty and
a lack of educational opportunities, which increases
the susceptibility of children to recruitment and
re-recruitment by armed groups and sexual violence,
among other serious violations.
Peacekeeping missions by the United Nations
and regional organizations should seek to incorporate
child protection obligations into mission planning,
policies, decisions and activities and must include child
protection focal points in field operations. In that regard,
we salute the African Union’s efforts to mainstream
child protection into its institutional responses through
the launch of the Policy on Child Protection in African
Union Peace Support Operations and the Policy on
Mainstreaming Child Protection into the African Peace
and Security Architecture.
Secondly, given the cross-border nature of some
violations against children in armed conflict, there
is a need for enhanced cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations, as well
as with Member States, through the development and
implementation of joint strategies and coordination
mechanisms to prevent cross-border recruitment and
use, as well as trafficking.
Thirdly, we urge regional organizations to deepen
their collaboration with civil society organizations in
23-19296

05/07/2023

Children and armed conflict

the areas of early warning and early response, with a
tailored focus on child protection. Platforms such as
the Peace and Security-Civil Society Organizations
Platform of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), if strengthened, can help to better
detect and predict threats to peace and security in West
Africa and their effects on children. For that reason,
we encourage ECOWAS, in its partnership with West
Africa’s network of civil society organizations, to
foster the sharing of information and experiences
geared towards more effective conflict prevention and
child protection.
Lastly, an indication of the level of importance
we attach to the children and armed conflict agenda is
reflected by the resources we are willing to devote in
support of its implementation. We therefore urge the
Council’s full support for the allocation of targeted,
practical and rapid resources to facilitate responses
to threats against children. Moreover, there is a need
for targeted resources and urgent collaborative efforts
by the international community and Member States to
sensitize communities on explosive ordnance risks,
as well as to ensure the identification, fencing off
and eventual destruction of all manner of explosive
ordnance, which endangers the lives of children.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Ghana’s
commitment to the work of the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict, as well as to international
frameworks such as the Convention on the Rights of
the Child, the Paris Principles and the Vancouver
Principles, as well as the Safe Schools Declaration.
While significant strides have been made globally in
raising awareness and preventing grave violations
against children in armed conflict, the miles left to
travel are still long. Ghana is committed to travelling
the extra mile for the cause of protecting our children
and securing their safe and sustainable future. We
all have a responsibility to ensure that no child must
worry about where their next meal will come from or be
traumatized by which direction the next threat or bullet
will come from. In doing so, we must work collectively
for the cause of peace.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Let me congratulate you,
Madam President, and your team on assuming the
presidency of the Council, and thank you for organizing
this open debate. We are grateful to the United Arab
Emirates for presiding over our work during the month
of June. I also thank Special Representative Gamba
de Potgieter and the Deputy Executive Director for

S/PV.9366

Programmes at UNICEF for their insights, as well as
Ms. Violeta for her account.
Every year we look forward with great interest
to the findings of the annual report of the SecretaryGeneral on children and armed conflict (S/2023/363). It
is an important document, but it remains a painful read.
The overall situation has not improved. There are more
conflicts around the world that have made an already
tragic situation worse, particularly through the killing,
maiming, abuse and recruitment of children. We are
alarmed by the increase in cases of abduction, of sexual
violence, especially against girls, and of deliberate
attacks on schools and hospitals. Forced displacement
remains a growing challenge, with an ever-growing
number of children fleeing in search of protection.
In Myanmar, the spread of violent conflict in new
areas and the proliferation of armed actors have resulted
in a serious increase in the number of grave violations
against children. The growing intercommunal violence
in South Sudan and the Sudan has exacerbated sexual
violence against children, abductions and attacks on
schools and hospitals. The surge in terrorist activities
has aggravated the conditions of children in the
central Sahel region, particularly in Burkina Faso. In
Afghanistan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Somalia, Mali, Syria and Yemen, children continue to
be in desperate need of protection and humanitarian aid.
The Russian aggression against Ukraine has
inflicted new levels of violence and misery on children.
The inclusion of Russian troops and affiliated armed
groups on the list of shame is proof of our deep
concerns. There have been repeated denunciations of
atrocities, deliberate attacks on women and children
and abductions committed by Russian troops and
the Wagner Group mercenaries. We were appalled to
learn that 91 children have been used as human shields
while attacks on schools and hospitals have continued
unabated. There is only one way for Russia to avoid the
world’s continued scorn for such despicable atrocities,
and that is to stop violating the fundamental principles
of child protection in wartime, hold perpetrators to
account and withdraw all its troops from Ukraine,
respecting its sovereignty and territorial integrity.
If we are to have any chance of another and more
hopeful discussion next year, with fewer spine-chilling
stories, and to be able to assure Ms. Violeta, and all
children everywhere, that we are serious and committed,
we have to take real action to change the realities for

23-1929613/32

S/PV.9366

Children and armed conflict

children on the ground for the better. That starts with
serious work on prevention and conflict resolution.
Dealing with the root causes is a long-term investment
with a greater and better guarantee of generating
tangible benefits for all civilians, especially children.
We know that successful prevention cannot
be achieved without accountability. Holding the
perpetrators of violations accountable increases the
cost of non-compliance with international law and
helps deter future violations. That is why we must
support the efforts of the United Nations to prevent and
respond to grave violations, including by monitoring
and reporting on them and by providing assistance to
affected children. Child-protection practitioners, civilsociety organizations and humanitarian personnel
in the field must be protected. All parties must allow
and facilitate safe, timely and unimpeded access for
humanitarian workers, as well as children’s access
to services, assistance and protection, including
integration and rehabilitation.
We deplore and condemn in the strongest terms all
atrocities committed against children anywhere in the
world. A crime against a child is an affront to all of
us — to humankind. We must never countenance the
irreplaceable harm inflicted on children in conflict.
We call on all the parties to the conflicts listed in the
annexes to the report to proactively engage with the
United Nations on the ground and with the Office of the
Special Representative in order to put in place measures
to prevent violations against children affected by
conflict. Nothing should be spared in efforts to prevent
conflicts, preserve peace and find political solutions
to war, because peace is the ultimate guarantee of
children’s security. It is conducive to an environment
in which children can receive a normal upbringing with
the education and care that they need and deserve and
that we owe them.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Let me start by
congratulating the United Arab Emirates on a very
successful presidency of the Council during the month
of June. I also wish the United Kingdom all the best in
its presidency in July. I thank you, Madam President,
for convening this annual debate, which provides us
with a unique opportunity to discuss such an important
file. Brazil is deeply committed to the children and
armed conflict agenda, and we hosted a signature event
on children and armed conflict during our most recent
presidency of the Council (see S/PV.9096).
14/32

05/07/2023

I thank the Secretary-General for his annual
report (S/2023/363) and the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, Mrs. Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, for
her tireless efforts to protect children. Brazil fully
supports the work of the Special Representative, and
we encourage her to continue engaging with all parties
to conflicts, including through field visits and action
plans. That engagement is essential to preventing and
ending violations, especially when there is no direct
cooperation between the parties involved in an armed
conflict. Brazil welcomes the positive results of those
efforts, with reintegration support given to more than
12,000 children formerly associated with armed forces
or groups in 2022. I also thank Mr. Omar Abdi, Deputy
Executive Director for Programmes at UNICEF, for his
dedicated work and for his presentation.
(spoke in Spanish)
I would like to thank Ms. Violeta for her testimony and
the recommendations she presented to us.
(spoke in English)
Children do not initiate wars, but when the Security
Council fails to maintain international peace and when
Member States fail to settle their disputes by peaceful
means, children are killed, maimed and raped. The
ultimate guarantee of children’s security is peace.
When considering each of the situations covered by the
report, the Council should be clear that humanitarian
action alone will not end children’s suffering. Only
through peace can we avoid child recruitment,
abductions, attacks on schools and hospitals and other
grave violations. The best approach to protecting
children is by promoting dialogue rather than isolation,
financing ceasefires rather than wars and engaging in
the peaceful settlement of disputes rather than coercive
unilateral sanctions. The most effective way to protect
children from the inevitable suffering caused by war
is to prevent it in the first place, and to favour the
immediate cessation of hostilities and the opening of
peace negotiations when peace is broken.
Brazil reiterates its principled position according
to which multilateral sanctions should not have adverse
consequences for children. The Security Council
should continue improving humanitarian carveouts in
sanction regimes and including experts on children’s
rights in the monitoring mechanisms of the Sanctions
Committees, including Panels of Experts. Childprotection provisions should be included in all the
23-19296

05/07/2023

Children and armed conflict

relevant mandates of United Nations peacekeeping
operations and special political missions. We should
always treat children primarily as victims, including
those associated with groups designated as terrorists.
Brazil strongly supports reintegration efforts, education
for peace and justice for victims. We also encourage the
Office of the Special Representative and the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict to make use of
the expertise of the Peacebuilding Commission.
A world that abandons its children has no
future. It inspires neither confidence nor hope. The
primary responsibility of the Security Council for the
maintenance of international peace and security is also
a responsibility to the children we may prevent from
being included in future reports. Let us not fail them.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
would like to join others in congratulating the United
Arab Emirates on its presidency of the Security Council
in June, and I wish you, Madam President, and your
team, every success in the month of July. Madam, you
can count on Switzerland’s support.
I would also like to thank you, Madam President, for
organizing today’s debate, and Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Gamba de Potgieter and Deputy
Executive Director Abdi for their in-depth analysis and
crucial work. My special thanks go to Ms. Violeta.
Almost 30 years ago, Graça Machel made an urgent
appeal in her seminal report on the impact of armed
conflict on children:
“We must look beyond what seems immediately
possible and find new ways and new solutions to
shield children from the consequences of war”
(A/51/306, para. 312).
The Security Council has responded to this call by
developing the Children and Armed Conflict agenda
through 13 resolutions that offer important tools for
protecting children. While the Children and Armed
Conflict agenda has helped to change the lives
of thousands of girls and boys, the annual report
(S/2023/363) reminds us that the situation of children
caught up in armed conflict remains disastrous.
Twenty-seven thousand grave violations of children’s
rights are 27,000 grave violations of children’s rights
too many, and although more than half of the total
number of violations emanate from armed groups, it
is worrisome to note that, as Mrs. Gamba de Potgieter
mentioned, Government forces have been responsible

S/PV.9366

for the majority of child killings, attacks on schools and
hospitals, and obstacles to humanitarian access.
Respect for international humanitarian law, human
rights and refugee law is fundamental in this context,
and we must intensify our collective efforts to protect
children in armed conflict. To this end, we must focus
on the following three points.
First, the tools developed by the Security Council
will remain effective if and only if they are used
independently, credibly and impartially. The criteria for
including parties in the annexes to the annual report, or
for removing them, must be transparent and objective.
The listing of Myanmar’s armed forces for additional
grave violations, as well as that of the Russian armed
forces and armed groups affiliated with them in the
context of the military aggression against Ukraine,
is consistent and important. We call for a meaningful
engagement of all listed parties with the United
Nations to prevent and end all grave violations. The
task now is to mobilize additional resources, including
for the Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism, which
Switzerland supports in several countries.
Secondly, verified attacks on schools and hospitals
have more than doubled in one year, which is simply
unacceptable. There has also been a marked increase in
the use of this infrastructure for military purposes. We
call on all states to sign and respect the Safe Schools
Declaration, and to implement resolution 2601 (2021).
Realizing the right to education is the key to a better
future and to lasting peace.
Thirdly, the successful reintegration of children
previously associated with armed groups or forces
is fundamental. We must not underestimate the
importance of long-term reintegration programmes that
also open up economic prospects and address genderbased needs. This is an effective way of countering the
risk of further recruitment.
Although the annual report paints a grim picture,
let us keep in mind what Ms. Violeta illustrated in her
briefing today: children, with their creativity, ambition
and recommendations, to which we have listened
carefully, can change the world, or, to once again
borrow Graça Machel’s words:
“In a world of diversity and disparity, children
are a unifying force capable of bringing people to
common ethical grounds.” (ibid., para. 6)

23-1929615/32

S/PV.9366

Children and armed conflict

Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): Mozambique wishes
to warmly congratulate you, Madam President, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of July. We pledge our fullest
and strongest support. We also thank the United Arab
Emirates for its excellent and dynamic presidency of
the Council in June.
We commend the United Kingdom presidency for
convening today’s important open debate. We extend our
appreciation for the comprehensive briefings made by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Mrs. Virginia Gamba de
Potgieter; the UNICEF Deputy Executive Director for
Programmes, Mr. Omar Abdi; and Ms. Violeta. We also
wish to pay tribute to Malta for its excellent leadership
and devotion in chairing the Security Council’s Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict. We commend
the Working Group on its results.
Mozambique expresses great concern for the
ongoing trend of violations against children’s rights
around the world. As indicated in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2023/363), many children
have been confronted with living in situations of
vulnerability, which demands attention and action,
particularly in areas affected by armed terrorist groups.
Violence against children is a grave violation of
human rights. At its core, it challenges the very notion
of international peace and security that we espouse
in this Chamber. It is therefore with great concern
that we continue to witness cases of violations of the
fundamental human rights of children, including acts of
killing, maiming, sexual violence, psychological torture
committed against children, and their recruitment and
use for criminal purposes.
Mozambique condemns in the strongest terms
the grave violations inflicted on innocent children.
The rights of children and their protection and
defence are enshrined in our Constitution. All of
Mozambican society is conscious of the primary duty
and responsibility of the State and of the society itself
to defending and protecting our children.
Accordingly, our Government considers it to be
of fundamental importance to cherish and uphold the
tenets of international human rights and of international
humanitarian law as they are applied to children. It is
of paramount importance to implement the various
resolutions of the Security Council, particularly
16/32

05/07/2023

resolution 1612 (2005), on the protection of children in
armed conflicts.
In that regard, we welcome the efforts made by
Governments around the world in countries identified
in the report of the Secretary-General, from Asia to
Africa and from Latin America to Europe. We praise
their commitment to addressing measures that are
conducive to the protection of children and to the
facilitation of humanitarian assistance for them. The
United Nations and other relevant stakeholders play a
pivotal role by extending their support through concrete
actions in order to prevent violations against children
all over the world.
We must take stock of the existing international,
regional and national tools to address violations against
children. We believe that regional and international
instruments are most important in that endeavour,
including the African Charter on the Rights and
Welfare of the Child, the Convention of the Rights of
the Child and its Optional Protocol on the involvement
of children in armed conflict, the Paris and Vancouver
Principles and the Safe Schools Declaration. Those
instruments are powerful prevention tools to ensure
that children are better protected and not subjected to
grave violations.
In that context, we commend the positive role played
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict. We appreciate her
recent visit to our country, Mozambique. It was an
opportunity to further strengthen our cooperation and
coordinate our views and actions in a constructive
manner. We value such dialogue and engagement, as
they reinforce our national and regional capacity to deal
with the situation of terrorism and respect for children’s
rights. Terrorism is, by definition, a negation and grave
violation of children’s basic and fundamental rights,
and it should be treated as such.
Peace is the foundation for children’s security. It is
the basis of their right to life, which is the most basic
right. In order to prevent and respond to violations
against children’s rights, it is crucial that we develop
and implement holistic approaches that can address
the structural causes of vulnerability of children and
communities, including issues of development. In that
regard, we would like to underline the following points.
First, there is a need to increase training
programmes for State and civil society actors in matters
related to human rights of the child and international
23-19296

05/07/2023

Children and armed conflict

humanitarian law. We believe that will strengthen the
capacity of those actors in handling cases of children
in conflict situations. It is also important that those
programmes be, by design, gender-sensitive, taking
into account the high levels of conflict-related sexual
violence perpetrated against children.
Secondly, we think that the utmost attention should
be given to key legal instruments, including resolution
2427 (2018), taking into account local, national and
regional approaches. In that connection, we underscore
the relevance of implementing the African Charter on
the Rights and Welfare of the Child.
Thirdly, we must mainstream child protection
in all peace processes, including in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, as well as in security
sector reform programmes. We must incorporate
children’s rights in humanitarian advocacy in order
to ensure equal access to reintegration support for all
children, including those formerly under the yoke of
terrorist groups.
Fourthly and lastly, we as the United Nations must
avoid and deny any appearance of extending a semblance
of legitimacy to terrorist groups in their action against
children, because that action is based on force, violence
and coercion. On the other hand, we must emphasize
multifaceted support to the action of legitimate
Governments in their fight against terrorism and their
efforts aimed at nation-building and peacebuilding.
In conclusion, Mozambique reiterates its firm
commitment to continue implementing measures that
can contribute to our collective action in addressing
human rights violations against children. It is our firm
conviction that our children are the world’s future. It
must be our solemn duty to protect them.
Mrs. Shino (Japan): I would like to join my colleagues
in thanking the Permanent Mission of the United Arab
Emirates for its excellent work as the President of the
Security Council in June. I also congratulate the United
Kingdom’s team and Ambassador Woodward on their
smooth assumption of the presidency, beginning with
their convening of today’s important annual debate
on children and armed conflict. Let me assure you,
Madam President, of our team’s full support for your
country’s successful presidency in July. I also thank
Mrs. Gamba de Potgieter, Mr. Abdi and Ms. Violeta for
their insightful briefings.

S/PV.9366

Behind every statistical figure of child victims of
armed conflict, children’s futures and dreams are being
taken away. Member States and all parties to conflicts
must bear in mind the serious impacts of armed conflict
that children endure. The Secretary-General’s latest
report (S/2023/363) shows that, in 2022, there were
27,180 grave violations against children, every single
of which is unacceptable, and we should not ignore
that there is a greater number of children affected by
conflict that is not reflected in that figure. Moreover, I
am particularly distressed to find yet another deplorable
aspect of Russia’s aggression against Ukraine in
the report.
Since the mandate of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
was created, various frameworks and guidelines have
been established to improve the situation of children
affected by armed conflicts. All stakeholders in
the international community should remember the
importance of implementation on the ground. No
child should live in fear of attacks, and neither should
children fight on the front lines of armed conflicts. In
that regard, let me stress two points.
First, the international community should take
preventive measures to ensure children’s safety.
According to the Secretary-General’s report, some 26 per
cent of child casualties are due to explosive ordnance,
including explosive remnants of war, improvised
explosive devices and landmines. Japan is convinced
that effective mine action contributes to preventing
grave violations against children and ensuring their
freedom from fear. Japan has therefore been supporting
mine clearance and mine-risk education through the
United Nations Mine Action Service, UNICEF and the
United Nations Development Programme, which will
reduce the risks for children.
Secondly, access to education is a fundamental
human right and a powerful tool to prevent and mitigate
conflict. It is regrettable that international humanitarian
law and international human rights law are openly
ignored, hindering children’s access to school. Ensuring
access to education for children in armed conflict leads
to investing in people who will shape and promote
more effective, accountable and resilient institutions
and societies. With that in mind, Japan has been
supporting education programmes. For example, this
year, the Government of Japan made a contribution to
UNESCO to provide emergency digital education and
school meals to children who fled Myanmar. Japan also

23-1929617/32

S/PV.9366

Children and armed conflict

supports school meals programmes through the World
Food Programme in many countries to help children
attend school even in conflict situations.
Children who are already in vulnerable
circumstances are typically confronted by greater
human-security challenges combined with those
presented by armed conflict, climate change and food
insecurity. We are responsible both for addressing
those human security threats and removing those
impediments that hinder children’s ability to create
a pathway to a future. Japan will continue to work
with other Member States, the United Nations system,
international humanitarian organizations and civilsociety organizations in that endeavour
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): Let
me take this opportunity to thank the United Arab
Emirates for its effective stewardship of the Security
Council in June and to welcome the United Kingdom
presidency for the month of July. I am very grateful
to Special Representative Gamba de Potgieter and
UNICEF Deputy Executive Director Abdi, and I
especially thank our civil-society briefer, Ms. Violeta,
for bringing her voice from the front lines of this
important issue to today’s discussion.
It is clear that we have not done nearly enough
to protect children from the effects of conflict. The
United States remains firmly committed to the children
and armed conflict agenda item and is keen to see it
elevated, enhanced and better integrated into all
the work of the Security Council. This year’s annual
report of the Secretary-General on children and armed
violence (S/2023/363) provides a sobering snapshot of
how conflict has impacted children. As the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General underscored,
in 2022 the United Nations reported 27,180 instances
of the six grave violations against children, including
more than 8,600 children killed or maimed. We are
deeply saddened by this staggering statistic. We are
encouraged by the outcomes of engagement with
parties to conflict, which resulted in the release of
12,460 children from armed groups and armed forces,
and we hope for more steps that will make children’s
lives better. However, too many children have been
further subjected to sexual violence, abducted or denied
humanitarian aid.
Girls in particular are at high risk of genderbased violence, both during and after conflict, and
have unique needs in recovery after conflict. Armed
18/32

05/07/2023

conflict also takes a devastating toll on children
with disabilities. There are reports of children in the
Sudan who have been forced from their homes and in
some cases separated from their families or subjected
to sexual violence. Armed groups remain the main
perpetrators of abuses against children in Colombia,
where the forcible recruitment or use of children
remains a prevalent concern, particularly for AfroColombian and Indigenous communities in rural areas.
We welcome the continued progress made by the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace. We encourage the Colombian
Government to prioritize ending such abuses in any
peace talks with illegal armed groups and to act swiftly
to implement protective measures. Perpetrators of
crimes against children, including sexual violence,
must be held accountable through the justice system.
In Afghanistan, the ban on girls’ access to education
beyond primary school, patterns of early and forced
marriage and the recruitment and use of child soldiers
have been detrimental to young people’s physical and
emotional welfare. We call on the Taliban to reverse
the policies and practices that restrict women and girls’
access to education at every level.
Of course we cannot talk about the impact of
conflict on children without discussing Russia’s war on
Ukraine. In pursuing Russia’s war of choice, members of
Russia’s forces and its officials have committed crimes
against humanity, and that includes children. Members
of its forces have committed execution-style killings
of Ukrainian men, women and children, and alongside
other Russian officials have deported hundreds of
thousands of Ukrainian civilians to Russia, including
children forcibly separated from their families. Those
acts are not random or spontaneous but are part of
a widespread and systematic attack on Ukraine’s
civilian population. Russia’s forces continue to attack
areas where children are clearly present, including
schools, hospitals and residential buildings. That stark
reality serves as a poignant reminder of the urgency
and necessity of strengthening the international
community’s child-protection capacities and of the
crucial need for all States to respect international
law and the principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations.
Children are not merely caught in the crossfire.
They are often deliberately victimized. Many continue
to experience trauma, rejection and social isolation
from their communities and require a broad, holistic,
survivor-centred and trauma-informed range of
23-19296

05/07/2023

Children and armed conflict

interventions to support their long-term health and wellbeing and enable them to make future contributions to
peaceful societies. We must do better. Children around
the world deserve to feel safe, receive an education and
have a future. When we take steps to protect them, we
are safeguarding our collective future and helping to
end enduring conflicts.
Mr. Montalvo Sosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
We congratulate you, Madam President, on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council, and at the same
time we appreciate the focus on prevention and response
strategies that you have proposed for this debate.
I am grateful for the information provided by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Mrs. Virginia Gamba
de Potgieter, and Mr. Omar Abdi, UNICEF Deputy
Executive Director for Programmes, and for the firsthand account by Ms. Violeta, to whom we listened
especially closely.
The killing, recruitment, use and kidnapping of
children, and sexual violence committed against them,
among other atrocious acts committed against children
in conflict situations, are crimes that leave lifelong
physical and mental scars on the victims, deprive them
of their right to fully experience childhood, hinder
their reintegration into society and prevent them from
contributing to it as agents of change. My delegation
condemns the obstruction of humanitarian access by
State and non-State forces and the destruction of schools
and hospitals, wherever they occur. Given the extreme
level of vulnerability of children and the violations and
abuses of their rights in conflict situations, we cannot
remain silent. The report of the Secretary-General
(S/2023/363) and today’s briefings have confirmed
the increase in 2022 in grave violations committed
against children, who continue to be disproportionately
affected. Ecuador therefore underscores the importance
of the children and armed conflict agenda in the Security
Council and the work of Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Gamba de Potgieter. As a member of
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict,
my country acknowledges her work and that of her
team, as we believe that we need a concerted response
by the international community if we are to address the
deteriorating situation in various regions of the world.
In the current context, it is vital to strengthen and
define efforts to establish national frameworks for the
protection of children, with the support of the relevant

S/PV.9366

agencies and bodies of the United Nations system,
based on international law, international humanitarian
law, international refugee law and the international
architecture for the protection of children, including
the Convention on the Rights of the Child and its
Optional Protocol on the involvement of children in
armed conflict. We also encourage the implementation
of demining plans that reduce the risk of death and
maiming from improvised explosive devices.
The Security Council should emphasize family
reunification and the safe and dignified return of
children displaced by violence, in particular when they
have been forced or have had to do so unaccompanied.
We support the Secretary-General’s call for the
rehabilitation and reintegration of children who were
recruited as victims, not as former combatants.
The Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism is a
valuable tool for the investigation and classification
of violations against children. The international
community should ensure its funding, and States
should guarantee the access and safety of personnel, in
accordance with resolution 1612 (2005), which includes
a set of mandates that must be fulfilled.
We must encourage the strengthening of
institutions that promote accountability, transitional
justice, investigation and the sentencing of perpetrators
of violations in armed conflict, in cooperation with
international institutions such as the International
Court of Justice and the International Criminal Court.
Prevention is the best chance of ensuring that an
increasing number of children have access to wellbeing and physical and mental health. Making that
possible is a collective responsibility. Ecuador stands
ready to contribute to that end.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I congratulate
the United Arab Emirates on its outstanding presidency
of the Security Council in the month of June. I
congratulate you, Madam President, and the United
Kingdom on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council this month, as well as on convening today’s
important debate on children and armed conflict.
The briefings provided by Special Representative
Virginia Gamba de Potgieter and Deputy Executive
Director Omar Abdi are particularly serious and
alarming. The moving testimony and recommendations
given by Ms. Violeta underscore the gravity of the
situation. According to the report of the Secretary-

23-1929619/32

S/PV.9366

Children and armed conflict

General (S/2023/363), children are the victims of
murder, maiming and physical violence, abduction,
denial of humanitarian access and recruitment and
use in terrorist organizations in various regions of the
world affected by armed conflict.
The year 2022 was particularly horrific for children
in various conflict zones throughout the world. There
were 24,300 violations of children’s rights, 2,985
murders, 5,655 cases of maiming, 7,622 instances of
recruitment, 3,985 abductions and 2,496 detentions for
actual or alleged association with armed groups. Those
numbers must be said outloud for us to grasp the gravity
of the situation.
The Secretary-General’s report highlights a
persistence and resurgence of gender-based violence,
in particular rape, forced marriage and other kinds of
sexual violence that have an impact on the physical
and mental health of children. That is compounded
by child labour, trafficking, smuggling and numerous
attacks on schools and health facilities that are used for
military purposes and deprive children of their right to
education and health services.
My country remains deeply concerned about the
use of explosive devices on the battlefield. Such devices
brutally kill and maim countless children. In Africa,
many forcibly recruited children serve as combatants,
scouts, mine testers, messengers and cooks. Some are
used as human shields. Women and girls are used as sex
slaves. In some crisis-stricken countries, children are
used as scouts at checkpoints to gather intelligence or
plant improvised explosive devices. In crisis-affected
countries, programmes to rehabilitate, reintegrate and
assist children separated from armed groups must
be systematically implemented, taking into account
their age and gender as well as the progress made in
repatriating them to their countries of origin and
treating them as victims.
The protection of children in armed conflict must
remain a priority on the Council’s agenda. Children
must be able to live anywhere in a stable and safe
environment in which their fundamental rights
are respected and protected. We must ensure the
implementation of the relevant legal instruments at our
disposal to give full effect to the protection of children
in conflict, in particular resolutions 1612 (2005) and
2427 (2018). In all conflict zones in which the safety
and dignity of children are under threat, humanitarian
access must be unhindered and the parties to conflict
20/32

05/07/2023

must strictly respect international humanitarian law
and adhere to relevant resolutions of the Council, in
particular resolutions 1998 (2011), 2143 (2014) and 2601
(2021).
The partnership concluded between the United
Nations and UNESCO to combat attacks on schools,
with a view to guaranteeing quality education for
all, is a lever for action that must be supported at the
global and national levels. Without a doubt, we must go
beyond the significant progress made in talks between
the United Nations and armed groups in order to better
protect children in armed conflict. It is up to every
State to guard against the spectre of violence against
children by taking concrete measures.
First, States must make national legislation on
the protection of children as robust as possible and
sufficiently dissuasive and ensure that, in times of
conflict or peace, the perpetrators of atrocities or
violations of children’s rights are held to account.
Secondly, education and access to health care
and the eradication of poverty and hunger are
essential links in the prevention of violence against
children. Education is a key lever in the fight against
obscurantism, fanaticism and terrorism.
In conclusion, I reiterate our support for the
efforts of Special Representative Gamba de Potgieter,
while underscoring the importance of implementing
international legal instruments and strengthening
international cooperation to ensure better protection
and a better future for children in armed conflict.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I want to
begin by thanking the United Kingdom for convening
today’s important debate as the first in its presidency
of the Security Council in July. We wish the delegation
every success in leading our work this month. I also
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Gamba de Potgieter and Deputy Executive Director
Abdi for their briefings today and for their tireless
efforts to strengthen the protection of children around
the world. I would also like to thank Ms. Violeta for
bringing a direct voice of experience into Council
deliberations today.
I would like to start by welcoming the clear fourpoint action plan put forward by Special Representative
Gamba de Potgieter in her remarks, as well as
Ms. Violeta’s point that the Security Council should be
a guarantor of the implementation of peace agreements.
23-19296

05/07/2023

Children and armed conflict

That goes to the core of the Council’s mandate and its
ability to protect children around the world.
As we have all noted of the 2022 report (S/2023/363),
the trend lines are alarming and give us all pause to
reassess when it comes to our efforts in terms of what is
working and what is failing. The report highlights that
the highest number of grave violations were verified in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Israel and the
occupied Palestinian territory, Somalia, Syria, Ukraine,
Afghanistan and Yemen. And we would really support
continued partnership with the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General in those countries to ensure
that the trend does not continue this year.
Tragically, in 2022 we saw 8,630 children either
killed or maimed overall, according to the verified
numbers in the report. As members of the United
Nations, we should all find that unacceptable. Given
the finding that the majority of child casualties were
perpetrated by Government forces, our common target
as United Nations Member States should be nothing
less than to reach the point where the mandate of the
Special Representative is no longer needed.
First, to support the Special Representative’s
priorities, the Council must double down on conflict
prevention and resolution. The record high number
of situations of concern clearly demonstrates that
conflict management strategies are not enough. We
need a change of paradigm to sustainably end conflict
and prevent it from happening in the first place. The
Council’s tools must be tailored to reflect the reality
and true nature of conflict today. With non-State armed
groups responsible for 50 per cent of grave violations,
deploying the standard responses, the list of shame and
other traditional means are simply not as effective with
those groups. In the face of bad-faith actors who prey
on and exploit children, the Council must do better to
adapt to those new realities. The ultimate objective
is not merely to punish but to change behaviour and
mindsets and deter and prevent future violations. We
must make full use of the powers of the Council to
fulfil our responsibilities towards children.
Secondly, we are deeply concerned about the
cascading cycle of violence that occurs when children
are also violated through their indoctrination and
recruitment into armed groups. In the words of a
previous Special Representative for Children and
Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara Otunnu, child soldiers are
forced to give violent expression to the hatred of adults.

S/PV.9366

As Ms. Violeta reminded us today, we must recognize
that those children are not only victims. They are also
agents of change and peacebuilders. In that regard,
countering indoctrination and recruitment must be
a cornerstone of the Security Council’s work on the
children and armed conflict agenda. The Security
Council must see education as its most potent weapon
in countering the threat of armed conflict against and
by children. We should ensure equal access to quality
education that promotes peace, tolerance and mutual
understanding, as well as the re-establishment of
educational facilities, including through international
cooperation and assistance. If we fail in that endeavour,
we risk creating lost generations of children newly
susceptible to radicalization.
Thirdly, we must change the mindset of the
partnership of Governments with Special Representative
Gamba de Potgieter and her team to an approach based
on complementarity. I think that would be one of the
most effective things for us to do collectively. Special
Representative Gamba de Potgieter has worked tirelessly
to improve partnerships with Governments around the
world, and that should be acknowledged. But we must
accelerate that trend to ensure that her work and that of
her team is embraced and carried out in full partnership
and cooperation with Governments, based on trust and
confidence-building measures. We must aim to create
a new understanding about implementation, based on
collaboration rather than avoidance. The Monitoring
and Reporting Mechanism may be a technical tool, but
we must ensure that the full weight of the Council is
behind it to ensure dialogue with key stakeholders and
the implementation of corrective measures.
I will end with a quote by Ishmael Beah in his book
about his experience as a child soldier in Sierra Leone.
“My squad is my family; my gun is my provider and my
protector; and my rule is to kill or to be killed.” I think
we can all agree that is not a childhood that any of us
would wish on anyone.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the briefers for their contributions
to today’s discussion.
Children are one of the most vulnerable sectors of a
population during conflict, and terrorist and extremist
groups involved in armed conflicts continue to pose
a particular threat in that regard, with the methods
they favour being child recruitment, abduction, sexual

23-1929621/32

S/PV.9366

Children and armed conflict

violence, the use of children as human shields and
obstruction of humanitarian aid.
The worst situation in terms of the terrorist threat is
unfolding in the Sahara-Sahel region, where terrorists
are stepping up their activities and extending their
geographical reach. It suffices to recall the numerous
crimes of Boko Haram, as well as the horrific practices
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and
other terrorist groups in Iraq and Syria. We continue
to be particularly concerned about the activities of
ISIL-Khorasan in Afghanistan, which continues to
claim child victims as well. And children are dying
in Palestine, too. There is also a difficult situation in
Myanmar, where armed groups continue to operate.
However, we note the efforts of the Government
of Myanmar to prevent serious violations against
children, including through the implementation of the
corresponding national action plan.
When it comes to protecting children in conflict,
we should not forget Syria. We are extremely concerned
about the plight of children in territories in Idlib and the
north-east of the country that are not under Damascus’s
control. The catastrophic situation in the Al-Hol and
Al-Roj camps for internally displaced persons in the
north-east has gone unresolved for years. Human
rights organizations and the Human Rights Council
special procedures have been talking for a long time
about the abduction of children for the purpose of
recruitment, with the most recent such statement issued
on 16 February. The United States, as the occupying
Power in control of the camps, refuses to address the
problem. We once again call on all States to fulfil their
obligations under international law and adopt measures
to repatriate children of their citizens from armedconflict zones.

05/07/2023

been killed and more than 440 minors injured due to
the Ukrainians’ actions. The authorized structures
of the Donetsk and Luhansk People’s Republics have
sent 2,000 communications to the European Court
of Human Rights and more than 1,500 to the ICC.
In nine years, they have sent appeals to the Security
Council, the Human Rights Council, the International
Committee of the Red Cross and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe. However, all of
those appeals have gone unheeded. Since February
2022 the territories of the Donetsk and Luhansk
People’s Republics have been shelled by the Armed
Forces of Ukraine more than 19,000 times. More than
5,000 civilians have been killed, including almost
200 children, and several thousand, including more
than 300 children, have been wounded. Some 600
educational institutions and more than 150 medical
facilities in Donbas have been destroyed or damaged.
Cases of death and serious injury to children have been
recorded in Zaporizhzhya and Kherson, as well as in
Belgorod, Bryansk and Kursk oblasts as a result of the
shelling perpetrated by the Armed Forces of Ukraine.

As for the situation in Ukraine, the issue of child
protection has unfortunately been cynically chosen
as part of a dirty information campaign to defame the
Russian Federation, launched by the Western media and
promoted by the so-called International Criminal Court
(ICC), which has served as a laundry for whitewashing
second-rate fakes. To our bewilderment, the SecretaryGeneral has now also decided to do his bit for the
campaign. Let us try to make sense of the situation.

The Special Representative mentioned a poor
maimed girl from Ukraine. We organized an Arria
Formula meeting on the subject “Children and armed
conflict: the crisis in Ukraine”, at which one of the
briefers was Evgeny Zhilitsyn, head of the children’s
division of the Donetsk centre for traumatology. It
was a pity that Mrs. Gamba de Potgieter was unable to
hear the doctor’s testimony about dozens of children
from Luhansk and Donetsk who were maimed as a
result of the strikes by the Armed Forces of Ukraine
targeting residential areas in those cities or were blown
up by Ukraine’s “lepestok” anti-personnel mines. The
brutality of the perpetrators of the Kyiv regime is mindboggling. In a school in the city of Lysychansk, in the
Luhansk People’s Republic, fighters from the notorious
volunteer Tornado Battalion set up a real torture room
in which children were tortured and raped, with all of it
filmed on video. In another town in the Luhansk People’s
Republic with the peaceful name of Shchastia — which
means “happiness” — orphaned girls were taken to the
Aidar Battalion, with the participation of the principal
of one of the town’s high schools, to be tormented and
sexually abused.

We have been insisting since 2014 that the United
Nations should give a proper assessment of the Kyiv
regime’s crimes against civilians in Donbas, including
children. In nine years, more than 130 children have

However, those stories and figures are not reflected
in the reports of the United Nations. The Organization
is unwilling to accept objective information from the
field and to draw attention to the fact that there are

22/32

23-19296

05/07/2023

Children and armed conflict

people living in Donbas who were the first victims of
the Ukrainian conflict, nine years ago. They are the
ones that the Russian Federation is now protecting.
However, even without the full information, the
Secretary-General was forced to record in his report
(S/2023/363) 80 cases in which children were killed and
hundreds in which children were maimed, as well as
the destruction of hundreds of schools and hospitals by
the Armed Forces of Ukraine. At the same time, the
Secretary-General decided not to include the Armed
Forces of Ukraine on the list of parties engaging in
violations against children. The question in that regard
is, why do not the children of Donbass, Zaporizhzhya,
Kherson, Belgorod, Bryansk, and Kursk oblasts need
the protection of the United Nations? Are their lives
less valuable? What do you think? Is 80 too few? The
response is clear. The deaths of children in these parts
of Russia do not fit the picture painted by the Western
media outlets of Ukraine being a beacon of democracy,
which means that all such facts have been conveniently
swept under the rug.
Clearly, the Secretary-General took a political
decision. One cannot fail to recognize that, in order to
voice accusations against the Armed Forces of Ukraine,
a certain courage is needed. It is difficult to counter
the blatant pressure from the West. The SecretaryGeneral was unable to summon that courage. And yet
the Secretary-General at least partially reflected the
crimes committed by the Kyiv regime, while Western
countries in the Security Council, as we heard today,
assume on the whole that those crimes do not exist
at all.
The reason for that is clear. There is a need to
conceal the crimes perpetrated by Kyiv in which these
countries themselves are implicated. The deaths of
children and the destruction of schools and hospitals
in Russian regions are the result, inter alia, of the
use of Western weapons delivered to Kyiv and of the
involvement of personnel trained by Westerners.
Moreover, representatives of the United States from
time to time boast about the fact that they provide
intelligence to the Armed Forces of Ukraine, as well as
discuss military designs with them. In legal language,
this means that they bear responsibility for the crimes
the Armed Forces of Ukraine commits.
But international organizations are not interested
in those issues. Therefore, in that regard, we decided
to establish a parliamentary commission on the
investigation of crimes committed by Kyiv against

S/PV.9366

children. This commission’s work will help to redress
violations of the human rights of children and ensure
that perpetrators are held accountable.
The head-in-the-sand policy in relation to the
crimes committed by the Kyiv regime against children
entails, inter alia, demonizing the image of the Russian
Federation and its army. This is the logic that underpins
the scandalous decision by the Secretary-General to
include the Russian Armed forces in the annex of parties
engaging in violations against children. Any objective
expert can confirm that there is no factual basis for
this decision by Secretary-General. We can see that in
the report, which lacks specific. Indeed, instances of
supposed violations are described in such a way that
they cannot be verified. Moreover, our requests to
receive clarifying information did not bear fruit or yield
the necessary results. Most of the actions in Ukraine
are accompanied by deafening flows of disinformation
received from the Human Rights Monitoring Mission
in Ukraine, which is biased and effectively under the
control of the Kyiv regime, as well as of unverified data
that the United Nations should have thoroughly checked
in conjunction with the affected sides.
However, the Russian Federation, as I mentioned, the
Secretary-General opted for a quick political decision.
We have repeatedly observed similar instances of his
doing the bidding of Western countries. One cannot fail
to notice the chronically biased nature of the list of socalled parties engaging in violations against children.
For example, neither the United States nor its allies are
on the list, as if there were no litany of their bloody
invasions in Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, Iraq, Libya
and Syria. States of the collective West consistently
and systematically perpetrate acts that run counter to
efforts to prevent serious violations against civilians.
That is starkly attested to by the numerous murders
and maiming of children permitted by the NATO
coalition, as seen in the years-long indiscriminate air
strikes targeting civilians in Afghanistan. According
to various reports, as a result of the such actions in
Afghanistan from 2001 to 2021, there were 46,000
to 70,000 casualties, up to a third of whom were
minors. According to the reports of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, approximately
40 per cent of those who died as a result of NATO air
strikes were children. One of the most odious instances
occurred in July of 2008 in Nangarhar province,
when American planes dropped bombs on a wedding
procession, as a result of which 35 children died. In July

23-1929623/32

S/PV.9366

Children and armed conflict

2011, as a result of NATO air strikes, in Khost province,
eight children died, the youngest of whom was only
five days old. It was documented that 51 children died
as a result of air operations in 2012. On 29 August 2021,
and only two days before the completion of the hasty
withdrawal of their troops, the Americans conducted air
strikes targeting Kabul, as a result of which civilians,
not terrorists from the Islamic State of Iraq, contrary
to initial reports from the Pentagon, died. Of those 10
civilians, 7 were children.
London has recognized its personnel’s responsibility
for the deaths of 16 minors in Afghanistan. At the same
time, according to reports of human rights activists,
the number of children killed by British troops could
be as high as 135. The most pervasive cause for these
deaths is air strikes by British air forces and the use
of weapons in densely populated areas. Furthermore,
crimes perpetrated against children in Iraq by British
soldiers are still assiduously concealed.
During the NATO bombings of Yugoslavia in
1999, approximately 90 children died. The symbol
of the NATO aggression there was three-year-old
Milica Radkić, who died at home near Belgrade in
April 1999, when alliance aircraft bombed an adjacent
military airfield, and the air strikes destroyed civilian
infrastructure, including hospitals, schools and even
kindergartens. The delayed consequences of NATO’s
use of depleted uranium munitions in Yugoslavia
include an increasing number of cancer cases among
children and genetic mutations among newborns.
Contrary to all those outrageous facts, NATO, the
Americans and the British have not been listed, which
essentially answers the question of the objectivity of
the United Nations mechanism used to protect children.
Moreover, these people are now imperiously accusing
the Russian Federation of crimes that have not been
proved by anyone.
Irrespective of any reports, the Russian Federation
reaffirms its continued commitment to the protection
of children during armed conflict, specifically during
our special military operation. We are adopting every
systemic measure to prevent the deaths of children
and damage to hospitals and schools. All this time, the
Russian Federation has been open to cooperation with
the United Nations on this issue, specifically with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Children and Armed Conflict.
24/32

05/07/2023

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
I would like to start by thanking Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Gamba
de Potgieter, Deputy Executive Director Abdi and
Ms. Violeta for their briefings. I would like to thank
Ms. Violeta, in particular, for her tremendous courage
and valuable insights on the impact of conflict
on children.
The scale of grave violations outlined in the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2023/363) is shocking.
Over 8,000 children were killed and maimed in 2022.
Attacks on schools and hospitals increased by 112 per
cent. Violations in the Sahel increased by 85 per cent
and in Myanmar by 140 per cent, and over 1,500
children were recruited and used in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. These are not just statistics.
They are the stories of real children and their families
and communities.
For the first time, a permanent member of the
Security Council, the Russian Federation, is listed for
over 1,200 grave violations against children, which
is a listing based on robust United Nations data that
represents the tip of the iceberg. There is only one
solution to ending the suffering of Ukrainian children:
an end to Russia’s illegal invasion.
We will continue to support the Government of
Ukraine’s efforts to protect its children and bring them
home after Russia’s forced deportations. International
frameworks to ensure children’s rights, such as the
Safe Schools Declaration, the Security Council’s
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict and
the Children and Armed Conflict Monitoring and
Reporting Mechanism need our full support.
The United Kingdom is taking action. We support
programmes delivering psychosocial support, safe
spaces and addressing the drivers of recruitment,
and we are a major donor to Education Cannot Wait,
helping over 8.8 million children achieve their right
to an education. We will continue to drive the global
response to conflict-related sexual violence, to remove
barriers to justice, increase support for child survivors
and implement our commitments under the platform for
action promoting the rights and well-being of children
born of conflict-related sexual violence.
Children do not start wars, but they continue to be
the most vulnerable to their effects. We should do better.
23-19296

05/07/2023

Children and armed conflict

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I would like to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than three minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to comment on two subjects.
First, in his statement, the representative of
the United States accused Russia’s armed forces of
executing children. It is completely inappropriate to say
such things in the Chamber.
Secondly, the representative of the United
Kingdom said verbatim — I heard the words — that
the Russian armed forces are being blamed, according
to the Secretary-General’s report (S/2023/363), for the
deaths of 1,200 children. I ask her to at least be accurate
and state the exact figure that is being alleged in the
report — although it is not verified — which is 120
children, and not 1,200.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than three minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Flashing lights on the collars of the
microphones will prompt speakers to bring their
statements to a close after three minutes.
I now give the floor to the representative of Mexico.
Mr. Ochoa Martínez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, I would like to thank the United Kingdom
for convening today’s annual open debate. We also
thank all the briefers for their briefings.
Let me begin by recalling the importance
of supporting the vital mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Children
and Armed Conflict. To protect children, it is necessary
to engage in dialogue with all parties to an armed
conflict, from Government authorities to leaders of
armed groups, including those under sanctions. In that
regard, the efforts of the Special Representative should
not be undermined by giving consideration to matters
that are unrelated to the fulfilment of her mandate,
which is to ensure the welfare of children in situations
of armed conflict.

S/PV.9366

The Secretary-General’s report (S/2023/363) once
again presents us with a bleak overview. Serious
violations against children and adolescents persist and,
unfortunately, in many cases, they are increasing. That
represents a failure of our efforts to protect children in
situations of conflict. We must spare no effort to reverse
that trend. Mexico once again calls on all parties to
conflicts to fully respect international law and the child
protection norms, such as the Safe Schools Declaration.
As far as the Latin American and Caribbean region
is concerned, we recognize that the Secretary-General
has included the case of Haiti as one of the worrisome
situations in his report. Indeed, the number of cases
of recruitment, killings, mutilations, sexual violence,
attacks against schools, kidnappings and denials of
humanitarian access confirm the grave situation in
and around Port-au-Prince resulting from armed gang
violence. Action needs to be taken to end the suffering
of Haitian children.
In conclusion, we reiterate our urgent call for
mainstreaming the protection of children perspective
in all peace missions and special political missions,
particularly in cases of withdrawals, as in the case
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali and other transitions of
peacekeeping missions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland.
Mr. Szczerski (Poland): Poland would like to thank
the United Kingdom for convening this important and
timely open debate.
We align ourselves with the statements to be
delivered on behalf the European Union and the Group
of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2023/363) for
2022 unequivocally demonstrates that children are
among the most profoundly affected groups during
armed conflicts. Regrettably, attacks against them
have evolved into a powerful weapon for eroding a
nation’s future. The fundamental rights of the youngest
generation are being flagrantly violated in many parts
of the world, encompassing forcible deportations, the
use of explosive weapons, recruitment into armed
groups, the imposition of bans on education and the
deprivation of access to food and health care.
Poland’s commitment to safeguarding the rights
of children and ensuring their protection is deeply

23-1929625/32

S/PV.9366

Children and armed conflict

ingrained in our political agenda. We demonstrated that
dedication in our recent tenures on the Security Council
and the Human Rights Council. Going forward, as we
prepare to join the Economic and Social Council in
January 2024, we will continue to champion children’s
rights as an integral part of our social agenda. Poland’s
active membership in the Group of Friends of Children
and Armed Conflict and its 2023 vice-presidency of
the UNICEF Executive Board Bureau also serve as
tangible examples of our steadfast engagement in the
global endeavour to protect and support children.
The gravity of violations of children’s rights cannot
be fully assessed. Still, from the perspective of an
immediate neighbour of an ongoing war, let me focus
on the situation in Ukraine. Poland has experienced the
humanitarian fallout of Russia’s full-scale aggression,
becoming a safe haven for the largest community
of Ukrainian refugees, exceeding today 1.6 million
individuals, with women and children constituting
90 per cent of that population. Those children brought
with them horrific memories of the acts of their Russian
aggressors, comparable only to the stories of the Second
World War. We hear those stories again and again,
listening to children deliver their testimonies in their
own language, which makes them even more appalling.
We swiftly implemented comprehensive measures to
extend support to Ukrainian children, ensuring their
access to essential services such as education, health
care and family benefits. Furthermore, since March
2022, we have proudly hosted the UNICEF Emergency
Response Office in Warsaw. We highly value our
collaborative efforts for the benefit of all children.
We are deeply concerned about the forcible
displacement of Ukrainian children to the occupied
territories and to Russia. Such actions flagrantly
violate the tenets of the Fourth Geneva Convention, the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide and the Convention on the Rights
of the Child. Consequently, this year’s report explicitly
references Ukraine as one of the countries with the
highest incidence of grave violations against children.
It is even more appalling that the parties perpetrating
those heinous acts are the Russian armed forces and
their affiliated armed groups — forces belonging
a permanent member of the Council that the world
expects to be especially committed to upholding peace
and protecting civilians.
In conclusion, we welcome the fact that the report
urges Russia to adopt measures to terminate and
26/32

05/07/2023

forestall such violations, while pursuing accountability.
In that context, we find it symbolic that the very first
arrest warrants issued by the International Criminal
Court (ICC) in relation to the war concern crimes
against children. Both the President of the Russian
Federation, Vladimir Putin, and Maria Lvova-Belova,
the Commissioner for Children’s Rights in his Office,
are allegedly responsible for the war crime of the
unlawful deportation and transfer of children from
occupied areas of Ukraine to the Russian Federation.
Poland strongly supports the mandate of the ICC and its
efforts to bring the perpetrators to justice for the sake
of the rights of the child.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I thank the United
Kingdom presidency for organizing this important
open debate, and Virginia Gamba de Potgieter and
Omar Abdi for their insightful briefings. I also want to
extend a special thanks to Ms. Violeta for sharing her
testimony and practical recommendations today.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2023/363)
reveals a troubling trend in 2022: a rise in children
affected by grave violations in 25 conflict situations.
The exponential increase in both grave violations
against children and the number of conflict situations
poses challenges to the children and armed conflict
architecture, necessitating additional support such
as adequate resources for child-protection specialists
and activities.
The devastating impact of Russia’s aggression on
children in Ukraine serves as a vivid example of that. It
is crucial not to forget that the numbers verified do not
reflect the true scale and volume of those violations, as
mentioned in the report. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine
has affected all of Ukraine’s 7.5 million children, nearly
two thirds of whom have been internally or externally
displaced. Due to the unabated bombardment and
shelling by the Russian armed forces, as of 3 July, at least
494 children had been killed and 1,036 injured. And 379
children have been reported missing during hostilities.
In addition, 13 cases of sexual violence committed
against children in various regions have been recorded
by the Office of the Prosecutor General of Ukraine.
Ukraine’s Ministry of Education reports that nearly
3,450 educational institutions across the country
have been damaged, with 331 of them destroyed.
23-19296

05/07/2023

Children and armed conflict

Furthermore, nearly 1,500 medical facilities have been
damaged, with 185 of them destroyed.
Unfortunately, the report fails to adequately
address the issue of the mass abduction of Ukrainian
children by Russia. Russian authorities themselves
have repeatedly stated that more than 700,000 children
were relocated from Ukraine to Russia. Ukraine has
strong grounds to believe that several hundred thousand
Ukrainian children were forcibly and unlawfully taken
by Russia, with many still being held against their will.
To date, Ukrainian authorities have identified 19,492
such children, including 4,390 who are orphans or lack
parental care. So far, only 380 have been successfully
returned and reunited with their families. Even those
terrible statistics of grave violations against children
are not definitive, owing to the lack of access to the
temporarily occupied territories of Ukraine.
It is crucial to remember that Ukraine has been a
victim of Russian aggression since 2014. Therefore,
given our belief in the potential of the children in
armed conflict mandate to enhance the protection of
Ukrainian children affected by the war, my delegation
has consistently requested, since that time, that the
situation in Ukraine be included in the report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict
whenever the Council meets to discuss it. As a party
to core international instruments related to the
safeguarding of children’s rights, Ukraine remains
determined to further strengthen children’s protection,
particularly in the context of Russia’s aggression. We
appreciated the Secretary-General’s decision in July
2022 to monitor the situation in Ukraine and established
constructive dialogue and cooperation with his Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict. In
order to further that commitment, the Government of
Ukraine has appointed a focal point on conflict and
armed children. We also established an interministerial
committee to ensure regular communication with
the children and armed conflict team, Furthermore,
the Government has implemented various preventive
measures, including the voluntary development of
a national prevention plan aimed at preventing grave
violations against children in the context of Russia’s war.
We were pleased to welcome Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Gamba de Potgieter and her
team to Ukraine in May, following our own invitation.
As agreed during the visit, a joint prevention plan with
the United Nations has been drafted and will soon be
signed. Ukraine welcomes the Secretary-General’s

S/PV.9366

decision to include the Russian armed forces and
affiliated armed groups in the annex to his report. The
Russian army undoubtedly belongs on the very same
list that includes the most egregious criminals, such as
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, Al-Shabaab and
the Taliban, to name a few, given the horrific crimes
that it has committed and continues to commit daily
against children in Ukraine. Yesterday alone, on 4 July,
Russia once again perpetrated an act of terrorism by
targeting a civilian neighbourhood in Pervomaiskyi, in
the Kharkiv region. The assault resulted in 43 injuries,
including 12 children, among them a 3-month-old
newborn, a 10-month-old infant and a 1-year-old child.
It is also without doubt that the Russian armed forces
and affiliated armed groups have engaged in similar
barbaric practices in other countries and regions.
Since Russia continues to disregard any dialogue
with United Nations human rights entities, such as
the Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on Ukraine, the International Criminal Court (ICC)
and the International Court of Justice, we expect to
see evidence of its true determination to cooperate
with the United Nations and the children and armed
conflict team, in particular. We hope one day to see
the full implementation of the most comprehensive
action plan developed by Russia together with the
United Nations, as stated by Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Gamba de Potgieter during her
press briefing on 27 June. Only then may it be justified
to name Russia as one of the listed parties that have
put in place measures during the reporting period
aimed at improving the protection of children. In that
regard, we urge the United Nations, and especially the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, to persistently demand
that the Russian Federation fulfil all its obligations
under international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. That includes ending all grave
violations against children in Ukraine and ensuring the
timely and safe return of all Ukrainian children who
are forcefully and illegally held by Russia.
In the meantime, however, the intervention made
today by Putin’s envoy, who is wanted by the ICC, as
always was humbug and hypocrisy — in order to avoid
more precise language to describe it. We call on the
international community to continue exerting pressure
on the Russian Federation to cease its aggression against
Ukraine and withdraw all troops from Ukrainian
territory within its internationally recognized borders,

23-1929627/32

S/PV.9366

Children and armed conflict

as the most effective measure to protect Ukrainian
children. Russia must also immediately and safely
return all Ukrainian children whom it is illegally
holding. Holding all violators accountable, whether
for violations against children or other war crimes
and crimes against humanity, remains a top priority.
Together with its partners, Ukraine will spare no effort
in bringing all perpetrators and their commanders
to justice.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Colombia.
Ms. Tickner (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): On
behalf of Colombia, I would like to thank the United
Kingdom for convening this open debate and to
underscore the central importance of the children and
armed conflict agenda in the United Nations peace and
security architecture. I also acknowledge the briefing
by my compatriot Ms. Violeta, whom all members
listened to.
I begin by underscoring that the “total peace”
policy developed by the Government of Gustavo Petro
Urrego includes a deep commitment to guaranteeing
and protecting children’s rights in situations of armed
conflict. As a reflection of that policy, since the
presidential inauguration in August 2022, military
air strikes against armed groups’ camps where
children may be present were indefinitely suspended,
as highlighted in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2023/363), which Special Representative Gamba de
Potgieter presented earlier.
I would like to mention three additional concrete
measures that my country has taken to stop grave
violations against children.
First, the national Government has sought to
de-escalate the armed conflict in order to reduce the
number humanitarian crises, which disproportionately
affect people in vulnerable situations, including
Afro-Colombian and Indigenous children. In line
with achieving that goal, one of the main conditions
established for initiating any form of dialogue with armed
groups is predicated on the commitment to eschewing
the recruitment of minors, the commission of acts of
gender-based sexual violence, the use of anti-personnel
mines and actions that result in the confinement or
internal displacement of the civilian population.
Secondly, Colombia has endorsed the Political
Declaration on Strengthening the Protection of Civilians
28/32

05/07/2023

from the Humanitarian Consequences arising from the
Use of Explosive Weapons in Populated Areas and the
Safe Schools Declaration. With regard to the latter and
in response to my compatriot Ms. Violeta, I am pleased
to report that Colombia has developed an action plan to
implement the Safe Schools Declaration, which seeks
to effectively protect schools and universities from
attacks and military use by the parties to our conflict.
Thirdly, at the institutional level, we have
strengthened the Intersectoral Commission to Prevent
the Recruitment and Use of Children, Adolescents and
Young Persons, the technical secretariat of which was
placed under the aegis of the Presidential Adviser’s
Office on Human Rights and International Relations
in December 2022. The emphasis on prevention and
the effective reintegration of demobilized minors into
civilian life constitute a central pillar of the Petro
Urrego Government’s strategy to promote the protection
of children.
Lastly, Colombia reiterates its commitment to
prioritizing the protection, rights, well-being and
empowerment of children affected by the armed conflict
and joins the Secretary General’s call for armed groups
to immediately cease violations, unconditionally
release children and make concrete and time-bound
commitments to cease and prevent grave violations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.
Ms. Zacarias (Portugal): Portugal aligns itself with
the statements to be made on behalf on the European
Union and the Group of Friends of Children and Armed
Conflict. We thank the United Kingdom for convening
this debate and we wish you, Madam President, every
success during your presidency.
Allow me to start by welcoming the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2023/363) and by expressing
Portugal’s full support to the United Nations system for
the protection of children in armed conflict, including
the mandate of Special Representative Virginia Gamba
de Potgieter. I would also like to commend the work of
UNICEF in that regard and thank Ms. Violeta for her
very moving, relevant and touching testimony.
Portugal remains a strong supporter of the growing
body of hard and soft international law that seeks to
protect children in armed conflict, including the first
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child, resolution 2601 (2021) and documents such as
23-19296

05/07/2023

Children and armed conflict

the Safe Schools Declaration, the Vancouver Principles
and the Paris Principles. We call on all Member States
to endorse and implement those relevant documents.
We also believe that education is key in preventing
violations against children, as is conflict prevention
and, of course, sustainable development. In the draft
resolution on the right to education, which Portugal
submitted just yesterday at the Human Rights Council,
we acknowledge the growing body of norms and
standards on protecting education from attacks and
reiterate our strong condemnation of the military use
of educational facilities. We stand with all efforts
towards monitoring and accountability contained
in those annual reports, including through the
International Criminal Court, and voice our support
to the Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism, as well
as the listing mechanism. Those two mechanisms must
remain impartial and independent.
Engagement with the various parties to a conflict
and the development and implementation of action
plans are essential elements of that framework, which
should be further stimulated. Nonetheless, we must
have in mind that last year UNICEF showed how over
the previous 16 years grave violations had increased
year after year, and this year is no exception.
The Secretary-General’s 2022 annual report
notes an increase of approximately 12 per cent in
grave violations against children. Despite that gloomy
picture, there are achievements that may serve as
an example to other Member States and advance the
protection of children. In our view, Mozambique is one
such example. Despite the difficulties in Cabo Delgado,
where grave violations against children have been
documented, the Government has taken proactive steps.
An interministerial commission on human rights and
international humanitarian law has been established,
an armed forces child protection focal point has been
appointed and there is increased training in the military
on the prevention of grave violations. Examples such as
that must be welcomed.
In conclusion, let us acknowledge that grave
violations have a long-lasting impact on victims and
survivors. Portugal believes that the international
community must pay greater attention to achieving true
justice, which includes livelihood support and full access
to mental health and psychosocial services. We cannot
return “childhood” to those who have been deprived of

S/PV.9366

it, but we must take it as a shared responsibility to give
them back hope and all the support we can.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Prabowo (Indonesia): I thank the United
Kingdom presidency for bringing the Security Council’s
attention to this very important agenda. I also thank
Special Representative Virginia Gamba de Potgieter,
Deputy Executive Director Omar Abdi and Ms. Violeta
for their updates on the issue.
Despite numerous and countless endeavours, every
year the Security Council is confronted by continued
grave violence against children in armed conflict. As
pointed out in the annual report (S/2023/363), almost
24,000 children have been denied a safe childhood.
Every three out of 10 children in an armed conflict
situation have either lost their lives or been maimed. That
is a serious warning for us to work beyond “business as
usual”. Allow me to highlight three pertinent points.
First, the universal principle of child protection
should never be compromised. As one of the most
fundamental principles enshrined in the most widely
and rapidly ratified human rights treaty, the Convention
on the Rights of the Child, the protection of children
must always be upheld as a priority, including in
conflict situations. We call on all parties to a conflict
situation to uphold and implement the universal
principle of the protection of children. In the same vein,
national Governments continue to hold the primary
responsibility to protect all children. We call on more
robust international cooperation to support national
capacities on child protection in armed conflict.
Secondly,
community
engagement
and
empowerment are key. The protection of children
in armed conflict requires the commitment and
collaboration of all parties, built upon trust and
confidence. Community engagement plays a
significant role in creating an enabling environment.
Beyond engagement, we must also work to empower
communities to lead in child protection efforts. In that
regard, United Nations missions hold a unique and
important role. Indonesia calls for a stronger capacity
of United Nations missions in relation to community
engagement and empowerment to better protect
children in armed conflict.
Thirdly, regional cooperation and networks must be
advanced. In the collective work of protecting children

23-1929629/32

S/PV.9366

Children and armed conflict

in armed conflict, regional cooperation and networks
can appropriately and effectively support national and
local actions to protect children in armed conflict. That
comes from the closeness of regional initiatives with
the specific context and situation faced by each country.
In 2019, Indonesia initiated the first Regional
Conference on Humanitarian Assistance. In 2021,
the Conference expanded to involve more than 100
humanitarian actors from 21 countries and was
successful in building a network of humanitarian actors
and initiatives across the region. Through the network,
humanitarian actors from countries in the region are
able strengthen their capacities in helping to guarantee
children’s access to humanitarian assistance.
To conclude, let me reassure the Council of
Indonesia’s commitment to contributing to international
efforts to ensure the protection of children in armed
conflict. Children are not soldiers, and they should not
become victims. They are our future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): The SecretaryGeneral’s most recent report (S/2023/363) makes
the plight of children due to armed conflict brutally
clear. We are particularly concerned about the report’s
account of an overall increase in the six grave violations
committed against children, including a 112 per cent
increase in attacks on schools and hospitals, a 21 per
cent increase in recruitment and use and a 15 per cent
increase in abductions.
We are deeply concerned about the violence
committed against children in Myanmar, where grave
violations have increased at an alarming rate, as well as
in Afghanistan, the Sudan, Mali and Palestine, to name
just a few situations. We are also aware that a complete
monitoring by the team of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General is almost impossible, and
those concerning numbers are therefore likely to be
lower than the actual figures. Similarly, the six grave
violations do not account for all the ramifications of
armed conflict on children. Conflict remains a primary
driver of malnutrition and hunger, both of which
particularly affect children. We reiterate that respect
for the independence and integrity of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General is crucial to
the effectiveness and credibility of the work of her
Office, which also includes the objective, consistent
30/32

05/07/2023

and transparent practice of listing parties that have
committed grave violations.
We note the section of the report documenting
violations committed against children in the course
of the Russian Federation’s war of aggression against
Ukraine. As the report documents, the Russian armed
forces and proxies have shown little regard for the
protection of civilians, and in particular the rights of
children. As a result, the International Criminal Court
(ICC) has issued arrest warrants against President Putin
and Children’s Rights Commissioner Maria LvovaBelova for the deportation and transfer of children from
occupied areas of Ukraine. We reiterate our call for the
return of all illegally deported children in Ukraine
and elsewhere.
We welcome the Special Representative’s visit to
Ukraine and the Russian Federation in May. In that
context, we are mindful of the United Nations essential
contact policy regarding meetings of United Nations
officials with individuals with arrest warrants from the
ICC and the need for its full and transparent application.
As such, we had hoped to see an explanation in the
Secretary-General’s report on the decision that the
meeting with the Children’s Rights Commissioner was
essential for the purpose of that visit.
We remain deeply concerned about the high
occurrence of rape and other forms of sexual violence
against children. Such violence is often underreported,
owing to fear of stigmatization and cultural taboos,
in particular when perpetrated against boys. The civil
society organization All Survivors Project has played a
key role documenting that violence. We commend their
work to everyone in the Chamber.
A culture of silence continues to impede
accountability and justice and contributes to further
cycles of violence and persistent harmful gender
stereotypes. We reiterate our strong support for the
work of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral to shed more light on marginalized victims and
survivors of conflict-related sexual violence, in line with
resolution 2467 (2019). It is key to uphold the security,
privacy and confidentiality of survivors and witnesses,
as well as ethical considerations in documenting and
verifying information on child survivors of sexual
violence. We also appreciate the cross-cutting nature
of that work across different mandate-holders and
encourage the Special Representative to work with
her counterparts to develop relevant frameworks and
23-19296

05/07/2023

Children and armed conflict

principles for the protection of children from sexual
and gender-based violence.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Kim Sangjin (Republic of Korea): I would
like to express my delegation’s support for the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mrs. Virginia
Gamba de Potgieter, and her Office. My appreciation
also goes to the United Kingdom for convening
today’s important meeting and to the briefers for
their contributions.
The Republic of Korea aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of
Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends of Children
and Armed Conflict. I would now like to deliver the
following statement in our national capacity.
The Republic of Korea remains deeply concerned
about the disturbingly high number of grave violations
against children around the world. It is even more
appalling that the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2023/363) reveals that Government forces were
the main perpetrators in the killing and maiming of
children, attacks on schools and hospitals and the denial
of humanitarian access. In that regard, my delegation
takes note of the new listing decisions pertaining to the
situation in Ukraine, as well as the additional incidents
of violence added to the listing of the Myanmar armed
forces, with concerns about the situation of children in
the region.
My delegation is particularly concerned by the
increasing number of attacks on schools, which
continue to constitute a blatant infringement on
children’s right to education. Children must not be
deprived of their access to education, even in conflictaffected settings, as it is crucial to building resilience
in societies and achieving sustainable peace, as well as
sustainable development.
In order to prevent those grave violations and to
better protect children in conflict-affected areas, we
need to fully utilize the relevant legal and operational
tools that we have already developed. In that connection,
all parties to conflict must comply with international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
The Republic of Korea also reiterates its full support for
the implementation of the Convention on the Rights of
the Child and its Optional Protocols on the involvement
of children in armed conflict.

S/PV.9366

In addition, we need to reinforce capacities on the
ground, including by ensuring sufficient human and
financial resources for the Monitoring and Reporting
Mechanism, while preserving its independence,
impartiality and credibility. This year, the SecretaryGeneral added Haiti and the Niger to the list of situations
of concern. The situation of children in those regions,
as in all countries mentioned in the report, must receive
the necessary attention from the Security Council,
as well as from the international community. In that
context, the Republic of Korea strongly supports United
Nations peacekeeping operations and special political
missions in facilitating a protective environment for all
children affected by armed conflict.
My Government has proudly provided $5 million
in humanitarian assistance to people, focusing on
children in Bor, South Sudan, through UNICEF and in
close cooperation with the civil-military cooperation
activities of our engineering units in the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan, which could serve as
a good practice.
As an elected member of the Security Council
for the term 2024 to 2025, the Republic of Korea
reaffirms its commitment to working with the United
Nations, as well as with all Member States, with a view
towards better protecting children from the scourge of
armed conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Costa Rica.
Ms. Chan Valverde (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Costa Rica thanks the United Kingdom for convening
this open debate, as well as the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mrs. Virginia Gamba de
Potgieter, and the other briefers for their interventions.
Costa Rica expresses its profound concern at the
continuing grave violations against children in the
context of armed conflict, as reflected in the increase
in all forms of such violations in the past year. We
are extremely concerned that, for the first time, State
groups and forces are the main perpetrators of those
violations. Costa Rica reminds all actors — and States
in particular — of the obligation to respect international
humanitarian and international human rights law under
all circumstances. It is impossible to speak of a new
preventive approach or lasting peace when rights are
being violated and new generations denied a future.
In that regard, Costa Rica vehemently calls on the
Council to fulfil its responsibility to protect children

23-1929631/32

S/PV.9366

Children and armed conflict

in armed conflicts and in other fragile contexts. We
also call on it to cooperate with the Secretary-General
to implement rigorous and objective processes for the
listing of State and non-State perpetrators in the latter’s
report (S/2023/363).
Secondly, we stress the importance of an
intersectional approach to ensure adequate and childsensitive responses to both prevent and put a stop
to grave violations. One example is the impact of
the indiscriminate application of counter-terrorism
approaches to the reintegration of children associated
with armed groups and forces, as well as the impact
of the use of explosive weapons in densely populated
areas against children. For Costa Rica, the correction
of those and other situations must be guided by and
for children themselves, centring their voices and
experiences and ensuring their full participation in the
design of responses.

32/32

05/07/2023

We also call for the protection of community,
religious and civic leaders and other human rights
defenders, who are the guarantors of truth and the key
to reconciliation in the context of armed conflict.
The success of the children and armed conflict
mandate rests on the effectiveness of the tools at the
Council’s disposal, in particular the Working Group
responsible for issuing recommendations for the
protection of children. Costa Rica reaffirms its full
commitment to the children and armed conflict mandate
and calls on all States, in particular the members of the
Council, to redouble their efforts to ensure the effective
functioning of those mechanisms.
The President: There are still a number of speakers
remaining on my list for this meeting. Given the lateness
of the hour, with the concurrence of the members of the
Council, I intend to suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1 p.m.

23-19296
