S/PV.6717 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6717th meeting
Tuesday, 21 February 2012, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ohin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Togo)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Musayev
Mr. Tian Lin
Ms. Rengifo Vargas
Mr. Marchetti
Mrs. Schenke-Olivieri
Ms. Bolaños Pérez
Mr. Raguttahalli
Mr. Bouchaara
Mr. Farooq
Mr. Vaz Patto
Mr. Zmeevskiy
Mr. Laher
Mr. Cleobury
Mr. Donegan

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa
The impact of transnational organized crime on peace, security and stability in
West Africa and the Sahel region
Letter dated 17 January 2012 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2012/42)
Letter dated 8 February 2012 from the Permanent Representative of Togo to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2012/83)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-23696 (E)

*1223696*

S/PV.6717 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.25 p.m.
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of the Sudan and
Uganda to participate in this meeting.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes, in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Brazil.
Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): I thank Togo for
organizing this open debate today. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his remarks.
Transnational organized crime is an issue of
increasing concern to all of us. It is a multifaceted
phenomenon, fed by a number of factors. Yet, it is not
always a threat to international peace and security.
This debate is relevant, for it gives Member
States an opportunity to reflect on what the Security
Council’s involvement should be in those cases in
which transnational organized crime indeed constitutes
a threat to international peace and security.
Brazil is of the view that, if and when organized
crime amounts to a threat to international peace and
security, Security Council actions must be focused on
fostering greater coordination of existing initiatives on
the ground, as well as on strengthening national
institutions and the rule of law, in particular in
peacebuilding contexts.
It is therefore essential to recognize the primacy
and importance of the efforts already made by the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council,
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC), the World Bank, the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa, among others, and to enhance
coordination among those efforts.
The United Nations, in its turn, should cooperate
and coordinate closely with regional and subregional
organizations, such as the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States and Economic
Community of Central African States, and with other
relevant actors, such as INTERPOL.
The transnational crime networks that operate in
West Africa and the Sahel take advantage of the frail

2

socio-economic realities of the countries of the region
to lay roots and prosper. That is why it is important to
avoid addressing the issue merely from a security
angle. An effective and long-lasting solution will
require attention to social and economic factors, such
as poverty and lack of employment, especially for
youth.
In the fight against transnational organized crime,
priorities should be determined by the affected
countries themselves. International cooperation must
be mindful of issues related to national sovereignty and
ownership, as well as regional leadership. We
encourage regional and subregional organizations and
national authorities to engage in a coordinated response
against organized crime that takes into account the
specificities and the aspirations and concerns of the
countries of the region. We also underline the need for
international assistance to favour instruments that
promote capacity-building and the strengthening of
national institutions.
The problem of illicit drug and arms trafficking
in West Africa and the Sahel is mostly an imported one.
It is important to recognize that those regions have
become transit points for drug trafficking and a
destination for weapons that are not manufactured
there.
In devising ways to combat transnational
organized crime, the Council should adopt an
integrated and balanced approach that also looks at the
consumption side that fuels drug trafficking and at the
need for better arms-control regulations at the national,
regional and international levels.
The relationship between transnational crime and
terrorism must be seen with caution. There is no
unequivocal information to confirm a direct link
between the operations of transnational trafficking
networks and the financing of terrorist activities.
Moreover, as those phenomena obey a different logic,
they must be fought on a case-specific basis and
through different means.
As Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission, Brazil is well aware of
the negative impacts that transnational organized crime
may have on peace and stability in West Africa. The
configuration has been working, with the support of
UNODC, to help Guinea-Bissau fight those crimes in
an effective and timely manner. Guinea-Bissau
participates in the West Africa Coast Initiative, which

12-23696

S/PV.6717 (Resumption 1)

aims at strengthening national and international
coordination in the fight against transnational
organized crime in the countries on its agenda.
Brazil is also engaged in a trilateral cooperation
initiative with Guinea-Bissau and UNODC to help to
establish a training centre for the security forces of
Guinea-Bissau.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): I wish to thank you, Sir,
for convening this open debate on the impact of
transnational organized crime on peace, security and
stability in West Africa and the Sahel region. I also
thank the Secretary-General and the Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) for the messages they delivered.
Today’s open debate confirms the Security
Council’s ongoing attention to the growing threat of
drug trafficking and transnational organized crime to
regional peace and stability. Transnational organized
crime and illicit trafficking are not only a security
issue; they are a multifaceted threat that demands an
integrated response. While it is very important to stop
criminals and drug-traffickers, this should not be the
sole driver of our policies. We have to address the root
causes of these problems and implement a
comprehensive strategy that fosters security and longterm socio-economic development.
Italy supports the Secretary-General’s five-year
action agenda aimed at mobilizing collective action
and comprehensive regional and global strategies
against organized crime, integrating rule of law, public
health, development and human rights responses. In
this regard, West Africa and the Sahel are test cases for
the international community.
Let me offer some concrete examples of Italy’s
comprehensive approach to these phenomena and of
the strategic coordination we have forged between
international cooperation and regional and national
policies.
In West Africa and the Sahel, Italy is actively
involved in a complete set of programmes in the fields
of the rule of law, institution-building, and training.
Italy has financed $1.6 million in international
cooperation through the Economic Community of West
African States and the West Africa Coast Initiative,
which brings together UNODC, the Department of

12-23696

Political Affairs, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and INTERPOL. In the framework of the
EU Frontex agency, Italy has provided a coastguard
unit and an aircraft for border controls in Senegal. Two
teams of Italian police officers participated recently in
a UNODC project to build the capacity of law
enforcement agencies in Guinea-Bissau, Mali, Sierra
Leone and Senegal to fight drug trafficking and
transnational organized crime. These efforts helped
establish transnational organized crime units in Sierra
Leone and Guinea-Bissau.
The broad approach to security that Italy
advocates is exemplified by our cooperation programs
with Nigeria. In addition to the training of police
officers, we also promote intercultural dialogue at the
bilateral, regional and international levels. Programmes
of this type have also been developed in Mali.
Italy recently hosted 20 Nigerian police-officers
for a three-week training course in financial
investigation techniques. We are also administering
customized police-training programmes on border
control techniques, and we have trained Nigerian
officials at border postings in Italy. Over the past four
years, the Centre of Excellence for Stability Police
Unit has trained approximately 300 African officers.
With regard to initiatives to break up the partnership of
convenience between criminal networks and terrorist
organizations, in December 2010 the Italian Anti-Mafia
Bureau signed a memorandum of understanding with
its Nigerian partner, NAPTIP, on countering trafficking
in human beings and the related illegal financial
incomes.
All these technical assistance programmes are
encompassed in the broader framework of development
cooperation activities that Italy continues to carry on in
several countries of West Africa and the Sahel region,
notably Benin, Burkina Faso, Mali, Niger, Nigeria,
Senegal and Sierra Leone.
Three key elements should be emphasized. First,
political will is a long-term decisive factor in fighting
transnational organized crime. We need to ground this
issue in the broader framework of the United Nations
agenda. Italy is traditionally committed to building
consensus on United Nations policies and common
actions on drugs and crime. This was attested to by the
General
Assembly’s
high-level
meeting
on
transnational organized crime, promoted by Mexico
and Italy in 2010, and the annual General Assembly

3

S/PV.6717 (Resumption 1)

resolution on the United Nations crime prevention and
criminal justice programme, introduced by Italy and
sponsored this year by 140 member States.
Secondly, drug trafficking still represents the
single most profitable criminal industry worldwide. It
spreads corruption to every level of affected States.
Our strongest weapon is the legal framework provided
by the United Nations Conventions on drug control,
transnational organized crime, and against corruption.
The protection of the integrity of these instruments and
the promotion of their full implementation are an
important feature of our common and shared
responsibility.
Thirdly, the distinction between producer, transit
and consumer countries is becoming blurred. Producer
and transit countries are facing consumption problems
in West Africa and the Sahel region as well, while
consumer countries are starting to produce and export
drugs. Supply reduction measures must go hand in
hand with efforts to reduce demand and promote the
rehabilitation and reintegration of drug users.
Last but not least, transnational organized crime
operates as a global business that seeks to reap big
profits. Curbing its financial power would affect its
raison d’être. We can and must make the attack on the
huge illegal assets accumulated by criminals around
the world the cutting-edge of international security
cooperation.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Müftüoğlu (Turkey): We, too, thank Togo
for having organized today’s open debate.
Transnational organized crime poses a serious
threat to peace, security and stability in all parts of the
world. West Africa and the Sahel region are no
exception. We are concerned that political instability,
food crises, ongoing security challenges and recent
social and political movements that have taken place in
North Africa have further contributed to the
consolidation of criminal networks in the region. The
risk of reversing the peacebuilding progress in this
particular region is yet another source of concern for
us.
Organized crime, coupled with emerging threats,
such as piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, necessitates
appropriate political mobilization with integrated
national and regional responses. That said, we are

4

pleased that some sincere efforts have been undertaken
by countries and organizations of the region, as well as
international bodies, to tackle the adverse impacts of
crime in West Africa and the Sahel region.
We particularly would like to commend the
regional action plan of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) to address the growing
problem of illicit drug trafficking, organized crime and
drug abuse in West Africa, covering the period of
2008-2011. We also commend the efforts of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) in
cooperating with regional countries and the
international community, and encourage UNODC to
further its cooperation with all actors. We believe that
reinforcing international coordination with the United
Nations system will enhance the effectiveness of
international efforts to tackle this global challenge.
While all the parties concerned have been making
relentless efforts to eradicate transnational crime and
criminal networks in the region, there still remain
important tasks to be done and responsibilities to be
taken on everyone’s part.
First, we call on the regional countries to
increasingly demonstrate their political will to
consolidate the rule of law and to fight corruption.
Secondly, given the importance of regional
cooperation and coordination, we urge ECOWAS to
renew the regional action plan beyond 2011. This will
not only ensure ownership at the regional level, but
also send a strong message to the international
community that the regional countries remain
committed to fighting transnational organized crime. In
this respect, Turkey welcomes the UNODC Regional
Programme for West Africa for the years 2010-2014,
which was devised to underpin the ECOWAS regional
action plan.
Thirdly, we have to bear in mind that it is
difficult to decouple the regional dimension of
transnational crime from its global dimension, and that
the countries of origin, countries of transit and
countries of destination are all affected by this scourge.
In this regard, all Member States have a responsibility
to fight this menace. Drawing from this fact, the
international community needs a more coordinated and
concerted effort to tackle these problems. In this
regard, Turkey welcomes the lead of the SecretaryGeneral for the establishment of the UN System Task

12-23696

S/PV.6717 (Resumption 1)

Force on Transnational Organized Crime and Drug
Trafficking.
Fourthly, recognizing the fact that international
cooperation and support are essential to tackling these
problems, Turkey would like to call on all Member
States to gear up their technical, financial and logistical
support to the countries of the region, as well as to the
regional organizations.
Fifthly, it is necessary to address these challenges
from a holistic perspective. In this regard, initiatives at
the national, regional and international levels should
address also the development challenges of the
countries concerned. We firmly believe that achieving
long-term success in the fight against transnational
crime is only one aspect of the broad strategy to
eradicate poverty and unemployment and to promote
decent living conditions for the entire population.
As one of the strategic partners of the African
Union, Turkey will continue to cooperate with all the
parties concerned to overcome the challenges in West
Africa and the Sahel region.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Finland.
Ms. Viljanen (Finland): Finland wishes to thank
the Republic of Togo for the concept note (S/2012/83,
annex) and for convening this open debate. The
observer of the European Union has already spoken,
and I associate myself fully with that statement.
We also wish to thank the Secretary-General for
his report on the activities of the United Nations Office
for West Africa (S/2011/811), which encourages the
countries of the region to continue to combat
transnational organized crime, including illicit drug
trafficking, and calls on international partners to
provide support for those countries.
We warmly welcome the consideration of this
topic at this venue. We share the deep concern over the
impact that transnational organized crime has on peace,
security, stability and on the wider development of this
region. The linkages between organized crime, the
trafficking of arms, drugs and human beings, and
terrorism are indisputable. Countering those challenges
requires strong determination and concerted action by
the countries of the region, as well as the efforts and
cooperation of the international community as a whole.
Regional and local ownership is absolutely essential if
our common efforts are to succeed.

12-23696

We recognize that the challenges that the
countries of West Africa and the Sahel are struggling
with are multifaceted. Consequently, it is of the utmost
importance that a comprehensive approach be adopted
to counter those challenges. That approach includes the
strengthening of the overall social and economic
structures of those countries. To successfully and
efficiently combat different forms of transnational
organized crime requires determined efforts to enhance
and strengthen law enforcement and judicial
institutions.
Finland is involved in the international efforts to
combat the trafficking in drugs and human beings,
organized crime and illegal immigration. The
Government of Finland has taken a decision to recruit
an immigration liaison officer to our Embassy in
Nigeria. He will begin his work in some weeks and
will cover the whole region of West Africa, including
the countries of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS). His work will include,
among other things, cooperation with local and
national authorities.
The United Nations is at the heart of the
international cooperation on the prevention of
transnational crime, as it is at the heart of the
maintenance of international peace and security. Due to
the global nature of the threat posed by organized
crime and terrorism, effective counter-measures require
continuous and consistent cooperation between
different actors, including civil society. Cooperation
between law enforcement and judicial authorities is an
essential element of preventing and combating drug
trafficking and terrorism. However, it is also important
that the actions of authorities be consistent and
appropriately transparent.
There is a clear link between development and
security. The consolidation of the entire security
situation should therefore be emphasized. That also
requires addressing development issues such as the
negative effects of climate change, which can lead to
social instability in the region, as stated in the
Secretary-General’s report (see S/2012/42). Also,
strong commitment to the rule of law and to the
promotion and protection of the human rights is a
precondition for stability and peace.
High levels of youth unemployment and poverty
increase the appeal of terrorism and of joining
organized crime groups. That makes it crucial to

5

S/PV.6717 (Resumption 1)

combat the social exclusion of minorities and other
groups and individuals in vulnerable situations. We
must ensure that they have equal opportunities to
participate in society.
Another major concern is the worsening
humanitarian situation in Sahel region. The looming
severe food crisis has put more 10 million people at
risk, especially more than 1 million children. The
international aid community should take anticipatory
measures without delay to respond to the crisis. While
providing humanitarian assistance, the root causes of
the crisis must also be addressed. That should be
followed up with long-term development efforts and
the strengthening of the resilience of the population to
tackle possible future droughts and food crises. Finland
is currently planning the funding for its humanitarian
assistance to the region for the beginning of the year.
In 2011, Finland provided €5.1 million in humanitarian
aid to Niger, Mali and Chad.
Finland strongly supports the countries of West
Africa and the Sahel in their efforts to overcome those
difficult challenges. In that regard, we would also like
to pay tribute to the important role of the African
Union and ECOWAS. We wish to encourage the
countries in the region to further intensify areas of
cooperation, not only among themselves but also with
international partners. As I said at the beginning,
countering those challenges requires the efforts and
cooperation of the international community as a whole.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate Togo on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council, and to express
appreciation to the presidency of the Council for the
organization of this debate on the important issue of
the impact of transnational organized crime on peace,
security and stability in West Africa and the Sahel
region. I also welcome the presence here this morning
of His Excellency President Faure Essozimna
Gnassingbé of Togo to preside personally over this
debate. I would also like to express my appreciation to
the Secretary-General for his participation and his
valuable contributions, as well as to the Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime.
There is no doubt that the activities of
transnational organized crime networks have serious

6

implications for peace and security in Africa, and for
West Africa and the Sahel region in particular. In turn,
that affects international peace and security in general.
Those activities therefore need to be addressed in order
that they do not lead to a reversal in the progress made
in consolidating peace and stability in the African
continent.
In spite of what is highlighted in the report of the
Secretary-General on the causes of conflicts in Africa
with regard to the significant reduction in the number
of African countries engaged in armed conflicts —
from 14 countries in the late 1990s to only just four
countries today, which underlines the deep
commitment of African Governments and peoples to
the cause of peace, stability and development — many
African countries are still unable to fulfil the
developmental aspirations of their peoples, including
the achievement of the internationally agreed
development goals, particularly the Millennium
Development Goals, where Africa still lags behind
other regions in terms of rates of progress.
In addition, there is the growing impact of a
group of emerging challenges to the efforts of African
countries to achieve peace and development, notably
those related to terrorism, acts of piracy and armed
robbery at sea and transnational organized crime,
including trafficking in persons, illicit drug trafficking
and the smuggling of small arms. The seriousness of
those challenges in West Africa and the Sahel region
were demonstrated by the negative effects of the
terrorist acts experienced by a number of countries in
the region, as well as acts of piracy and armed robbery
in the Gulf of Guinea, on the economic, social and
humanitarian situations in those countries.
In that regard, Egypt remains deeply concerned
about the terrorist threats posed by Al-Qaida in the
Islamic Maghreb to the Sahel region in particular, and
in West Africa in general. We emphasize the dire need
to effectively address the terrorist threat through a
comprehensive subregional counter-terrorism action
plan supported by the United Nations that includes a
capacity-building component so as to strengthen the
limited security capacities and infrastructure of the
countries in the region, including breaking any links
between the terrorist group of Boko Haram in West
Africa and Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb, as well as
enhancing the capacity to prevent terrorists from
organizing terrorist acts and moving freely across the
borders of States in this region, through the

12-23696

S/PV.6717 (Resumption 1)

implementation of effective measures of law
enforcement and border control and the monitoring of
coastal and inland areas. In that context, Egypt
reaffirms its readiness to contribute effectively to the
counter-terrorism efforts made by the countries of the
region, especially through the provision of training for
security and law-enforcement forces, as well as
through the exchange of experiences, lessons learned
and best practices.

In that regard, Egypt welcomes the initiatives
aimed at including the combat against organized crime
in the work of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Offices in many countries in the region,
as well as at integrating the task of strengthening the
capacity of national security institutions into the
mandate of peacekeeping operations in Africa, taking
into consideration the issue of the national ownership
of reform and institutional capacity-building processes.

The countries of West Africa and the Sahel region
have made a number of efforts at the national and
regional levels to address those challenges, including
through the conclusion of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) Convention on Small
Arms and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition, and
Other Related Materials, which entered into force in
November 2009; the ECOWAS Regional Action Plan
to Address the Growing Problem of Illicit Drug
Trafficking, Organized Crime and Drug Abuse in West
Africa; and the African Union Plan of Action on Drug
Control and Crime Prevention. However, the weak
institutional capacity of the countries of the region in
general and the economic and social challenges faced
by those countries, in particular the high levels of
poverty and unemployment, and the weakness of
international assistance have had a negative impact on
the outcome of those regional efforts.

On the other hand, it should be stressed that a
comprehensive approach to the issue of transnational
organized crime — which has such strong
repercussions on peace, security and stability in West
Africa and the Sahel region — should not be limited
only to strengthening the institutional capacity of the
countries of the region in the field of border control
and law enforcement. It should also include, on the
basis of the close interlinkages between peace, stability
and development, support for the efforts made by the
countries of the region to address the economic, social
and humanitarian challenges facing them, including job
creation, especially for young people.

Egypt believes that addressing the challenges
associated with the activities of transnational organized
crime networks requires coordinated action at the
regional and international levels. Such action should
take into consideration the direct link that exists
between the fight against transnational organized crime
in West Africa and the Sahel region, and the
peacebuilding efforts under way in a number of
countries in the region, as many of those countries face
enormous challenges related to the weak capacity of
their rule-of-law institutions and their limited ability to
control their borders. Those challenges contribute to
the creation of a breeding ground for the activities of
organized crime networks, whose activities —
especially through their financial revenues — in turn
further weaken State authority and institutional
capacity.
For all of those reasons, we need to work
collectively to break the vicious circle of low
institutional capacity and the rising threat of
transnational organized crime.

12-23696

Finally, Egypt stresses that the support of the
international community and the United Nations
system — in particular through the activities of the
Peacebuilding Commission, the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, the United Nations Office in West
Africa and others — must be focused on building the
capacity of regional mechanisms, support for border
control and the exchange of information on
transnational organized crime, including small-arms
smuggling, illicit drug trafficking and trafficking in
persons. It must also focus on the mobilization of
broader international support for the countries of West
Africa and the Sahel region, with a view to addressing
the root causes of instability.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Yamazaki (Japan): At the outset, I would
like to extend warm congratulations to His Excellency
Mr. Kodjo Menan, Permanent Representative of Togo
to the United Nations, on his presidency of the Security
Council for the month of February, and to welcome the
presence of His Excellency Mr. Faure Gnassingbé,
President of Togo.
Japan commends Togo’s initiative to continue the
discussion on West Africa and the Sahel region,
following up last month’s initiative by South Africa. I

7

S/PV.6717 (Resumption 1)

would also like to express appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his decision to send assessment
missions to examine the two emerging threats in the
region, namely, piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf
of Guinea and the effect of the Libyan crisis on the
countries in the Sahel region.
Countries in West Africa and the Sahel region
have suffered greatly over the years from the threat of
transnational organized crime, which includes
terrorism, small-arms proliferation and illicit drug
trafficking, but they have made strenuous efforts to
overcome these difficulties. Some notable engagements
in that area include efforts by the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) to
control small-arms proliferation and illicit drug
trafficking. The four West African countries on the
agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) have
also strived to cope with those problems through
security-sector reform and strengthening of the rule of
law. Those efforts should be recognized.
However, recent discussions have highlighted the
emerging challenges facing those regions. One is the
issue of piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf of
Guinea, and the other is the fallout from the Libyan
crisis. The Libyan crisis has generated approximately
420,000 returnees to neighbouring Niger, Mali, Chad
and Mauritania, adding to the number of people
already facing food shortages, and promoting the
proliferation of weapons. Furthermore, the activities of
Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb pose a significant
threat to security in the region. In addition, Japan is
seriously concerned about the recent clashes between
the Government and the Tuareg rebels in Mali, as well
as the repeated attacks by the Nigerian terrorist group
Boko Haram. Effective action must be taken in order to
prevent the region from retreating from the progress
made thus far.

provided the vehicles necessary
organized crime in Mali bilaterally.

for

controlling

At the regional level, we have been continuously
providing assistance to ECOWAS since 2000. For
example, Japan recently participated in efforts relating
to capacity-building for counter-narcotics efforts in
Guinea.
Multilaterally, Japan, through the PBC and the
Commission’s working group on lessons learned, has
contributed to resource mobilization and expressed
political support for security-sector reform and the
strengthening of the rule of law in the countries on its
agenda. We encourage the Security Council to utilize
the
outcomes
of
Peacebuilding
Commission
discussions as one of the tools for formulating its
policies in this area.
We, the international community, must give
serious consideration to what is being discussed here
today. Transnational organized crime not only spans
various countries; issues such as trafficking, terrorism
and piracy are also closely interlinked. In order to fully
utilize our existing resources, we must strengthen our
efforts and ensure better coordination among the
relevant regional and international actors. Japan
remains committed, in cooperation with the United
Nations, regional organizations and the countries in the
region, to work to bring about peace and stability in
these two critical regions.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Tunisia.

The transnational nature of these problems
requires us to take a multifaceted approach that
supplements existing national efforts while allowing
ownership to remain in the hands of the countries
affected. With that in mind, Japan has supported efforts
to address the threats in the region through national,
regional and multilateral frameworks.

Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in French): May I
at the outset express my thanks to the Togolese
presidency of the Security Council for having chosen
this issue of great importance to international peace
and security, in particular in Africa. We are pleased to
see His Excellency Mr. Faure Gnassingbé, President of
the Republic of Togo, presiding over this debate on the
impact of transnational organized crime on peace,
security and stability on West Africa and the Sahel
region. I should also like to thank His Excellency
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, Secretary-General of the United
Nations, and other speakers for their valuable
statements.

At the national level, Japan has worked in
collaboration with the United Nations Development
Programme to manage the proliferation of small arms
in Liberia, Sierra Leone and Côte d’Ivoire, and

The States of West Africa and the Sahel are
facing very serious problems that are threatening
security and stability throughout the African continent
and hampering the efforts being made towards

8

12-23696

S/PV.6717 (Resumption 1)

development and democracy. In particular, I am
referring to piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, illicit
weapons and drug smuggling and the threat posed by
terrorist groups.
The crises besetting many countries of the region
have worsened an already precarious security situation,
particularly in the Sahel region, due to the vast
numbers of weapons, repatriated refugees, the
appearance of new terrorist groups, the illicit transfer
of arms and rising crime, as mentioned in the report of
the assessment mission on the impact of the Libyan
crisis on the Sahel region (S/2012/42). The same report
adds that the deterioration of the security situation has
made it more difficult to ensure that humanitarian
assistance reaches the people suffering chronic food
and nutritional crises. It also indicates that in some
isolated areas criminal organizations have taken over
the provision of humanitarian assistance. That enables
them to set up local networks of arms dealers and
logistics, which once again shows how urgent it is to
adopt a global and holistic approach in the fight against
transnational organized crime at the national, regional
and international levels, taking into account the very
close
link
between
a
lack
of
security,
underdevelopment and poverty.
Border areas remain particularly conducive to
drug and arms trafficking and a rise in crime. More
vigilance and active cooperation among all States of
the region is more necessary than ever to effectively
counter persistent threats to the security and stability of
States and civilians.
Although the African Union and subregional
organizations have developed regional measures on
those issues, their resources and capacities continue to
be limited given the scope of the current challenge. In
its 2010 report, the International Maritime
Organization stated that the West African coast was one
of the six major hotbeds of piracy in the world,
seriously disrupting international navigation. Similarly,
as stated in the Secretary-General’s report, certain
countries in the West Africa region are stopovers for
the large-scale cocaine smuggling going from Latin
America to markets in Europe and the United States.
In order to prevent those problems from
becoming even greater, it is urgent that we strengthen
international cooperation to effectively combat this
scourge, in particular by identifying appropriate means
to deal with the mobility of the protagonists of

12-23696

organized crime and terrorists and their use of new
information technologies. A multilateral action at the
multilateral level must be adopted to put in place
mechanisms for facilitating judicial assistance,
extradition, cooperation among forces responsible for
public order, the consolidation of resources made
available to police forces and the criminal justice
system, and the consolidation of peace, with the
cooperation of civil society in order to increase
people’s awareness and to encourage them to cooperate
with the authorities to effectively combat this problem.
We also share the view of the United Nations
assessment mission on piracy in the Gulf of Guinea
with regard to how important it is that we develop a
global strategy to combat piracy in the region. In that
respect, we welcome the decision of the Togolese
presidency to hold a meeting on 27 February to discuss
this matter further.
In the same context, the international community,
with the United Nations in the lead, is also called upon
to redouble its efforts to establish an integrated global
strategy to deal with the deep-rooted causes of
instability in the region, in particular by ensuring better
coordination to implement the initiatives undertaken by
affected countries, the African Union, subregional
organizations and their various bilateral and
multilateral stakeholders; strengthening national
capacities in order to ensure better border control and
address the challenges of a lack of security and
underdevelopment; mobilizing more international aid
for West African and Sahel countries; and, lastly,
enhancing the interoperability among the various
United Nations bodies already in the area and their
presence in the field, given the fact that no United
Nations body currently has a global mandate to cover
the vast Sahel region.
In conclusion, we would like to reiterate how
important it is to strengthen cooperation and the
interaction
among
affected
States,
regional
organizations and the various United Nations bodies to
address the urgent needs for humanitarian aid and the
many security-related, social and economic challenges
linked to organized transnational crime, as well as the
rapidly increasing youth unemployment.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.
Mr. Malme (Norway): Transnational organized
crime represents a threat to peace, security and stability

9

S/PV.6717 (Resumption 1)

in West Africa and the Sahel region, and ultimately to
the rest of the international community. That calls for
renewed and more coordinated international efforts,
with the United Nations in the lead. That is why
Norway supports the task force on transnational
organized crime set up by the Secretary-General last
year. We have provided earmarked funds for its start-up
phase, and Norway’s support enables Vienna to have a
task force liaison officer here in New York.
Cocaine smuggled from Latin America through
West Africa may end up in Norway and elsewhere in
Europe, but it leaves drug abuse, corruption and
violence in its path. Pirates in the Gulf of Guinea may
target Norwegian vessels, but they also undermine
economic activity in the region.
Furthermore, the aftermath of the Libyan crisis
has accentuated some of those challenges and
highlighted the need to address and counter them, as
recently pointed out by the United Nations interagency assessment mission to the Sahel region and the
report of the United Nations Office for West Africa
(see S/2012/42).
Several West African States have over the past
few years made important strides towards greater
political stability and freedom. Yet, the situation
remains tenuous. Terrorism and weapons proliferation,
increasing piracy along the coast and the drug trade not
only pose serious threats to the safety and lives of
individuals, they also seriously challenge the
governance, peace and stability of the States in the
region, of both fragile post-conflict States and stable
democracies.
Transnational organized crime is not just a
judicial matter. It undermines the very foundations of
States by penetrating deeply into the political sphere
and the public and private sectors through corruption,
money laundering and illicit financing.
Great efforts are already being made by the States
in the region, with international support, to address
those challenges. However, there is an urgent need for
much closer coordination and cooperation between
States in the region. There is also a need for stronger
political commitments from Governments in the
region. Law enforcement cooperation is important, but
there must also be sufficient political will to tackle
organized crime.

10

Important initiatives taken by the African Union
and the Economic Community of West African States
need to be strengthened and supported by the
international community. The International Criminal
Police Organization (INTERPOL) has a key role in
supporting the Member States in the region by
addressing the threats from transnational organized
crime. Norway welcomes the recent initiative to
strengthen the collaboration between the United
Nations and INTERPOL in West Africa and Sahel
region.
The heightened focus on threats posed by
organized crime deserves the place it has been given in
the Secretary-General’s five-year action agenda. We
look forward to working with the United Nations to
mobilize collective action and develop new tools to
address this problem. We expect that the SecretaryGeneral’s task force on transnational organized crime
will significantly contribute to integrating responses to
transnational organized crime into the peacekeeping,
peacebuilding, security and development activities of
the United Nations. We hope the Task Force and the
five-year action agenda will support relevant global
and regional initiatives and create a focus that is sorely
needed in regions such as West Africa.
Lastly, let me echo others in thanking Togo and
its President for organizing this meeting.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
give the floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French): I
would like to commend Togo and the Council for this
open, focused and important debate. Canada also
thanks the President for the frank concept note
(S/2012/83, annex), with which we broadly agree.
Canada is concerned by the destabilizing effects
of the illegal drug trade, especially cocaine trafficking,
originating in the Americas. That is why we raised the
matter at the 2010 Group of Eight Summit in Muskoka,
and we commend France for the ministerial meeting of
last May bringing together many countries from West
Africa, the Americas and the Group of Eight. We
would like to see that work continue, with a greater
number of partners.
Transnational organized criminal groups and their
trafficking in drugs, persons and firearms attack
democracy and the rule of law, feeding corruption,
disturbing free markets, reducing national wealth and

12-23696

S/PV.6717 (Resumption 1)

slowing the development of stable societies. Latin
American transnational criminal organizations are
extending their networks to new territories, which risks
creating narco-States in West Africa and gravely
threatens public security on both sides of the Atlantic.
(spoke in English)
Beyond the impacts of the illicit drug trade itself,
we are also concerned about the potential for
partnerships between organized crime and terrorist
organizations. In a recent meeting of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Forum’s Sahel Working Group,
which Canada was privileged to co-chair with Algeria,
considerable attention was paid to that threat. It was
recognized that measures to counter one part of the
problem would help against the other.
It is for those many reasons that Canada is
engaged, on both sides of the Atlantic, in
peacebuilding, institution-strengthening and capacitybuilding to help partner Governments in countering
transnational
organized
crime
and
terrorism.
Transnational threats require us to work better together
multilaterally, regionally and bilaterally. Here in New
York, Canada stands ready to do its part as Chair of the
Sierra Leone configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, cooperating with other Commission
configurations, regional Governments and other
stakeholders to facilitate and encourage a more
coordinated approach.

have responded by limiting transit visas and visas
granted on arrival, but the smuggling networks have
adjusted and entered their irregular migrants through
neighbouring countries. Canada congratulates Togo and
Benin for the counter-measures they have taken and is
working with the region to have that problem
addressed coherently.
The regional action plan of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the
West Africa Coast Initiative are useful steps towards
developing a truly regional response to transnational
organized crime. Canada has contributed substantially
to the implementation of the West Coast Africa
Initiative through the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime. However, in order for the goals to be
achieved, ECOWAS will need to redouble its
leadership, Governments need to build sustainable
national capacity with stronger financial and technical
support from donors, and the United Nations needs to
deliver a more integrated approach, as advocated by
the Secretary-General. The Security Council should
continue to identify this issue as an important part of
post-conflict mission mandates, just as the
Peacebuilding Commission should continue to develop
a more robust, concrete approach to supporting the
relevant countries on its agenda.
Finally, Canada is concerned about the
humanitarian impact of the impending food and
nutrition crisis in the Sahel. Recent statements from
Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator Catherine Bragg
point to the severity of the situation. With up to
12 million people at risk owing to a combination of
drought and chronic food insecurity, the situation has
been exacerbated by the influx of returnees and recent
fighting in northern Mali, resulting in internal and
external displacement. In order to stop the cycle of
repeating food crises in the region in the future, the
underlying causes — an interplay of food insecurity,
underdevelopment, limited national capacity and
transnational threats — will all need to be addressed.

Indeed, the Sierra Leone example illustrates the
imperative of regional and international cooperation.
Sierra Leone has made admirable progress in fighting
transnational crime. It is the most advanced member of
the West Africa Coast Initiative, having fully
established a transnational organized crime unit. Sierra
Leone has also made great strides in reforming its
justice sector and establishing an internationally
respected anti-corruption commission. Yet that
progress depends on developments across the region,
including improved intelligence-sharing and early
warning. Limited State capacity to monitor and patrol
borders provides criminals with a high degree of
freedom to seek the most favourable operating
environments. Critically, many national authorities lack
the necessary legal and technical tools to track
financial flows and prevent money-laundering.

Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg fully subscribes to the statement made by
the observer of the European Union.

Recently, we have seen human smuggling rings
take advantage of loose visa requirements to establish
operations in West Africa. Some members of the region

I would like to warmly thank the President of the
Togolese Republic, His Excellency Mr. Faure
Gnassingbé, for his initiative in organizing this

12-23696

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Luxembourg.

11

S/PV.6717 (Resumption 1)

important debate. The report of the mission sent by the
Secretary-General, in close collaboration with the
African Union, to assess the impact of the Libyan crisis
on the Sahel region (see S/2012/42), confirms an
alarming situation. The countries of the Sahel region
are facing a situation of chronic poverty, an imminent
humanitarian crisis and serious security problems,
which predated the Libyan crisis but were exacerbated
by it.
The acts of terrorist groups like Al-Qaida in the
Islamic Maghreb and Boko Haram in West Africa, as
well as other armed groups and the multitude of illicit
traffickers, are transnational issues that concern all
States of the region and that threaten considerable
destabilization on a regional and even international
level. The report of the United Nations assessment
mission on piracy and other criminal activities in the
Gulf of Guinea (see S/2012/45) points to a similar
conclusion. A considerable effort will be required in
the sharing of intelligence, the updating of legal
frameworks, the building of the capacity needed to
allow States to fulfil their sovereign functions and the
fight against bad governance and corruption. The
meeting of 10 African heads of State in Cotonou on
18 February to discuss security in the Sahel region
should be commended as an important step in this
direction.
In the short term, a concerted security response,
as initiated by some of the States of the subregion,
notably through the pooling of resources, could truly
make a difference and should be supported by the
international community. Given the transnational
nature of organized crime and terrorist networks,
border control and Governments’ presence in their
countries’ most remote regions are two essential
elements, which should be at the heart of strategies and
operations, at the national, regional and multilateral
levels, in order to avoid the security vacuum being
filled by criminal and terrorist organizations.
Since it is obvious that security represents part of
the solution, any sustainable stabilization of the region
will need to be based on a parallel socio-economic
development of the countries of the region, with
particular emphasis on vocational training and job
creation for young people. In that spirit, Luxembourg
has provided substantial support over the past decades
to the States of the Sahel and West Africa, notably
Senegal, Burkina Faso, Mali, the Niger and Cape

12

Verde. We intend to continue those partnerships in the
future.
We fully share the opinion of the SecretaryGeneral concerning the need to strengthen international
cooperation in support of the region and the need to
improve its coherence and coordination. The strategy
for the Sahel that the European Union recently adopted
is grounded in such an integrated approach.
In order to strengthen the dynamic that has been
generated, we trust that the new leadership of the
Economic Community of West African States, whom I
would like to congratulate on their election, will give
priority to the renewal of its regional action plan on
illicit drug trafficking and organized crime, so that all
countries affected by the scourge of drug trafficking
and organized crime may benefit from it and
participate in the West Africa Coast Initiative, in
partnership with the United Nations system and
INTERPOL. With its intimate knowledge of West
Africa, we would in particular encourage the United
Nations Office for West Africa to continue its efforts to
bring together the activities of the United Nations
system and establish links with major ongoing
regional, subregional and national initiatives.
The United Nations Peacebuilding Commission
has a role to play in that regard. In the context of the
Guinea configuration, which I have the honour to chair,
important progress has been made in the area of the
reform of the judiciary and the security and defence
sectors. Similarly, the recent charges made by the panel
of judges investigating the violence of 28 September
2009 confirm the strong will of the Government of
Guinea to make progress in the fight against impunity.
We very much hope that Guinea will soon be able to
contribute actively to the West Africa Coast Initiative
and to the fight against the scourge of transnational
organized crime.
In conclusion, I would like to commend the
Council’s continuous work for a better integration of
efforts to fight transnational organized crime in the
Sahel region and West Africa, and to address its impact
on peace, stability and security.
Luxembourg is firmly convinced that it is
important to address the dimensions of peace and
security, of development and human rights in a
comprehensive manner, paying equal attention to each
of them.

12-23696

S/PV.6717 (Resumption 1)

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Burkina Faso.
Mr. Somdah (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
On behalf of my delegation, allow me first of all to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your country’s
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.
We would also like to thank you for convening this
debate on the impact of transnational organized crime
on peace, security and stability in West Africa and the
Sahel region. I would also like to take this opportunity
to congratulate the delegation of South Africa for the
manner in which it carried out the Council’s work
during the month of January. I welcome the
participation and important statements by the
Secretary-General and the other participants in this
debate.
The topic of this debate — which is
complementary to, and takes further, the consultations
of the Council during January on the activities of the
United Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWA) and
the report (see S/2012/42) of the assessment mission of
the impact of the Libyan crisis on the Sahel region —
provides an opportunity to comprehensively and
holistically review the security issues facing the States
of the region. The issues of insecurity in the Sahel, as
well as an upsurge in drug trafficking and transnational
organized crime in West Africa have become potential
sources of insecurity and instability for States of the
region, as well as for the international community as a
whole.
Those issues are compounded by a food crisis in
the Sahel region and by piracy in the Gulf of Guinea.
They clearly demonstrate the interlinkages between
security and development, in particular at a time when
people’s fundamental needs have become increasingly
urgent. At a time when the States of the region are
obliged to channel their energies into priorities in
development, security issues jeopardize the progress
made and endanger State institutions, peace and
security.
Along those lines, the agenda of the fortieth
Summit of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) was essentially devoted to security
issues in the subregion, in particular to insecurity in the
Sahel and to the spike in piracy in the Gulf of Guinea.
The interaction between drug trafficking and related
criminal activities — such as the funding of conflicts,
transnational organized crime, illicit trafficking in

12-23696

weapons and money laundering — further weaken
those regions, in which a number of States are still
emerging from conflict or are currently experiencing
crises.
Mindful of the impact of such transnational
activity on security and development, Burkina Faso
convened in 2009, for the first time, a thematic debate
on drug trafficking and the threat to international peace
and security. It is both urgent and important that the
international community, and the Security Council in
particular, continue to take action to provide
appropriate responses to those issues.
It is a welcome fact that, during its consultations
on 26 January, the Security Council took up the issue
of the exacerbation of the security situation in the
Sahel region in the aftermath of the Libyan crisis, and
that it underscored, in so doing, the need for a
coordinated approach that would bring together all
stakeholders, including the United Nations.
My delegation supports that approach and
remains convinced that only heightened cooperation at
the subregional, regional and international levels will
make it possible to tackle criminal and terrorist
activities, which threaten the stability and security of
the States of the Sahel and West Africa. We commend
and encourage the activities of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, INTERPOL, the West
Africa Coast Initiative and the relevant departments of
the Secretariat in support of the efforts of the States of
the region, in particular with respect to implementing
the ECOWAS action plan for combating drug
trafficking.
We believe that the recommendations contained
in the report of the inter-agency mission have already
addressed some concerns, in particular with regard to
United Nations capacity-building support to Member
States and subregional and regional mechanisms for
cooperation, as well as with regard to the
implementation of strategies and programmes that
address the root causes for upswings in transnational
organized crime in those two regions. It is primarily
the responsibility of the heads of State of the region to
enhance their cooperation at all levels. But it is also the
responsibility of the international community, in
particular that of the Security Council, to support State
efforts to combat such indiscriminate threats. We
therefore fervently hope that the appeal launched by
ECOWAS during its fortieth Summit will receive

13

S/PV.6717 (Resumption 1)

effective and prompt support from the international
community, especially from the United Nations.
For its part, Burkina Faso is an active participant
in the activities and initiatives undertaken regionally
and subregionally in order to combat criminal and
terrorist activities, in particular those that pertain to
drug trafficking in West Africa, as well as the regional
legal cooperation platform that brings together three
other countries, namely, Mali, Mauritania and Niger.
Burkina Faso is also prepared to cooperate
subregionally in the framework of the joint strategy for
counter-terrorism.
We must not overlook the impact of the grave
food crisis on the countries of the Sahel region. While
we welcome the solidarity already demonstrated by
several partners, agencies and countries following the
urgent appeal for humanitarian assistance launched by
several countries of the region, we nevertheless
encourage the international community to support the
efforts of affected countries.
In conclusion, we call upon the international
community to become part of a holistic and
comprehensive approach in order to provide adequate
solutions to the security issues in the Sahel region and
in West Africa, and to understand that they are
everyone’s responsibility. The conclusions of this
debate should go along these lines.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Senegal.
Mr. Diallo (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would
like at the outset to welcome you, Mr. President, to
United Nations Headquarters and to express our pride
at seeing you assume the presidency of the Security
Council for this month.
Like other speakers, I would also like to warmly
congratulate and thank the Togolese delegation for
having taken this wise and timely initiative to organize
an open debate on the issue of transnational organized
crime, which is one of the major concerns of West
Africa and the Sahel region.
Given the numerous and diverse threats posed by
transnational organized crime to the African continent,
and particularly West Africa, it is appropriate that we
focus on this important issue. Unfortunately, the
combination of factors such as porous borders, poverty
and political instability create fertile ground for
organized crime in that part of the world. It goes

14

without saying that unless bold steps commensurate
with the danger are taken, this ever-growing scourge
will
undoubtedly
undermine
our
economic
development efforts and jeopardize the still fragile
national and social stability of several States of West
Africa and the Sahel region.
The danger is made even clearer by the many
reports of the United Nations Office for Drugs and
Crime, which establish that transnational organized
crime is fuelled in large part by trafficking in drugs,
weapons and human beings, as well as piracy and
money-laundering. If it is to be effective, the fight
against transnational organized crime must therefore
comprehensively address all the insidious facets of this
scourge.
The proliferation of small arms and light weapons
in our subregion remains a major source of concern,
given how cheap and easy they are to obtain. They
seriously jeopardize the security and economic and
social development of our countries, raising the spectre
of escalating conflicts, crumbling peace agreements,
increased violence and growing crime.
Recognizing this, in 2006 the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) adopted
the Convention on Small Arms and Light Weapons,
Their Ammunition and Other Related Materials, which
came into force in 2009. The Convention offers a
gleam of hope that real progress might be made against
the spread of these weapons, whose circulation in West
Africa remains a dangerous spark in an already
inflammable region.
Through its regional action plan of 2008,
ECOWAS has established a unit dedicated to fighting
drug trafficking, which is the key mechanism for
cooperation and intelligence-sharing with similar
organizations engaged in the same battle in Europe,
Latin America and the United States. The States
members of ECOWAS attach considerable importance
to the development and harmonization of legislation
governing drug-related investigations and trials.
Also in the framework of the operationalization
of the action plan, a subregional conference on the
harmonization of efforts to fight drug trafficking was
held February 2010 in the capital of Senegal, leading to
the adoption of a road map commonly known as the
Dakar Initiative. This multisectoral response is
principally aimed at reducing supply and demand
through the suppression of drug trafficking and the

12-23696

S/PV.6717 (Resumption 1)

strengthening of operational mechanisms for
information exchange, the creation of a subregional
crime database, and improved border controls.
The
development
of
international
law
enforcement in the fight against money-laundering is a
key part of the drive to eradicate all activities related to
organized crime. In that regard, cooperation must not
be limited to the financial sphere, but must include in
particular strategic support among the various partners
in the form of a strategic alliance against drug
trafficking.
Clearly, the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime remains the main
instrument of the international legal response to this
scourge and continues to generate real hope that the
spread of such crime can be halted. To achieve the aims
of the Convention, the task force set up to monitor its
implementation must be given the resources it needs.
Another major focus of our concern continues to
be the worrisome increase of acts of piracy in the Gulf
of Guinea and the Sahel region. We must do more to
counter such activity, which, in addition to
jeopardizing the freedom of international shipping,
hampers the economic development of the countries
affected.
Despite all the individual and collective efforts of
States to avert the many disastrous consequences of
this scourge for our countries, much remains to be done
if it is finally to be wiped out. If we are to address the
full scope and various facets of the struggle, we must
not merely enhance national and regional regulation
and surveillance capacities. My delegation therefore
believes that, in addition to the domestic adoption of
the principles of economic and political good
governance, the international community must support
the efforts of the countries of West Africa and the Sahel
to fight poverty, social insecurity, political instability
and the disruption of the ecological balance.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Prosor (Israel): I want to thank you, Sir, for
presiding over the Security Council today, and the
Togo delegation for organizing this important
discussion.
Seven months ago, the bombing of the United
Nations headquarters in Abuja claimed the lives of
more than 20 people and shocked the world. That was

12-23696

just one of 115 separate attacks engineered last year by
Boko Haram that killed more than 500 people. The
Secretary-General correctly described the attack on the
United Nations headquarters as an assault on those who
devote themselves to helping others. The explosions in
Abuja illuminated the struggle now taking place for
Africa’s future between those who seek stability and
those who seek chaos; between extremism and
progress; between hope and hatred.
The alarming rise in terrorism throughout West
Africa is connected to a global trend. It is made
possible by an increasingly linked network of
smuggling rings, traditional criminals and terrorists.
Terrorists understand that if one can smuggle narcotics
into a European capital, one can easily do the same
with an anti-aircraft missile. They understand that
lawless environments are fertile ground for
radicalization. They recognize that selling drugs can
pay for bombs.
Working together, criminals, gangsters and
terrorists have declared war on stability in West Africa.
They remain a key obstacle to unlocking the region’s
vast potential. The criminal terrorist networks in West
Africa are not only a local problem; they are a global
problem. West Africa’s battle is our battle. Its enemies
are our enemies, and its future is our future. The State
of Israel understands that our destinies are intertwined
with those of the nations of West Africa and the Sahel.
Today, we stand shoulder to shoulder with these
nations as we pursue common opportunities and face
common threats.
Israel is particularly concerned about Hizbullah’s
activity in the region, which has served as a hub for the
terrorist organization’s operations for more than two
decades. Hizbullah uses West Africa as a transit point
for funnelling money, arms and drugs to far-flung
corners of the globe. These criminal enterprises
strengthen Hizbullah’s ability to create sleeper cells in
the region and to garner support from the local
population.
The world cannot afford to stand by and give
Hizbullah a base for operations in West Africa. These
activities are not only a clear and imminent danger to
the people of Africa. Hizbullah and its Iranian sponsors
pose a threat to innocent people in all corners of the
globe — as we saw last week in New Delhi, Bangkok
and Tbilisi.

15

S/PV.6717 (Resumption 1)

The security challenges in West Africa call for a
two-track approach. The international community must
work with African nations to root out terrorism and
crime while we nourish the roots of development and
prosperity. Together, we must strengthen regional
cooperation in counter-terrorism efforts, toughen
border controls and improve intelligence-sharing. We
must ensure that terrorist and criminal groups are
placed on every terrorism and law enforcement watch
list at the national and international levels.
Together, we must make greater efforts to prevent
the transfer of small arms and all other weapons to
criminals and terrorists, including dual-use items.
Israel is prepared to play our part in that effort. Our
export control laws and regulations are rigorous and
extensive. They ensure that all arms exports meet the
standards and criteria set by the Wassenaar
Arrangement and all other supplier regimes.
Israel has long worked hand in hand with African
nations to combat transnational crime and terrorism.
We continue to share our knowledge and experience
with many African States and regional organizations.
These collaborative efforts span a range of issues from
terrorist financing to aviation security and from
money-laundering to border protection. Israel is proud
to be a donor and an active partner in the counterterrorism efforts here at the United Nations, working
closely with bodies such as the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, and the international counterterrorism committees.
Development must be a part of a long-term
strategy to fight crime and terrorism in West Africa and
the Sahel. A strong foundation of economic security,
good governance and social cohesion denies criminals
and terrorists the environments that they need in order
to operate.
Israel has been deeply engaged in development
cooperation in Africa for more than five decades. In
1958, Golda Meir, then serving as Foreign Minister,
made a historic visit to the newly independent States of
Africa. On her trip, Golda Meir resolved to share
Israel’s growing expertise with our African neighbours.
She said,
“Like them, we had shaken off foreign rule; like
them, we had to learn for ourselves how to
reclaim the land, how to increase the yields of our
crops, and how to defend ourselves.”

16

Thousands of Israeli experts set out for the
continent — driven by the spirit of what we call tikkun
olam, the Jewish principle that calls on us to mend the
world and make it a better place.
The connections forged in those years have
blossomed into a programme of extensive cooperation.
Today in Ghana, Israel’s network of prenatal clinics
has dramatically reduced child and infant mortality. In
Senegal, our triangular partnership with Italy has
brought innovative Israeli drip irrigation to thousands
of African farmers, helping them to move from poverty
to self-sufficiency. We continue to look for new
opportunities to build institutions and capabilities in
the region.
In many corners of West Africa today, we see
how trouble comes in twos and threes. Criminals and
terrorists continue to exploit instability and lawlessness
and to sow even greater chaos. The international
community must work with African nations to break
this cycle. We must pave the road to development,
while clearing the obstacles of terror and crime from
its path. This is a collective challenge. No nation is
free from responsibility, and no nation can escape the
consequences of inaction.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the representative of Mauritania.
Mr. Ould Teguedi (Mauritania) (spoke in
French): At the outset, I would like to thank the
Togolese delegation for organizing this debate and the
President of the Togolese Republic for his
participation. My country also thanks SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his statement and his efforts.
We also thank Mr. Yuri Fedotov, Executive Director of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.
The issue of security and development has been
one of the major challenges facing the Sahel region
since the end of the last century. The region has
suffered the eruption of conflicts and armed rebellions,
as well as severe environmental upheavals, such as the
great drought of the 1970s that pushed hundreds of
thousands of farmers into large cities that lacked
adequate infrastructure, thereby promoting the
smuggling and trafficking of arms and all sorts of
goods. This in turn led to the expansion of organized
crime networks, terrorism and human trafficking.
Those trends have been exacerbated in areas of the
region where States have been undermined by security
and economic structures that are inadequate to the size

12-23696

S/PV.6717 (Resumption 1)

of their territory and by difficulties in effectively
monitoring porous borders.
Since the start of the century, our country has
been hamstrung by the activities of organized crime
networks and terrorist attacks at a time when we have
not been prepared to deal with such threats. The first
signs of the threat emerged in 1994, when members of
a Salafist group related to some foreign extremists was
arrested, while others managed to find refuge in
Somalia and Afghanistan. That group reappeared in
2003, after the occupation of Iraq. Some young
Mauritanians, seeking to make their way to Iraq, made
contact with the former Algerian Armed Islamic Group,
which is active in the mountains that range from
southern Algeria to northern Mali, in order to train in
using weapons before going to Iraq as jihadists.
Today, our country hosts no terrorist base or site.
Attacks are perpetrated from a rear base to which they
return immediately afterwards. Nevertheless, the
system of effective security mechanisms in place along
the border makes infiltration into our country more and
more difficult.
The Mauritanian Government wishes to guarantee
stability and security in our country in order to achieve
its socio-economic objectives. It is determined, despite
its immense territory and modest resources, to tackle
those challenges and place them at the centre of our
priorities. This effort has two dimensions. One is
national, and under that framework Mauritania has
developed a strategy following three guidelines.
The first is prevention and territorial security.
Preventing all terrorist activity within our national
territory requires securing our borders through efficient
border controls and permanent monitoring of the same;
the creation of mobile armed intervention units that are
well-equipped, including for aerial surveillance;
cooperation among countries in information-sharing;
and the control of immigration in order to prevent all
infiltration of terrorist recruiting elements.
The second is awareness-raising and education.
The Government has initiated actions aimed at
countering terrorism on its own territory through
communication campaigns involving public debates
and the media.
The third is treatment and punishment. In
addition to ratifying conventions and protocols,
Mauritania has established a legal framework aimed at

12-23696

defining and punishing terrorism-related crimes and
financing. Under that framework, the Government has
set out to train and professionalize officials
participating in the fight against terrorism in all its
aspects.
I turn now to the regional dimension. In the face
of the transnational nature of the terrorist threat, and
given the weak economic resources of the region, the
countries most exposed — a group commonly known
as the “field” that includes Algeria, Mali, Mauritania
and Niger — have strengthened their cooperation on
security matters by meeting periodically since 2010,
first in Algiers, then in Bamako in 2011 and in
Mauritania in January this year, with a view to
periodically adjust their shared strategy and fight
against the phenomenon.
Through such cooperation, we have created
counter-terrorism organizations, including an outreach
and liaison unit, with the objective of exchanging
information on security issues; a joint operational
committee of chiefs of staff with human and material
resources for rapid ground intervention; and a followup technical committee for projects aimed at
development in this area. Meetings with partners from
outside the region were convened in September,
November and December 2011 in Algiers, Washington,
D.C., and Brussels, respectively, to secure funding for
regional projects in vulnerable and impoverished areas
of the four countries of the field.
Following those steps, significant results were
achieved. The first was the dismantling of several
active or dormant terrorist cells and the elimination of
some 465 terrorist individuals over the past three years.
Several attempted terrorist attacks failed owing to a
dozen operations. Operational bases of Al-Qaida in the
Islamic Maghreb near Mauritania, which were
threatening its national security, were dismantled.
Thirty-five groups of traffickers of all sorts were
eliminated. Security staff was well organized and
trained. Young people gained awareness of the terrorist
threat and its various mechanisms. A reliable database
was established from data gathered on the modus
operandi of cells and their financing. Several supply
lines of the various terrorist groups were eradicated.
In conclusion, the terrorist phenomena should be
taken seriously because it is a genuine threat for the
countries of the region. We note that terrorist groups
are increasingly well equipped and trained.

17

S/PV.6717 (Resumption 1)

International cooperation is essential in order to
eliminate the phenomenon, which is transnational. It
must be in the context of a partnership and respect for
the sovereignty of the countries concerned.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I would first like to
thank Togo for its leadership in convening this debate
and, in particular, President Gnassingbé for his
presence today and you, Mr. Minister, for your
presence this afternoon. As everybody has recognized
today, the challenges facing West Africa and the Sahel
clearly demand a much greater international focus. The
Secretary-General’s warning this morning of the fear of
a humanitarian crisis of the magnitude of that affecting
the Horn of Africa should be a wake-up call for us all.
Transnational crime takes various forms that are
all too often viewed as separate phenomena. However,
in truth, as we know, transnational crimes tend to feed
off and reinforce each other. Such crimes obviously
thrive in environments where there are challenges to
governance, where Governments, law enforcement
agencies and judiciaries lack the capacity to pursue and
prosecute criminals, and where unemployment,
including of the youth, is such a serious problem.
The challenges confronting the Sahel are
particularly acute. Existing challenges have been
exacerbated by the Libya crisis, with resultant flows of
weapons and the influx of returnees. More broadly, as
the representative of Mauritania has just starkly
reminded us, the region faces existing threats of
regional drug trafficking, piracy and terrorism. Today,
we have heard worrying warnings about the links
between organized crime and terrorist groups. The
exacerbating impact of the effects of climate change —
as recognized by the assessment mission to the
Sahel — compounds those challenges.
The assessment mission report (see S/2012/42)
clearly spells out necessary actions, and we must note
them. They include multisectoral reintegration
initiatives for returnees, with a strong focus on conflict
prevention,
social
cohesion
and
protection.
Programmes that focus on youth unemployment are
vital. In the long term, conflict prevention programmes
need to address access to justice, particularly given the
weak rule of law structures in the areas of return. More
broadly, across West Africa and the Sahel, national
Governments need support to secure their national

18

borders, including against the transfer of weapons, and
to implement national programmes to destroy illegal
arms. We need to build the capacity of Governments to
tackle transnational organized crime and terrorism by
strengthening national institutions and facilitating
information and intelligence exchange, coordination
and joint operations.
We must also support regional security strategies
and mechanisms. Here, of course, the role of the
Economic Community of West African States is
critical. Given that there is no one subregional
organization that covers all the Sahel, the roles of the
African Union (AU) and the United Nations are,
obviously, particularly important.
We support the strengthening of the United
Nations system’s security capacity and presence on the
ground in the region, and are interested in the
Secretary-General’s proposal this morning for
specialized police units within peace operations to
work alongside national units to build capacity and
tackle crime. We also support the recommendation of
an overarching framework to bring together all affected
countries in the Sahel to address those challenges.
Australia seeks to play its own part in such
issues. My written statement includes a fair amount of
detail, but I would mention — only as examples — a
few of the efforts that are needed in the region: our
active work, for example, with the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate to enhance
border control capabilities; our strong efforts against
money laundering; our active role in preparing for the
arms trade treaty, to be negotiated in July. That is
obviously a vital instrument for Africa and, of course,
we need to do much more to implement the Programme
of Action on Small Arms and an effective and quick
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration
programme across North Africa, arising out of the
Libyan problems.
In terms of our own assistance, we have
particularly focused on seeking to improve mutual
legal assistance between Francophone and Anglophone
countries and on developing, with the AU, a series of
transnational crime guides.
Briefly, in relation to piracy, I might note that
Togo’s concept note for today’s meeting (S/2012/83,
annex) explains the need to examine how pirates of
various regions interact and what kind of problems that
can mean. As part of the effort to better understand the

12-23696

S/PV.6717 (Resumption 1)

root causes and to draw from experience across
different regions, Australia will host a conference on
piracy later this year, certainly by mid-year, which will
specifically compare, or seek to compare, the
experiences of counter-piracy cooperation in the Indian
Ocean, South-East Asia and West Africa.
Towards concluding, the Council has regularly
reaffirmed the strong nexus between security and
development. We all need to recognize — and cannot
pretend that we do not — that there is an urgent
priority to quickly mobilize programmes to ensure that
unemployment, particularly youth unemployment, lack
of education and poverty do not continue to feed
violence and extremism. As we know, those
vulnerabilities are a toxic combination.
We must also, of course, address the urgent
humanitarian needs facing the Sahel region, but longerterm resilience to meet food security challenges, in
particular, is vital. Last week, my own country
announced another contribution of $10 million to assist
with that, in addition to a $100-million programme that
we recently launched to focus on resilience, including
agricultural productivity and community resilience,
particularly in West Africa.
To conclude, Australia remains committed to
continuing to work with all partners to make a secure
and sustainable future for the people of the region a
reality. We pledge to do more.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): Allow me, on behalf of
the Nigerian delegation, to congratulate the Republic
of Togo on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council and for discharging the responsibilities wisely.
Let me convey our appreciation to you, Mr. President,
for convening this timely discussion on the impact of
transnational organized crime on peace, security and
stability in West Africa and the Sahel region. I thank
the Secretary-General for his informative briefing,
which has set the stage for today’s discussion.
The activity of criminal networks is an
international problem that transcends borders and
undermines our collective security and economic wellbeing. In West Africa, organized crime negatively
impacts on efforts to achieve economic security and
political stability. Piracy in the Gulf of Guinea is
persistently hampering maritime navigation, with dire

12-23696

consequences for the economies of the subregion. It
also threatens the stability and security of coastal
countries and beyond.
Drug trafficking in the subregion has led directly
to increased violent crimes, small arms proliferation,
human trafficking, money laundering, and political and
economic instability. The fallout of the Libyan conflict
by fuelling illicit trafficking networks and arms flows
and an upsurge in terrorist attacks and other forms of
destabilization in the Sahel has made the threats in
West Africa and the Sahel more acute and deserving of
critical attention by the Security Council and the
international community.
Countries in the Sahel region are also contending
with the influx of hundreds of thousands of
traumatized and impoverished returnees. Indeed,
organized crime is a growing threat that is destabilizing
an already tenuous region that is still grappling with
challenges of security and development, such as weak
governance structures, high youth unemployment,
poverty and a lack of effective security.
Security Council resolution 2017 (2011), which
drew attention to the risk of destabilization posed by
the dissemination of illicit small arms and light
weapons in the Sahel region, was an important first
step in the effort to address the challenges of organized
crime in the region. But more can be done. That is why
we welcome the assessment missions to the Gulf of
Guinea and the Sahel. We hope that their findings and
recommendations will provide impetus for further
addressing the challenges in the region in a
comprehensive manner.
Undoubtedly, the countries of West Africa and the
Sahel region have demonstrated a strong political will
to confront the threats of organized crime. The joint
strategy developed by Algeria, Mali, Mauritania and
Niger to counter terrorism needs to be fully supported.
The prospect of expanding the scope of cooperation to
Mali and Nigeria in the implementation of the strategy
is a move in the right direction. The establishment of a
regional judicial platform by countries of the Sahel has
indeed institutionalized judicial cooperation in the
region. It has paved the way for the harmonization of
laws that have proved invaluable in prosecuting
transnational criminals.
However, fighting transnational organized crime
is not a task that can be undertaken in isolation. It
requires close collaboration and coordination at the

19

S/PV.6717 (Resumption 1)

bilateral, subregional, regional and global levels. It
also requires partnerships, initiatives and strategies to
effectively address this menace. The expanding
scourge of drug trafficking demands heightened
vigilance and the firm commitment of the international
community, based on universal adherence to the
international conventions related to the fight against
drug trafficking. It also demands effective cooperation
and more active coordination of efforts. That approach
obliges the international community to always take into
account the larger question of drug-supply and drugdemand control channels, as they are invariably
interrelated.
In West Africa, there have been several initiatives
in addressing the growing menace of piracy. Benin and
Nigeria commenced a six-month joint patrol
programme along the coast of Guinea on 28 September
2011. The programme, which is being conducted under
Nigeria’s strategic command and Benin’s operational
command, draws 95 per cent of its logistic support
from Nigeria, including in particular two helicopters,
two maritime vessels and two interceptor boats. The
collaboration has recorded some success but still faces
major constraints, including the absence of logistical
support facilities for vessels being used to conduct
patrols.
International assistance would be vital in
ensuring the sustainability of this productive
enterprise. The Economic Community of West African
States plan of action to address illicit drug trafficking,
organized crime and drug abuse is a relevant tool to
tackle the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons, but its implementation has been limited to
West Africa. New initiatives should be taken to
broaden its capacity and widen its scope for more farreaching implementation.
Indeed, a multifaceted approach at the national,
regional and global levels in the wider context of
poverty eradication and human development is
required. Criminal justice and law enforcement
responses must be supported by programmes that
address root causes of crime and the eradication of
poverty. In that regard, the United Nations system as a
whole should recommit itself to the goal of assisting
the subregion to achieve the Millennium Development
Goals by the target date of 2015.
We cannot overstate the need for cooperation,
coordination and committed and concerted action by

20

the international community. We already have the legal
instruments and tools to make crime unattractive and
unprofitable. What we need most at this time is to
mobilize the oversight, international political will and
our resources to win the war against organized
transnational criminals.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mali.
Mr. Daou (Mali) (spoke in French): Allow me to
begin, Sir, by asking you to relay to the President of
the Togolese Republic, Mr. Faure Essozimna
Gnassingbé, the warm greetings of his brother and
friend, the President of the Republic of Mali, His
Excellency Mr. Amadou Toumani Touré, and his
heartfelt congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. The delegation of
Mali especially welcomes Togo’s initiative to convene
this meeting on peace and security in Africa, and in
particular the impact of transnational organized crime
on peace, security and stability in West Africa and the
Sahel region.
My delegation also thanks Secretary-General Ban
Ki-Moon for having dispatched in December 2011,
together with the African Union, a joint assessment
mission on the impact of the Libyan crisis in the Sahel
region.
All of these initiatives, which Mali welcomes,
illustrate the growing interest of the Security Council
in the Sahel region, which, as we know, is facing
growing insecurity due to the activities of the Al-Qaida
in the Islamic Maghreb terrorist group and criminal
networks engaged in the trafficking of weapons, drugs
and human beings.
Transnational organized crime, terrorism and the
activities of rebel groups undermine peace, security
and stability in the Sahel. As President Gnassingbé so
eloquently expressed in his statement this morning:
“[T]he actions of rebel groups, which are already
endangering the stability and territorial integrity
of several countries, have unfortunately
intensified following the Libyan crisis, which has
led to a significant flow into the region of
weapons of every calibre.” (S/PV.6717)
My delegation shares this assessment, which is in
line with the situation in northern Mali. Indeed, since
17 January, a number security and armed forces units
from villages and cities in Mali have been the targets

12-23696

S/PV.6717 (Resumption 1)

of armed attacks perpetrated by the so-called
Movement for the National Liberation of Azawad,
which claims to be fighting for the independence of
Azawad through the division of our national territory.
These attacks are directly linked to the crisis in Libya,
as the arrival in our country of hundreds of Libyan
troops with extensive arsenals of weapons of all sorts
and vehicles has radically changed the nature and
objective of the aforesaid Movement.
Indeed, although a national movement of
Azawad — which simply called for recognition as a
national political organization guided by the principles
of national unity and a peaceful approach — existed as
early as November 2010, by the second half of 2011
that group had developed into a liberation movement
that resorted to armed struggle. At the same time, its
leaders, recently returned from Libya, claimed to have
left that country to wage war — a war which today
they hope to paradoxically impose upon the
Government and people of Mali.
For us, the aggression we face today, coupled
with the increased proliferation of weapons and other
military equipment, is a collateral consequence of the
crisis in Libya, as demonstrated by the report of the
joint assessment mission of the United Nations and the
African Union on the impact of the Libyan crisis in the
Sahel region (see S/2012/42). The situation that
prevails in northern Mali as a result of the rebellion has
also led to a deterioration in the humanitarian situation.
There are IDPs, and refugees have fled to neighbouring
countries.
The attacks perpetrated since 17 January 2012 by
the so-called Azawad National Liberation Movement,
with Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM)
elements and other terrorist groups, were followed by
massacres and atrocities against civilians and
Government forces. By way of example, I would cite
the massacre committed on 24 January in the village of
Aguelhok and the recent assassination in Homburi on
18 February last. In Aguelhok, the so-called Azawad
National Liberation Movement and AQIM summarily
executed dozens of Government soldiers who had been
taken prisoner and tied up with their hands behind their
backs. Some were shot in the head, others had their
throats slit and yet others were dismembered. In
Homburi, those bandits, in a bid to provoke conflict
within and among communities, shot a tribal chief on
18 February last — only a few days ago.

12-23696

We call on the Security Council and the
international community to firmly condemn the almost
incessant attacks perpetrated by the so-called Azawad
National Liberation Movement rebels and AQIM
terrorists, who hope to tarnish the reputation of Mali,
which is a democratic and stable country, and to create
uncertainty in connection with our ongoing electoral
process.
The attacks also undermine the efforts made by
the Government of Mali and its technical and financial
partners for economic and social development in the
northern part of the country, such as the special
programme for peace, security and development of the
north, which has already allocated $31 billion CFA
francs, or more than $62 million, to that end.
Before concluding, I should like to thank those
States and international organizations that reiterated
their support for respect for the territorial integrity and
the national unity of Mali. I would also take this
opportunity to thank neighbouring countries,
development partners, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the International
Committee of the Red Cross, as well as all
governmental and non-governmental organizations
providing humanitarian assistance to refugees and
displaced persons.
In conclusion, I would underscore the intention of
the Government of Mali to resolve peacefully the
situation in the northern part of the country by means
of dialogue, which we have always made a priority, in
the framework of respect for the territorial integrity
and sovereignty of my country.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Algeria.
Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria) (spoke in French): Sir,
it is an honour to take the floor under your presidency.
I should like to convey Algeria’s congratulations to the
delegation of Togo on its assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of February, and
I would ask you to kindly convey our thanks to His
Excellency President Faure Gnassingbé for having
provided us with this timely opportunity to discuss a
matter that is of great importance and relevance given
what is at stake for the countries of the region,
including Algeria.
The situation in the Sahel and West Africa region
is conducive to the further development of existing

21

S/PV.6717 (Resumption 1)

regional hotbeds of tension, radicalization and terrorist
violence. They are operating in conjunction with the
many organized-crime networks in the area that engage
in illicit trafficking in drugs, weapons and human
beings. The worrisome regional situation, which is
conducive to the proliferation of weapons, including
weapons of war, has in recent months fuelled a
resurgence of violence and terrorist attacks, as well as
the recruitment of new terrorists.
Algeria, in agreement with the Sahel countries,
has consistently advocated an approach that is geared
towards targeted and efficient action based on
ownership by the countries of the region — Mali,
Mauritania and the Niger — aimed at combating
terrorism and cross-border criminality while assuming
responsibility for security and stability on their
territories, in keeping with their international
obligations.
Thus action was taken jointly with the partner
countries of the subregion to establish mechanisms
specifically geared to that undertaking. That involved
the creation, in April 2010 in Tamanrasset, Algeria, of
a Committee of Joint Chiefs that includes the armed
forces of Algeria, Mali, Mauritania and the Niger, and
the establishment in Algiers of the Unité de fusion et
de liaison, to enable information exchange. Those
mechanisms are part and parcel of the process that was
begun in March 2010 and reaffirmed by the Bamako
ministerial meeting held in May 2011, and serve as a
complement to traditional forms of cooperation among
the police, customs and border guards.
The conference held in Algiers on 7 and
8 September 2011 with the participation of the core
countries — Algeria, Mali, Mauritania and the
Niger — and extra-regional partners reached a clear
consensus and made a firm commitment to combat the
scourges affecting the region by means of an integrated
approach focusing on security and development
objectives, in particular in the most underprivileged
areas of the region.
The conference, while stressing the principle of
ownership, also emphasized the need for cooperation
among the core countries and extra-regional State and
institutional partners. A productive process to follow
up the consultations held with extra-regional partners,
including the United States and the European Union,
spearheaded by the core countries and held at the

22

ministerial level, began in November 2011 and is
ongoing.
Algeria welcomes the strong support provided by
the Security Council, in its statement to the press
(SC/10535) of 31 January 2012, for the countries of the
affected region and for the initiative of our core
countries, which is reflected in the partnership and
structures already set up by those countries. Algeria
attaches particular importance to United Nations action
in the region, which is being carried out by the Office
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Office for West Africa.
The work of the United Nations is made more effective
by close cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations, particularly the African Union and the
Economic Community of West African States. Those
efforts
are
being
undertaken
with
primary
responsibility falling to the countries of the region and
with contributions from other States, which are
complementary and involve no duplication whatsoever
in terms of the activities focused on the West Africa
and Sahel region.
In the spirit of that effective and integrated
approach taken jointly with extra-regional partners,
Algeria attaches particular importance to the approach
taken by the Global Counterterrorism Forum, launched
in September 2011 in New York, to the Sahel region
and to Africa in general.
The regional Working Group tasked with
strengthening the Sahel’s capacities, co-chaired by
Algeria and Canada, held its first meeting on 16 and
17 November last in Algiers. That meeting yielded
concrete results, including the adoption of an action
plan and several programmes aimed at enhancing
cross-border security, legal and judicial cooperation
and cooperation among police services, combating the
funding of terrorism and reaching out to civil society.
Algeria wishes to convey to its Forum partners,
including Canada, its satisfaction at the constructive
efforts they have undertaken for the region.
Algeria has tirelessly expanded its efforts to
combat the financing of terrorism and to raise
awareness of the criminal practice of kidnapping
hostages for ransom. That practice poses a challenge
that remains of great concern because it provides
financing and enables the recruitment of new terrorists,
particularly worrisome given its links with organized
crime and illegal trafficking of all kinds.

12-23696

S/PV.6717 (Resumption 1)

Many challenges remain in West Africa and the
Sahel, and they are often exacerbated by alarming
events. The links that Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb
is trying to forge with armed terrorist groups active in
other subregions, such as the Boko Haram group,
whose criminal activities have increased alarmingly,
and Al-Shabaab in Somalia encourage us to redouble
our vigilance and intensify our efforts to take swift
action.
To conclude, I would like to note that, in that
spirit, the most recent ministerial meeting, held on
23 and 24 January 2012 in Nouakchott — in which
Nigeria participated, in addition to the countries of the
region — is an excellent example of the adapting of
cooperation efforts to the challenges on the ground.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my deep appreciation to
you, Mr. President, for convening this debate today to
discuss the threats to peace and security in West Africa
and the Sahel region, especially in the light of the
expansion of transnational organized crime and its
links to the illicit spread of small arms and light and
heavy weapons and to other phenomena such as the
smuggling of rare metals, the trafficking in illicit drugs
and the increase in cross-border activities by armed
groups. Such activities also include terrorist activities,
piracy and armed robbery.
Those phenomena, as the Council well knows, are
fuelled by open borders between most States in West
Africa and the Sahel region and by tribal links among
the various population groups and individuals that live
along the borders in those States. This situation has
subjected each of our States to the direct effects of the
security and stability situations in neighbouring
countries. Those influences and effects can be both
positive and negative.
Several States in our region have carried out great
efforts to contain the activities of transnational armed
groups. Here, for example, I would like to mention my
country’s experience, together with the Republic of
Chad and the Central African Republic. Through close
cooperation, we have achieved great results in
containing infiltration across borders and strengthening
communication channels so that they could be a bridge
for cooperation among us, rather than a tool to export
violence and transnational crimes.

12-23696

The Council has also heard from a number of
speakers who discussed the regional plan of action
adopted by the Economic Community of West African
States, which includes practical steps in this regard,
similar to what we have agreed upon with Chad and the
Central African Republic.
We reaffirm the importance of having the
participation of the international community,
specifically the United Nations and international
partners such as the World Bank, in support of these
initiatives, especially since several States in the region
were directly affected by the repercussions of the fall
of the Al-Qadhafi regime in Libya. We should take into
consideration that the Al-Qadhafi regime was a strong
supporter of many destructive activities and a sponsor
of many armed groups. Those groups supported his
brigades during the Libyan revolution. After the fall of
that regime, those groups infiltrated the borders of
neighbouring countries, such as the Sudan, with all
their weapons and ammunitions.
In this context, I would like to recall the
complaint lodged by the Sudan to the Security Council
on 29 December 2011 (S/2011/810), when we
explained that there were remnants of the Justice and
Equality Movement that were active in Darfur and
which had crossed with all of their weapons and
ammunitions into the State of South Sudan. Those
forces had been fighting side by side with the brigades
of the former regime of Colonel Al-Qadhafi. The
Sudanese forces confronted them. However, they
escaped and crossed into the State of South Sudan. We
informed the Security Council of the locations where
these forces are now in the State of South Sudan. I will
repeat once again for the Council’s benefit that they are
now in the Tensaha area and that they are armed with
the weapons they smuggled and had received from the
Al-Qadhafi regime.
We would like the Council to translate its words
into deeds. Those are the organizations and the armed
groups that undermine and threaten peace and security
in Central and West Africa and in all parts of Africa.
Those forces crossed with about 79 vehicles fully
loaded with weapons from Libya, including
37-millimetre guns and 40-millimetre grenade
launchers. That is a living example of the danger of the
infiltration and border-crossing by armed groups.
We had expected that the Security Council would
deal with our complaint with greater attention and

23

S/PV.6717 (Resumption 1)

grant it the special, urgent treatment it deserves. We
hope that our deliberations today will remind the
Council of the importance of dealing firmly with such
infractions, which constitute a true threat to security,
peace and stability in all the States of the region.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Uganda.
Mr. Kafeero (Uganda): Thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this important debate and for the
concept note that was prepared (S/2012/83, annex),
which has helped to steer today’s discussions. We
thank the Secretary-General for his informative
briefing earlier today.
It gives me great pleasure to be here today to
speak about some of the key challenges facing West
Africa and the Sahel region, especially the problem of
transnational organized crime, which has reached
alarming proportions and has become a matter of
international concern.
Uganda is concerned by the impact of
transnational organized crime on the peace, security
and stability of West Africa and the Sahel region.
Transnational organized crime — especially drug
trafficking, the illicit trafficking of small arms and
money laundering — has reached alarming proportions
and is a greater threat than ever before to international
peace and security. The challenge of combating these
crimes is now more formidable, because the networks
are increasingly using advanced information and
communications technology.
As mentioned in the report of the assessment
mission on the impact of the Libyan crisis on the Sahel
region (see S/2012/42):
“The Libyan crisis further exacerbated an
already precarious security situation in the Sahel
region.” (ibid., para. 32)
“Over night, the Governments of the region
had to contend with the impact of the crisis on an
already challenging humanitarian, development
and security situation.” (ibid., para. 64)
West Africa and the Sahel region have proven to
be fertile ground for international trafficking networks,
which have taken advantage of porous borders and
weak law enforcement capacities. Challenges relating
to economic development and unemployment —
especially among young people — together with

24

poverty, have only served to exacerbate the situation. If
not addressed properly and immediately, the surge in
transnational organized crime could jeopardize
democratic governance in the region, support the
expansion of criminal gangs and terrorist networks and
further threaten peace, security and development across
the entire continent. In our view, those threats require a
comprehensive and integral approach.
Uganda therefore commends and supports the
efforts by the countries in the region and the African
Union, working together, to address these threats. We
are convinced that in order to deal effectively with
these challenges and to have a long-lasting impact,
there is need for a mechanism that brings together all
affected countries and external actors in a coordinated
fashion to discuss issues, but with an emphasis on
devising solutions and implementing them.
It is also essential to strengthen national
institutions and cooperation among Member States
through organizations such as the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS). In this
regard, we welcome the support of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, the Department of Political
Affairs, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
INTERPOL and other partners for the ECOWAS
regional action plan. That partnership is crucial
because it supports national initiatives, which
constitute the pillars of any long-lasting regional
response.
The relevant international conventions, including
the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs and the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its Protocols, also provide a firm
legal framework for international action against
organized crime. What is needed is intensified efforts
to implement the provisions of those conventions by
Member States. The international community’s
collective response to organized crime can be more
effective through universal participation in those
instruments.
Finally, the proliferation of transnational
organized crime is a deterrent to investment and has a
negative impact on the economies of afflicted
countries. Those countries will find it difficult to
overcome the combined effect of the impact of the
various threats unless there is sustained vigilance,
information sharing and comprehensive enforcement
measures, with support from the international

12-23696

S/PV.6717 (Resumption 1)

community. It is therefore critical that the actions and
responses to counter these threats, at the national,
subregional and regional levels, as well as by the
United Nations system and the wider international
community, be comprehensive and well coordinated.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list.
Before closing the meeting, I would like, on
behalf of His Excellency Mr. Faure Essozimna

Gnassingbé, President of the Togolese Republic, to
thank everyone here today for demonstrating a strong
interest in the issue of security, which calls to all of us.
All of today’s productive statements point to a path for
some day eradicating the scourge of transnational
organized crime.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.35 p.m.

12-23696

25
