UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/2000/26
14 January 2000
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 14 JANUARY 2000 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

Pursuant to paragraph 9 of Security Council resolution 1281 (1999) of
10 December 1999, I have the honour to submit a detailed list of parts and
equipment necessary for the purpose described in paragraph 1 of resolution
1175 (1998).
In order to help prepare the above-mentioned list, I dispatched an expert
to Iraq from Saybolt Nederland BV which, under a contract with the United
Nations, has been providing independent oil inspection agents since the
beginning of the humanitarian programme in Iraq pursuant to resolution
986 (1995). The expert visited Iraq from 15 to 21 December 1999 to review the
situation on the ground and, in consultation with the Government of Iraq, to
prepare the list of spare parts and equipment necessary to enable Iraq to
increase the export of petroleum and petroleum products, in quantities
sufficient to produce the sum established in paragraph 2 of resolution
1153 (1998). The report of the expert is attached for your information
(annex I).
As stated in my previous reports to the Security Council, the oil industry
in Iraq is in a lamentable state. There has been continuing deterioration of
the oil facilities in Iraq, which has been adversely affecting the safety of the
workers in the oil fields and causing serious environmental damage as well as
damaging oil wells - some permanently; details have been provided in my previous
reports to the Council (S/1998/330 and Corr.1, S/1998/1233, S/1999/746 and
Add.1, S/1999/1053 and S/1999/1162 and Corr.1). The continuing deterioration of
the oil facilities may also cause a major breakdown in Iraq’s oil production and
export capacity, which will have serious repercussions on the implementation of
the humanitarian programme.
Accordingly, I should like to reiterate my recommendation, contained in my
letter dated 12 October 1999 addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/1999/1053), that the Council approve the request by the Government of Iraq to
increase by $300 million the allocation for oil spare parts and equipment,
bringing the total allocation to $600 million under phase VI of the humanitarian
programme. I should also like to inform the Council that the funds for such an
increase are available.

00-24310 (E)

180100

/...

S/2000/26
English
Page 2

The current conditions of the oil facilities described above call for
prompt remedial action. Unless applications for contracts for key items of oil
spare parts and equipment are approved expeditiously and are made available and
commissioned within a short time, the production of oil is likely to drop, even
under a regime of "severe risk management".
For phase VII, the Government of Iraq has proposed an allocation of
$600 million for oil spare parts and equipment, which is twice the amount of
$300 million approved by the Council in resolution 1281 (1999). According to
the expert, taking into account the current situation of the oil sector, the
proposed allocation of $600 million would be reasonable.
Without prejudice to the merits of the proposal of the Government of Iraq
and the evaluation made by the expert, I should like to keep the matter under
further review and await the report of the group of six experts, including oil
industry experts, I am dispatching to Iraq from 15 to 31 January 2000 to survey
the condition of the Iraqi oil production sector. The recommendations of the
group of experts will be taken into account in my report to the Council,
pursuant to paragraph 28 of resolution 1284 (1999), on the progress made in
meeting the humanitarian needs of the Iraqi people and on the revenues necessary
to meet those needs, including recommendations on necessary additions to the
current allocation for oil spare parts and equipment.
As at 13 January 2000, the Office of the Iraq Programme has received a
total of 1,991 applications for oil spare parts and equipment, with a total
value of over $1.1 billion, of which 1,392, with a total value of $721 million,
have been circulated and 50 declared null and void.
Of the total number of applications circulated, 900, with a total value of
$447 million, have been approved by the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 661 (1990); 438 applications, with a total value of
$217.8 million, have been placed on hold; and 54 applications, valued at
$56.2 million, are pending the Committee’s decision. There remain
133 applications, with a total value of $120.5 million, which have been
evaluated by the Office of the Iraq Programme but have not yet been circulated
because insufficient information was provided by the applicants. Furthermore,
owing to the very high volume of applications for oil spare parts and equipment
received since November 1999, there remain 416 applications, with a total value
of $263 million, which are currently under review prior to circulation. The
total value of oil spare parts and equipment which have arrived in Iraq, as at
13 January 2000, is $259.9 million.
In the light of the foregoing, I should like to express the hope that the
Security Council Committee will proceed as expeditiously as possible in its
consideration and approval of applications for oil spare parts and equipment and
to review further all applications placed on hold.

(Signed)

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/2000/26
English
Page 3

Annex I
Report pursuant to paragraph 9 of Security Council
resolution 1281 (1999)

A.

Terms of reference

1.
In paragraph 9 of its resolution 1281 (1999) of 10 December 1999, the
Security Council requested the Secretary-General, in consultation with the
Government of Iraq, to submit to the Council no later than 15 January 2000 a
detailed list of parts and equipment necessary for the purpose described in
paragraph 1 of resolution 1175 (1998).

B.

Introduction

2.
At the request of the Secretary-General, an expert visited Iraq to
ascertain the current requirements for spare parts and equipment in relation to
Iraq’s ability to sustain its current export capacity of crude oil, and also to
review and further assess the potential for increased exports.
3.
The visit to Iraq took place from 15 to 21 December 1999. Meetings were
held with senior representatives of the Ministry of Oil and of all the operating
companies within the Iraqi oil sector, in order to finalize the list of oil
spare parts and equipment.

C.

Distribution plan for phase VII

4.
The distribution plan for phase VII as it relates to oil spare parts and
equipment, as submitted by the Government of Iraq, encompasses the following
objectives:
Upstream
(a) The completion of 240 wells (40 in the north, 200 in the south),
including those for water injection;
(b) The drilling of 160 new wells (70 in the north, 90 in the south), in
order to maintain production at 3 million barrels per day, and to move towards
3.3 to 3.4 million barrels per day during 2000 (which was the Iraqi production
quota under OPEC in 1990) provided that the timely and complete arrival of spare
parts is ensured;
(c) The connection of 120 producing wells (50 in the north, 70 in the
south), subject to the availability of necessary flow lines and associated
equipment;
(d) The installation of equipment to tackle wet crude problems, especially
in the north (Baba and Jambour fields);

/...

S/2000/26
English
Page 4

(e) Maintaining production via oil field developments in both the north
and the south, where flow lines and well head valves are very important;
(f) Emphasis on pollution control and environmental damage, particularly
with reference to air pollution;
(g) Special emphasis on the production and distribution of gas for the
12 gas-powered power generation plants recently installed.
Downstream
(a) Increasing the quality of products, by refinery improvement and
specific plant projects (No. 2 lubrication oil plant at Baiji refinery);
(b) Reducing the use of tetra ethyl lead by bringing in an isomerization
plant at Daura and a fluidized catalytic cracking unit at Baiji, resulting in
30 per cent of gasoline production being lead free;
(c) Increasing the efficiency of isomerization units to reduce the sulphur
content of gas oil from the current 1.2 per cent to a target of 0.2 per cent;
(d) Targeting specifically the quality of gas effluents from the North and
South Gas Companies;
(e)
Improving the efficiency of product distribution by increasing the
number of gas cylinders available, increasing the number of road tankers and
providing increased product storage installations;
(f) The installation of pipelines for both gas and oil to power stations,
to replace road haulage;
(g)
The rehabilitation of the gas storage installation at Zubair to
improve efficiency of distribution and to make gas storage possible when demand
is low (rather than flaring), and to provide an export facility.

D.

Phase VI production

5.
The marginally increased production, and subsequent export volume, during
phase VI has been achieved by the connection of previously drilled wells, the
impact (short-term) of water injection and the availability of field chemicals
(such as demulsifiers) made available under the spare parts programme initiated
in phase IV.

E.

Present production

6.
The Ministry of Oil claims an average production figure for phase VI of
2.75 million barrels per day, with a local consumption figure of 0.6 million
barrels per day, thus achieving an export figure of 2.15 million barrels per
day. The Ministry of Oil indicated to the expert that this was achieved "under

/...

S/2000/26
English
Page 5

a regime of severe risk management", rather than a "planned programme of good
reservoir management".
7.

Actual export volumes, over the past three phases, have been monitored at:
Phase IV: 1,712,000 barrels per day
Phase V: 2,009,000 barrels per day
Phase VI: 2,164,600 barrels per day

8.
The previous production targets (as of June 1999 = 3 million barrels
per day by December 1999, 3.2 million barrels per day by March 2000 and
3.5 million barrels per day by December 2000) have been affected by the delays
in approval and delivery of spare parts and equipment.
9.
Current predictions for production are therefore very dependent on the
approval, arrival and distribution of much-needed spare parts and equipment for
the oil industry, and their rapid installation and commissioning. The issue of
the impact of spare parts and equipment will be comprehensively addressed during
the forthcoming visit of the group of experts, scheduled for January 2000.
10. According to the Ministry of Oil, if all holds were released and subsequent
shipments speedily processed and delivered, the target of 3.3 to 3.4 million
barrels per day is thought to be realistic; a more likely scenario, as estimated
by the Ministry of Oil, would be a reduction in production of some 300,000
barrels per day.
11. Local refinery consumption was estimated to be approximately 540,000
barrels per day, and deliveries to Jordan are between 70,000 and 90,000 barrels
per day.
12. Taking the average production of 2.75 million barrels per day during
phase VI, and the conservative view that the approval rate and subsequent
arrival of spare parts and equipment is not likely to change markedly in the
near future, production capacity during phase VII is expected to average in the
region of 2.5 to 2.6 million barrels per day. Given similar local refinery
consumption and the continuance of crude export to Jordan this would result in
overall exports of some 1.95 to 2 million barrels per day, or a similar figure
to that achieved in phase VI.

F.

Spare parts and equipment for phase VII

13. The list of oil spare parts and equipment for phase VII is submitted in
13 sections, as in previous phases, subdivided into operating companies each
with an allocation of funds determined by the Government of Iraq.
14. As in phase VI a number of specific projects are involved and the line item
numbering system has been modified to identify each "stand-alone" project. The
completion of these projects is dependent on the concurrent arrival of all the
line items identified.

/...

S/2000/26
English
Page 6

15. The total value of the spare parts and equipment as listed exceeds the
$300 million provided for under Security Council resolution 1281 (1999), and
from preliminary inspection will exceed $600 million, should all items be
contracted. The expert noted that he had been advised by the Government of Iraq
that under phase VI contracts at a value of $630 million had been signed.
16. As predicted in previous reports, crude oil production has peaked. Unless
key items of spare parts and equipment are made available and are commissioned
within a very short time production is likely to drop, even under a regime of
"severe risk management". From a technical standpoint (and as previously stated
in our report - see S/1999/746) the reversal of this situation would require the
allocation of funds for spare parts and equipment under phase VI to be
increased. The Government of Iraq’s allocation of funds under phase VII taking
into account the current situation, therefore, is reasonable.

G.

Budget per operating company

North Oil Company - $135 million
17. The spare parts and equipment submission for the North Oil Company covers
repairs and maintenance, as well as the following:
(a)

Drilling of 70 new wells in the Kirkuk, Bai Hasan and Saddam fields;

(b)

Workover of 40 wells in the North Oil Company area;

(c)

Production maintenance of wells in the North Oil Company area;

(d)

Wet crude treatment plants at the Baba and Jambour fields.

South Oil Company - $230 million
18. This company has by far the largest allocation of funds from the Ministry
of Oil, which reflects the problems faced in that region. Major projects
include:
(a) Drilling and completion of 90 new wells in the North and South
Rumailah, Luhais and Zubair fields;
(b)

Workover and completion of 200 wells throughout the region;

(c) Continued rehabilitation of Fao tank farm to enhance storage capacity
and export capability;
(d)

Continued development of the West Qurna field;

(e)

Reconstruction of de-gassing stations at South Rumailah;

(f)

Repair and reconstruction of process plants and compressor stations.

/...

S/2000/26
English
Page 7

Iraqi Drilling Company - $35 million
19. The spare parts and equipment list for the Iraqi Drilling Company covers
requirements for the repair and maintenance of existing drilling and workover
rigs, and an application for four new rigs.
Oil Projects Company - $10 million
20. This application consists mainly of construction equipment requirements,
with associated spare parts, consumables, non-destructive testing (x-ray)
equipment and necessary office support systems.
Oil Exploration Company - $10 million
21. This application contains equipment for exploration and production support,
site transportation, geological studies and analyses, and a service contract to
transcribe existing geological data, which is rapidly deteriorating.
North Refineries Company - $30 million
22. The phase VII plans for the Baiji refinery are in many cases a repeat of
those in phase VI but not ordered (blown asphalt bagging unit, sulphur recovery
unit), or only partially ordered (hydro-desulphurization units, lubrication oil
plant). New projects in phase VII include:
(a)

Items for boiler water treatment;

(b)

Raw water desalination project;

(c)

Fluidized catalytic cracking unit to improve gasoline quality;

(d)

Equipment to reduce contamination of effluent water.

Midland Refineries Company - $22.5 million
23. The phase VII plans for the Daura refinery cover general repair and
maintenance, automatic boiler operation, and a project for a naphtha
isomerization unit to improve the quality of gasoline.
South Refineries Company - $24.5 million
24. Generalized spare parts and equipment for repair and maintenance are
listed, with an automatic tank-gauging control system, and further water
treatment units.
North Gas Company - $10 million
25. This application consists of a wide range of transport requirements,
environmental control systems, safety equipment and general consumables.

/...

S/2000/26
English
Page 8

South Gas Company - $15 million
26. Apart from routine spare parts and equipment for repairs and maintenance,
the plans for the South Gas Company include:
(a) The repair of the Khor-Zubair natural gas liquefied and liquefied
petroleum gas plants to treat and store gas for power station and domestic use,
reducing the amount of flaring and subsequent pollution, and also the repair of
the Khor-Zubair gas storage and cooling plant;
(b)

The repair of the North Rumailah sour gas treatment plant.

Oil Products Distribution Company - $32 million
27. Spare parts and equipment for the repair and maintenance of the
distribution system throughout Iraq, with materials and equipment to build nine
storage tanks in the Euphrates area, Mosul and Baghdad, to reduce dependency on
vehicular transport.
Oil Pipelines Company - $41 million
28. Control and internal measurement systems are featured, along with pumping
stations for the north area (Mosul), to deliver products to the local power
station, and the commencement of repair work - via an intelligent pigging
contract - to the North Rumailah-Nassiriya dry gas pipeline. Equipment for the
repair of the North Rumailah gas compressor station is also included.
Gas Filling Company - $25 million
29. As in previous phases, the distribution plan focuses on the replacement of
leaking and dangerous liquefied petroleum gas cylinders, with spare parts and
equipment for the repair and maintenance of filling plants country-wide.

/...
