S/PV.8982

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

8982

nd meeting
Monday, 28 February 2022, 10.45 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Polyanskiy/Mr. Kirpichenko . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Xing Jisheng
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Ms. Bongo
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Mathur
Mr. Gallagher
Mrs. Toroitich
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Mills

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 31 January 2022 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2022/76)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-27095 (E)
*2227095*

S/PV.8982

The situation in the Middle East

programme and its engagement with the Syrian Arab
Republic to that end.

The meeting was called to order at 10.45 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 31 January 2022 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2022/76)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, the Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey
to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mrs. Izumi
Nakamitsu, High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2022/76, which contains the text of a letter
dated 31 January 2022 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
I now give the floor to Mrs. Nakamitsu.
Mrs. Nakamitsu: I thank Security Council
members for the opportunity to brief them again on
the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013), on the
elimination of the chemical weapons programme of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Since my previous briefing, on 5 January (see
S/PV.8943), the Office for Disarmament Affairs has
continued to maintain regular contact with counterparts
at the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) on its activities related to this matter.
Per established practice, I held a monthly call with the
OPCW Director-General on 24 February to receive an
update on developments and ascertain in his views.
As I previously informed the Council, the OPCW
Technical Secretariat’s ability to deploy to the Syrian
Arab Republic remains subject to the evolution of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Despite
continued travel restrictions, the Technical Secretariat
continues to undertake its mandated activities related
to the elimination of the Syrian chemical weapons
2/16

28/02/2022

The OPCW Declaration Assessment Team (DAT)
is continuing with its ongoing efforts to clarify all the
outstanding issues related to the initial and subsequent
declarations submitted by the Syrian Arab Republic in
accordance with the Chemical Weapons Convention. I
have been advised that the OPCW Technical Secretariat
has not yet received the requested declaration from
the Syrian Arab Republic on all undeclared types and
quantities of nerve agents produced and/or weaponized
at one former chemical weapons production facility
that was declared by the Syrian Arab Republic as
never having been used to produce and/or weaponize
chemical warfare agents.
The OPCW Technical Secretariat also expects to
receive further information and documentation from
the Syrian Arab Republic regarding the damage caused
during an attack on 8 June 2021 to a military facility
that housed a declared former chemical weapons
production facility.
In that context, I have also been advised that the
OPCW Technical Secretariat has not yet received
information from the Syrian Arab Republic regarding
the unauthorized movement and remains of two
destroyed cylinders related to the chemical weapon
incident that took place in Douma on 7 April 2018. I
urge the Syrian Arab Republic to respond to the OPCW
Technical Secretariat’s requests as soon as possible.
It is my understanding that, for almost 10 months,
the OPCW Technical Secretariat has attempted to
schedule with the Syrian National Authority the twentyfifth round of consultations with the DAT in Damascus.
However, I regret to inform Council members that the
OPCW Technical Secretariat has not been in a position
to conduct that deployment due to the continued refusal
by the Syrian Arab Republic to issue an entry visa for
one member of the DAT. I have been informed that the
OPCW Technical Secretariat stands ready to deploy the
DAT to the Syrian Arab Republic subject to the issuing
of visas to all DAT members, as well as the evolution of
the COVID-19 pandemic.
As a result of the identified gaps, inconsistencies
and discrepancies that remain unresolved, the OPCW
Technical Secretariat continues to assess that, at this
stage, the declaration submitted by the Syrian Arab
Republic cannot be considered accurate and complete
in accordance with the Chemical Weapons Convention.
22-27095

28/02/2022

The situation in the Middle East

I reiterate my call to the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic to facilitate arrangements for the
deployment of the DAT as soon as possible. As has
been stressed on numerous occasions, it is only through
complete cooperation by the Syrian Arab Republic with
the OPCW Technical Secretariat that all outstanding
issues related to the Syrian Arab Republic’s initial
declaration can be closed. The confidence of the
international community in the complete elimination
of Syria’s chemical weapons programme depends upon
those issues being finalized.
I have been advised that the OPCW Technical
Secretariat is planning to conduct the next rounds of
inspections of the Barzah and Jamrayah facilities of the
Syrian Scientific Studies and Research Centre (SSRC)
in the course of 2022. Regarding the detection of a
Schedule 2 chemical at the Barzah facilities of the SSRC
in November 2018, I regret to inform the Council that
the Syrian Arab Republic has yet to provide sufficient
technical information or explanations that would enable
the OPCW Technical Secretariat to close that issue.
I note that preparations for the in-person meeting
between the OPCW Director-General and the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of the Syrian Arab
Republic remain ongoing. The Technical Secretariat
will keep the OPCW Executive Council informed of
further developments on that matter.
The OPCW Fact-Finding Mission (FFM) remains
in the process of studying all available information
related to allegations of the use of chemical weapons
in the Syrian Arab Republic and continues to analyse
the information collected from recent activities.
Furthermore, the FFM is preparing for upcoming
deployments, which remain subject to the evolution of
the COVID-19 pandemic.
On 24 January 2022, the OPCW Technical
Secretariat issued the report of the FFM in Syria
regarding the incidents of the alleged use of chemicals
as a weapon in Marea on 1 and 3 September 2015
(S/2022/85, annex). The FFM report concluded that there
are reasonable grounds to believe that, on 1 September
2015, in Marea, a vesicant chemical substance from
Schedule 1.A.04 of the Chemical Weapons Convention
was used as a weapon. With regard to the incident that
took place in Marea on 3 September 2015, the FFM
report states that the results of analysis of all available
data obtained up until the issuance of the report did not

S/PV. 8982

allow the FFM to establish whether or not chemicals
were used as a weapon.
On 31 January 2022, the OPCW Technical
Secretariat issued the report of the FFM regarding the
incident of the alleged use of chemicals as a weapon
in Kafr Zeita on 1 October 2016 (S/2022/116, annex).
According to the report, the incident involved two
barrels containing toxic gas near a field hospital. The
FFM obtained one of the industrial chlorine cylinders
retrieved from the incident location in Kafr Zeita. The
FFM report concluded that there are
“reasonable grounds to believe that the chlorine
cylinder was used as a weapon. The cylinder
ruptured as a result of mechanical force and
released a toxic irritant substance that affects the
respiratory system and mucous membranes”.
A copy of both FFM reports was shared with
the members of the Security Council on 1 and
15 February 2022.
I understand that the Investigation and Identification
Team (IIT) continues its investigations into incidents in
which the FFM has determined that chemical weapons
were used or likely used in the Syrian Arab Republic.
The IIT will issue further reports in due course, subject
to the evolution of the COVID-19 pandemic. I take this
opportunity to reiterate my full support once again for
the integrity, professionalism, impartiality, objectivity
and independence of the work of the OPCW.
On the decision entitled “Addressing the Possession
and Use of Chemical Weapons by the Syrian Arab
Republic”, (C-25/DEC.9), adopted on 21 April 2021,
I have been informed that, unfortunately, the Syrian
Arab Republic has not yet completed any of the
measures stipulated in paragraph 5 of decision EC94/
DEC.2. I therefore reiterate my call on the Syrian Arab
Republic to cooperate fully with the OPCW Technical
Secretariat in that regard.
Any use of chemical weapons is unacceptable,
and the absence of accountability for the past use of
such weapons remains a blight on the conscience of the
international community. Impunity for the use of those
weapons is intolerable. As the body with the primary
responsibility for international peace and security,
unity in the Security Council continues to be necessary
if those identified as responsible for the use of chemical
weapons are to be held to account. Such profound

22-270953/16

S/PV.8982

The situation in the Middle East

violations of international law cannot continue to go
unaddressed and unresolved.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank High
Representative Nakamitsu for her briefing.
Yet again, through reports by experts from the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), we are presented, with more incontrovertible
evidence that chemical weapons were used in Syria.
Those reports are of course alarming. They capture
the true human tragedy underlying those horrific acts.
Many witnesses interviewed by OPCW experts were
poisoned by direct exposure to chemical weapons;
others were exposed while caring for the injured. It is
difficult to comprehend the terror that they must have
experienced — terror that the Al-Assad regime and
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) clearly
intended to cause by deploying those illegal and
immoral weapons throughout the conflict.
Per its mandate, the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission
did not, in those two reports, identify the perpetrators
of those chemical weapons attacks. This is a task that
falls within the purview of the OPCW attribution
mechanism, the Investigation and Identification Team.
We expect that the Investigation and Identification
Team will seize itself of this matter and carry out the
follow-up attribution work with the same independence
and professionalism that it, as well as the Fact-Finding
Mission, have demonstrated throughout their mandates.
In the meantime, however, based on the chemicals
identified by the Fact-Finding Mission and previous
incident reports from both the OPCW-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism and the Investigation and
Identification Team, we can infer who is responsible.
In Marea, the Fact-Finding Mission concluded that
sulfur mustard was used. This chemical was previously
independently identified by the OPCW-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism as having been used by
ISIS a couple weeks prior, also in Marea.
In Kafr Zeita, the Fact-Finding Mission concluded
that a chlorine barrel bomb was used. Both the Joint
Investigative Mechanism and the Investigation and
Identification Team have attributed other aerial chlorine
4/16

28/02/2022

barrel bomb attacks to the Al-Assad regime, the only
party to the Syrian conflict known to have access to
air assets.
These reports describe careful interviews with
dozens of witnesses who provided detailed and
consistent accounts of the incidents — accounts that
were subsequently corroborated by physical evidence
and scientific analysis, including X-rays, mechanical
engineering analysis, ballistics, metallurgy tests and
meteorological modelling.
The proficiency, impartiality, and thoroughness
demonstrated in those reports dispels any misguided
suggestions that the OPCW staff, be it the Fact-Finding
Mission, the OPCW Declaration Assessment Team or
the Investigation and Identification Team, somehow
lack the professionalism, expertise or integrity to carry
out credible work or are in any way biased towards a
particular party to the conflict.
The United States sees attempts by the Al-Assad
regime and its allies to impugn the integrity and
capability of the OPCW and its staff as part of a
deliberate — and, frankly, desperate — campaign
to distract us from the human tragedy the Al-Assad
regime has caused and from the fact that it has flouted
its obligations under both the Chemical Weapons
Convention and resolution 2118 (2013). Indeed, the
disinformation narratives issued by Russia are but
a continuing disturbingly misguided effort to shield
a regime that has used weapons of mass destruction
against its people. But as we have said before, no amount
of disinformation espoused by Syria or its Russian
enablers can negate or diminish the credibility of the
substantial body of evidence that has been presented to
the Council by the OPCW.
Unfortunately, as the latest report of the OPCW
Director-General (see S/2022/76) highlights, the
strategy of systematic obstruction and obfuscation
under the guise of cursory cooperation executed by
the regime and its enablers continues to this day. In
fact, it intensifies. The latest Director-General’s report
notes that the Syrian regime continues to fail to turn
over evidence to corroborate its claim that two chlorine
cylinders related to the April 2018 chemical weapons
attack in Douma were destroyed in a June 2021 attack
and air strike. Neither has the regime provided any
explanation why those chlorine cylinders were moved
from their previous location to the site of the air strike,
despite explicit instructions from the OPCW Technical
22-27095

28/02/2022

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8982

Secretariat not to move or alter the containers without
consent of the OPCW. The report also notes the
regime has yet to issue visas to the entire Declaration
Assessment Team, delaying the holding of the twentyfifth meeting between the Declaration Assessment
Team and the regime by nine months and counting.

military solutions to the Syrian conflict and favour
comprehensive political dialogue between all Syrian
political forces. The success of the political process,
however, depends on constructive engagement with
the international community, which includes active
collaboration with the OPCW.

In conclusion, we again call on Syria to comply
with its obligations under resolution 2118 (2013), to
cease obstructing the work of the OPCW and to end its
continued assault on the Syrian people. And we call on
our fellow Security Council members to stand united
against Syria’s chemical-weapons use.

Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu,
High Representative for Disarmament, for her briefing
on the progress towards the full elimination of the
Syrian chemical-weapons programme.

Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I thank
Mrs. Nakamitsu on her briefing on the recent progress
in shedding light on the Syrian Arab Republic’s
chemical-weapons programme.
Brazil firmly supports the work of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)
to prevent the use of chemical weapons, which is
unacceptable under any circumstances, from ever
happening again. I take this opportunity to make
three comments.
First, we appreciate the efforts of the Fact-Finding
Mission in investigating incidents such as that at Kafr
Zeita, which occurred in October 2016. While the use
of chemical weapons in Syria has been proven beyond
a doubt, the commitment to international humanitarian
law and respect for the victims require impartial
investigation and comprehensive documentation of
similar episodes.
Secondly, Brazil encourages Syria to collaborate
with the OPCW and facilitate access for technical teams
to its territory. That includes responding promptly to
requests for information and issuing visas to technical
team members. We believe that ensuring free access
of the OPCW is a condition for the speedy closure of
this dossier.
Finally, Brazil attaches great importance to the
confidence-building measures between the OPCW
and the Syrian Arab Republic. The proposed meeting
between the Director-General of the OPCW and the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of Syria is a
step in that direction, as is the extension of the tripartite
agreement among the Syrian Arab Republic, the OPCW
and the United Nations Office for Project Services.
Brazil reiterates its support for the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria. We reject

Let me first underline Norway’s steadfast confidence
in Director-General Arias and the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). We firmly
reject any efforts to discredit their important work.
Since our most recent meeting on this issue (see
S/PV.8943), the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission (FFM)
has published two reports on the use of chemical
weapons in Syria. The first report (S/2022/85, annex)
investigates incidents in Marea in September 2015. The
FFM concludes that there are reasonable grounds to
believe that, on 1 September 2015 in Marea, a vesicant
chemical substance was used as a weapon. The second
report (S/2022/116, annex) investigates an incident
in Kafr Zeita in October 2016, concluding that there
are reasonable grounds to believe that an industrial
chlorine cylinder was used as a weapon.
The report of the Fact-Finding Mission reflects
a rigorous, evidence-based analysis. We applaud the
FFM for the undertaking of collecting, comparing and
scrutinizing evidence amid the challenges posed by the
global pandemic. Norway strongly condemns the use
of a chemical weapon in Marea and in Kafr Zeita, just
as we condemn any use of chemical weapons under
any circumstances by anyone. Accountability for those
responsible for the use of chemical weapons must
be ensured.
Turning now to the monthly report, February marks
one year since the last round of consultations between
the Declaration Assessment Team (DAT) and the
Syrian authorities. That has been followed by months
of persistent delays to the issuance of visas despite
successful deployments by the OPCW Fact-Finding
Mission and Technical Secretariat to Syria in December
last year. The situation is simply untenable. We would
like to underline Syria’s obligation to cooperate fully
with the OPCW, including the DAT.

22-270955/16

S/PV.8982

The situation in the Middle East

Resolution 2118 (2013) explicitly mentions Syria’s
obligation to accept personnel designated by the
OPCW and provide that personnel with immediate and
unfettered access to, and the right to inspect, any and
all sites.
Let me conclude by reiterating that 20 outstanding
issues from Syria’s initial declaration remain
unresolved. We urge Syria to provide sufficient
technical information and explanations to close those
outstanding issues. Similarly, we urge Syria to complete
the necessary measures to lift the suspension of its
rights and privileges as a State party to the Chemical
Weapons Convention.
Mr. Gallagher (Ireland): Let me thank the High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs for her
informative briefing today.
I would like to begin by reiterating Ireland’s
condemnation of any use of chemical weapons in the
strongest possible terms. Any use of chemical weapons
is an affront to international law, on which we all
depend for our security and well-being.
I wish to thank the Technical Secretariat of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) for its work in addressing chemical weapons
in Syria. Since the beginning of the year, we have
seen two further reports by the OPCW Fact-Finding
Mission in Syria into chemical weapons use in Marea
in September 2015 and in Kafr Zeita in October 2016
S/2022/85, annex and S/2022/116, annex, respectively.
We have also seen the 100th and 101st monthly reports
of Director-General Arias to the Security Council.
Those reports and the work behind them demonstrate
the integrity, professionalism and impartiality of the
OPCW in its work in Syria.
The OPCW’s role remains essential. The Security
Council should be clear in its full support for the OPCW
in its ongoing work in Syria and in rejecting efforts to
undermine the OPCW.
These Security Council meetings serve an
important purpose: to hold Syria to its obligations
under the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) and
Council resolutions.
Let us recall that, in 2013, the Council adopted
resolution 2118 (2013) in response to the deaths of
hundreds of Syrians from chemical weapons in Ghouta.
That resolution set out a very clear bottom line: no
party, whether it be the Syrian authorities or non-State
6/16

28/02/2022

actors, can be allowed to develop, produce, acquire,
stockpile, retain, transfer or use chemical weapons;
and Syria’s chemical weapons programme must be
verifiably destroyed, to be confirmed by the OPCW.
Since then, however, and despite Syria’s accession
to the CWC, the use of chemical weapons by the
Syrian authorities has been clearly proved in numerous
incidents by the United Nations and the OPCW.
Equally, it has not been possible for the OPCW
to determine that Syria’s initial declaration under the
Chemical Weapons Convention is correct or complete.
That is due to numerous ongoing and substantial gaps
and inconsistencies relating to the entire production
facilities, stockpiles of munitions and agents and
research and development activities left undeclared.
Based solely on the findings of the Declaration
Assessment Team (DAT), Syria has amended its initial
declaration 17 times since October 2013.
The Technical Secretariat has made clear the
concrete actions necessary to resolve those outstanding
issues. It is for Syria to implement such actions and
provide the necessary clarity on all outstanding matters.
An important start would be for Syria to stop
blocking the DAT’s deployment to Syria for the twentyfifth round of consultations, now outstanding since
April of last year.
A resolution to this file is entirely in Syria’s hands,
should it engage in serious and meaningful cooperation
with the OPCW. That can provide assurance for all
of us that Syria’s entire stocks of chemical weapons
are declared and verifiably destroyed, in line with
its obligations.
We remain hopeful that the proposed meeting
between Director General Arias and Foreign Minister
Mekdad can finally be arranged and that Syria will
engage genuinely with the Technical Secretariat to
agree the arrangements for the meeting soon. It is
essential that the meeting focus on achieving concrete
outcomes. It is important that Syria’s engagement take
the form of productive actions — not merely words and
delays. Ireland will continue to support all efforts to
resolve outstanding issues on this file.
Mr. Xing Jisheng (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I thank High Representative Izumi Nakamitsu for
her briefing.
22-27095

28/02/2022

The situation in the Middle East

China has taken note of the monthly report on
chemical weapons in Syria submitted by the DirectorGeneral of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) (see S/2022/76), as well as
the two recent reports submitted by the OPCW FactFinding Mission in Syria (FFM).
The investigation and handling of the alleged
use of chemical weapons must strictly follow the
requirements of the Chemical Weapons Convention,
respect science and facts and ensure compliance with
procedures, reliable evidence and credible conclusions.
There remain many doubts regarding the sources of
information, the working methods and the completion
of the chain of evidence of the FFM Douma report. So
far, they are yet to be clarified. That will invariably
affect the credibility of the work of the FFM.
China calls for upholding the technical attributes
of the OPCW and avoiding the politicization of its
work. In recent years, some countries have repeatedly
pushed for a vote, which seriously undermined the
authority and effectiveness of the OPCW. China
calls on the Director-General to play an active role in
promoting dialogue among States parties, in returning
to the tradition of taking decisions by consensus and in
avoiding going further down the road of disagreement.
The OPCW should not be used as a tool for pursuing
geopolitical goals.
Syria has repeatedly expressed its willingness
to cooperate with the Technical Secretariat, and
its constructive attitude deserves recognition.
The Technical Secretariat should take an equally
constructive approach and be flexible regarding some
of the details. We hope that the two sides will hold the
twenty-fifth round of technical consultations as soon
as possible to promote the settlement of outstanding
issues and maintain communication on issues such as
the inspections of the Syrian Scientific Studies and
Research Centre and the in-person meeting between
the Director-General and the Syrian Foreign Minister.
Since 2017, the Syrian Government has repeatedly
provided the Technical Secretariat with information on
the possession and use of chemical weapons by terrorist
groups. That merits the attention of the Secretariat.
In conclusion, I would like to point out that, with
the Council’s limited resources and busy schedule,
China strongly suggests reducing the frequency of the
consideration of Syrian issues or considering combining
them for joint consideration. That will not only help

S/PV. 8982

deal with Syrian issues from a holistic perspective, but
also improve the efficiency of the Council.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the three African members
of the Security Council — Gabon, Kenya and my own
country, Ghana (A3). Our decision to deliver a joint
statement today flows from our shared commitment
to upholding the well-established and internationally
accepted norms against the use of chemical weapons
and to supporting efforts geared towards their
complete elimination.
We extend our appreciation to the High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs, Mrs. Izumi
Nakamitsu, for her comprehensive briefing. Let me
also welcome the participation of the representatives of
the Syrian Arab Republic, the Islamic Republic of Iran
and Turkey.
The A3 acknowledges the role of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) as
the key implementing agency for the Chemical Weapons
Convention and commends its efforts to complement
and strengthen our work in the maintenance of
international peace and security.
We welcome the centennial monthly report of
the OPCW (S/2022/76, annex), which outlines the
activities undertaken during the period of 24 December
2021 to 23 January 2022 to implement Security Council
resolution 2118 (2013) and the relevant decisions of the
OPCW Executive Council relating to the elimination of
the Syrian chemical weapons programme.
With nearly all of its members being State parties
to the Chemical Weapons Convention, the African
continent can be counted upon as a reliable partner
in the global efforts against the use of chemical
weapons in Africa or anywhere else in the world.
Chemical weapons use constitutes a grave violation of
international law and puts at risk the peace, security and
stability that we work hard to obtain. The A3 therefore
reiterates Africa’s strongly held position against the use
of chemical weapons by anyone, anywhere and under
any circumstances.
We further reiterate our firm condemnation
of the use of chemical weapons in the name of
counter-terrorism.
The A3 is concerned about the gaps and
inconsistencies that remain in Syria’s initial and
subsequent submissions on its weapons stockpile and

22-270957/16

S/PV.8982

The situation in the Middle East

urges the Syrian authorities and the OPCW to work
together to resolve all outstanding issues and questions,
especially those related to Syria’s initial declaration,
that remain unresolved eight years after the adoption
of resolution 2118 (2013), on the elimination of Syria’s
chemical weapons programme.
We take note of work of the Technical Secretariat
in Syria and the difficult circumstances imposed by
the coronavirus disease pandemic, and encourage
the constructive cooperation of the Syrian Arab
Republic and all other parties playing an important
role in facilitating the effective discharge of the
Secretariat’s mandate.
We also take note of the activities of the Declaration
Assessment Team (DAT) and call upon the Syrian Arab
Republic to grant unfettered access into Syria for all
members of the team.
Regarding the issue of visas, we encourage the
Technical Secretariat to explore alternative approaches
to carrying out its verification and assessment mandate.
This could include the replacement of the team member
to whom access has been withheld or the remote
participation of that member in the work of the team.
This, we hope, would remove the obstacles to the holding
of the twenty-fifth round of consultations between the
DAT and the Syrian National Authority and pave the
way for verification and assessments in line with the
Convention and relevant Executive Council decisions.
We would like to see progress on the subsequent
rounds of inspections of the Barzah and Jamrayah
facilities of the Syrian Scientific Studies and Research
Centre and urge the Syrian authorities to be more
cooperative on the conclusion of this issue.
The A3 looks forward to substantive progress
being made towards the holding of the meeting
between Foreign Minister Fayssal Mekdad and the
Director General of the OPCW, as we believe that such
engagement would be useful for building trust.
The A3 supports accountability mechanisms for
chemical weapons use. To this end, the work of the FactFinding Mission in Syria (FFM) and the Investigation
and Identification Team remain pivotal. We encourage
the two bodies to carry out their mandate independently
and with transparency.
We acknowledge the FFM report of 24 January
regarding incidents of alleged use of chemical weapons
in Marea on 1 and 3 September 2015, as well as the
8/16

28/02/2022

report of 31 January, on incidents that allegedly
occurred in Kafr Zeita on 1 October 2016 (S/2022/85,
annex and S/2022/116, annex, respectively).
Finally, it is our belief that the expeditious closure
of investigations into the use of chemical weapons in
Syria will allow the Security Council to support the
Syrian people more meaningfully in their quest for a
comprehensive and lasting peace.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank Mrs. Izumi
Nakamitsu for her briefing.
We reaffirm the principled position of the United
Arab Emirates rejecting and explicitly condemning the
use of chemical weapons under any circumstances, by
anyone and anywhere. Their use constitutes a flagrant
violation of the provisions of the Chemical Weapons
Convention and international law and a grave threat to
international peace and security.
Making tangible progress on the chemical
weapons dossier requires, in principle, engagement in
a constructive dialogue between the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the
Syrian Arab Republic. We believe that this dialogue
should focus on discussing and identifying areas of
cooperation for achieving that progress.
Within the framework of the current membership
of the United Arab Emirates on the OPCW Executive
Council and its support for the work and objectives of
the Organization, we have taken note of the reports of
the Fact-Finding Mission in Syria on incidents related
to the alleged use of chemical weapons in the Syrian
Arab Republic. It is worth noting the efforts of the FactFinding Mission in collecting and analysing information
to make progress on this dossier. We also note the
importance of continuously ensuring that the Mission’s
reports are based primarily on information collected
from scientific evidence and personal interviews.
Considering the horrific consequences of the use
of chemical weapons, we reiterate the need to totally
eliminate such weapons and prevent anyone from
acquiring, using or developing them, in particular
terrorist groups and armed militias, such as the terrorist
Da’esh organization, which continues to launch terrorist
attacks in Syria, as happened recently at Al-Sina’a
prison in Al-Hasakah. We underscore that access by
terrorists to these weapons constitutes a grave threat to
international peace and security.
22-27095

28/02/2022

The situation in the Middle East

In conclusion, we emphasize the importance of
eliminating chemical weapons from Syria’s territories
in accordance with resolution 2118 (2013).
Mr. Hoxha (Albania) (spoke in French): I thank
Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing.
We have just heard once again, unfortunately
and not surprisingly, the overwhelming evidence of a
deliberate lack of cooperation on the part of Syria to
respond to the clear requests in resolution 2118 (2013).
We commend the work of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and its
Technical Secretariat to shed light on the irrefutable use
of chemical and biological weapons in Syria. Paragraph
7 of the resolution requires Syria to accept personnel
designated by the OPCW by providing immediate
and unfettered access necessary for carrying out their
duties. That is not the case and we regret that.
To date and following the numerous reports — the
current one is the hundredth — there is no reason to
believe that Syria’s chemical weapons programme has
been destroyed. The briefing that we have just heard
this morning reinforces the certainty that the chemical
weapons and their components in Syria have not been
placed under international control.
The most recent OPCW report (S/2022/76,
annex) continues to assess that, at this stage, owing
to identified gaps, inconsistencies and unresolved
discrepancies — precisely the same ones that were
clearly indicated before, which I will not quote, as the
report is clear on that — the declaration submitted by
the Syrian Arab Republic on 17 January cannot be
considered accurate and complete in accordance with
the Chemical Weapons Convention.
We are waiting for the planned meeting between the
OPCW Director-General and the Syrian Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Expatriates to take place as soon
as possible. If we must wait months for such a meeting
take place, what does that say about everything else?
We demand the full and unconditional cooperation
of the Syrian authorities with the OPCW Technical
Secretariat and reject any effort to discredit or politicize
its work. Syria does not have the right to decide on the
rules of procedure and is not entitled to decide on the
selection of inspectors.
Albania reiterates its strong condemnation of
the use of chemical weapons by any actor under any
circumstances and believes that the Security Council

S/PV. 8982

must maintain its strong and clear message on upholding
the international ban on chemical weapons. We remain
convinced that the early conclusion of the investigations
into the use of chemical weapons in Syria will enable
the Council to more effectively support the Syrian
people in their quest for a peaceful and better future.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): Let me thank
Under-Secretary-General Nakamitsu for her briefing,
and Director-General Arias for his continued
thorough reporting.
Within the past month, the Fact-Finding Mission
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) has issued two reports finding that
there are reasonable grounds to believe that chemical
weapons were used in Marea in September 2015 and
Kafr Zeita in October 2016 (S/2022/85, annex, and
S/2022/116, annex, respectively). Both incidents are
cause for concern, indicating further use of chemical
weapons in the Syrian conflict. We welcome the
OPCW Technical Secretariat’s professionalism and
impartiality in compiling the reports, in which we have
full confidence.
The United Kingdom opposes the use of chemical
weapons in all circumstances by all actors. There can be
no impunity for those who use chemical weapons. We
will continue to work with the international community
to hold perpetrators of chemical weapons attacks to
account. Syria continues to fail to engage with efforts
to resolve the many serious gaps and omissions in its
chemical weapons declaration. Its defiant attitude shows
its contempt for its obligations under the Chemical
Weapons Convention and resolution 2118 (2013).
Disinformation about chemical weapons is
worrisomely familiar, coming not only from the
Al-Assad regime but from its backers on the Security
Council. We have recently seen fake claims by the
Russian Federation about impending chemical weapons
attacks in Ukraine. Claims of imminent attacks by
groups labelled as terrorists or saboteurs are put forward
without any credible evidence, undoubtedly as part of
the pretext for an invasion that the Russian Federation
told us in the Council would never happen.
Russia has repeatedly alleged that the West
supports false-flag attacks to frame Syria — charges
that are never backed by evidence. Russia also claims
that the OPCW Technical Secretariat is biased, once
again presenting no plausible evidence. Russia’s
tactic is designed to deflect attention from those who

22-270959/16

S/PV.8982

The situation in the Middle East

actually use chemical weapons. So far, eight separate
attacks in Syria have been attributed to the Al-Assad
regime by independent expert investigations run by the
OPCW and the United Nations. Further attacks remain
under investigation.
Let me conclude by reminding you, Mr. President,
and the Council that any use of chemical weapons by
anyone is abhorrent and cannot be tolerated
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): I thank the High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, Mrs. Nakamitsu, for her briefing.
I also welcome the delegations of Turkey, Syria and Iran.
Once again, we are faced with a lack of tangible
progress on the Syrian chemical weapons dossier,
including various obstacles such as the denial of visas
to experts of the Declaration Assessment Team (DAT).
The reasons for the unauthorized movement of the two
chlorine cylinders related to the April 2018 Douma
incident have also not been clarified. We stress the call
on the Syrian authorities to cooperate constructively
with the Declaration Assessment Team.
In that regard, the meeting between DirectorGeneral Arias and the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Expatriates of Syria, which we hope will take place
soon, will be a positive step towards strengthening
collaboration between the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the
Syrian authorities. We reiterate our confidence
in the professionalism of the OPCW investigation
teams. Accordingly, we take note of the reports that
have already been published by the Fact-Finding
Mission (FFM) — previously mentioned here in the
Chamber — in relation to the incidents in Marea,
in September 2015 and Kafr Zeita in October 2016
(S/2022/85, annex and S/2022/116, annex, respectively).
Concerning the attacks in Marea, the FFM
determined that there are reasonable grounds to
believe that sulfur mustard was used as a weapon. As
in the previous incident, the Mission’s investigation
determined that there are reasonable grounds to believe
that chlorine was used as a weapon in Kafr Zeita.
Both incidents constitute a violation of the Chemical
Weapons Convention and international humanitarian
law. Those responsible for such crimes must be brought
to justice. In the light of the failure of the Security
Council to refer the Syrian dossier to the International
Criminal Court, cooperation with the International,
10/16

28/02/2022

Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011 is more imperative than ever. Mexico once again
urges Member States to cooperate with the work of the
OPCW and promote the implementation of the relevant
United Nations resolutions to end the conflict.
I conclude by noting that, in view of the resurgence
of terrorist cells in Syria, the possibility that those
organizations may be able to procure chemical materials
and weapons is of great concern. We underline the
importance of fully implementing resolution 1540
(2004) and other mechanisms to that end.
Mr. Mathur (India): We would like to thank the
Under-Secretary-General and High Representative
for Disarmament Affairs, Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, for
her update.
We have taken note of the contents of the latest
two reports by Director-General of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) (see
S/2021/1103 and S/2022/76) submitted to the Security
Council pursuant to resolution 2118 (2013), as well
as the reports of the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission on
the alleged use of chemical weapons in Syria in 2015
and 2016 (S/2022/85, annex and S/2022/116, annex,
respectively). We have also noted the two latest
submissions made by Syrian Arab Republic detailing
measures undertaken to implement its obligations
under the Chemical Weapons Convention.
Furthermore, we note the Technical Secretariat’s
proposal for holding the next round of inspections of
the Barzah and Jamrayah facilities of the Scientific
Studies and Research Centre and urge that they be held
at an early date. We encourage continued engagement
between Syria and the OPCW Technical Secretariat to
resolve their differences as soon as possible.
India’s position on issues related to Syria acceding
to the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) is well
known. It is our principled stand that the CWC is a
unique, non-discriminatory disarmament instrument
for the elimination of an entire category of weapons
of mass destruction. India attaches high importance
to the CWC and stands for its full, effective and
non-discriminatory implementation. We support the
collective efforts made by all the parties to ensure
that the credibility and integrity of the Convention is
maintained to the fullest.
22-27095

28/02/2022

The situation in the Middle East

India is against the use of chemical weapons
by anybody, anywhere, at any time and under any
circumstances. India has consistently maintained that
any investigation into the use of chemical weapons
must be impartial, credible and objective. Such an
investigation should follow scrupulously the provisions
and procedures embedded in the Convention and be
in conformity with the delicate balance of power and
responsibility enshrined under it to establish facts and
reach evidence-based conclusions.
India has also repeatedly cautioned against the
possibility of terrorist entities and individuals gaining
access to chemical weapons, including in the region.
The reports of the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) have
also referred to the repeated deployment of chemical
weapons by United Nations-proscribed terrorist
groups and those affiliated with ISIL against civilian
populations between 2014 and 2016. ISIL and Da’esh
should remain active in Syria and Iraq, where the
group is seeking to rebuild its capabilities. Therefore,
allegations of the use of chemical weapons need to be
addressed with the utmost attention.
India continues to believe that progress on other
tracks — the political track and the humanitarian
track — would help with potential forward movement
in respect of the political process in Syria, as advocated
by resolution 2254 (2015).
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke
in French): First of all, I would like to begin by
thanking Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing and by
commending the vital work of the Technical Secretariat
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW).
The publication of a report of the Fact-Finding
Mission, led by the OPCW in Syria, again contains
information on an incident that took place in Kafr
Zeita on 1 October 2016 (S/2022/116, annex). Despite
the challenges faced, it is a comprehensive and highquality report. It concludes that there are reasonable
grounds to believe that a chlorine cylinder was used
as a weapon on Syrian territory. Those findings are
extremely disturbing.
The Syrian regime must cooperate with OPCW
teams and shed full light on its chemical arsenal. Instead,
it hinders the full implementation of OPCW team
mandates. We are still awaiting the initial deployment

S/PV. 8982

of the Declaration Assessment Team. To that end,
cooperation at the most basic level is needed to issue
the necessary visas. However, such cooperation does
not exist. It is very clear that efforts are intentionally
being thwarted. The Council must not remain silent on
the issue.
The position of the Syrian regime is at complete
variance with its obligations under the Chemical
Weapons Convention and resolution of 2118 (2013).
The regime must fulfil those obligations and cooperate.
Failing that, its rights and privileges at the OPCW
will not be restored. We are waiting on the regime to
demonstrate goodwill. It must be held accountable for
its behaviour, including before courts.
I would like to recall that combating impunity and
ensuring a total ban on the use of chemical weapons
remain our priorities. That is the foundation for an
effective and credible prohibition regime. It is also one
of necessary pillars for lasting peace in Syria.
France remains fully mobilized with its partners to
address the threat posed by chemical weapons to our
collective security. That is the reason we continue to
support the International Partnership against Impunity
for the Use of Chemical Weapons, which we launched
with our partners in 2018.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.
We would like to thank Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu for
her briefing. We were eager to see the report from the
Director-General of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), Mr. Fernando Arias,
during today’s meeting.
Since his previous briefing to the Security
Council (see S/PV.8785), approximately eight months
ago, Mr. Arias was re-elected for a second term. We
expected to hear his plans to address the dire situation at
the OPCW caused by the politicization of its work. We
extended an invitation to him, but Mr. Arias declined
to participate in today’s meeting as he was too busy.
We very much regret the fact that the OPCW DirectorGeneral was unable to find time in his schedule for a
briefing to the Council. This is the second time that
that has happened. The same occurred in May last year.
At the same time, what is most surprising is that,
when it pertains to statements on other platforms and
various forums, Mr. Arias can find the time to attend.

22-2709511/16

S/PV.8982

The situation in the Middle East

For example, on 22 February, he participated in a
seminar organized by the Arms Control Association in
Washington, D.C., during which he saw fit to deliver an
openly politicized assessment. However, he preferred
not to answer our comprehensive questions.
Mr. Arias also opened a meeting of the Open-Ended
Working Group on Terrorism on 22 February, as part
of the ninety-ninth session of the Executive Council of
the OPCW. We also realized that the note distributed
on the day before the event on the contribution of the
OPCW to the global counter-terrorism efforts, under
his authorship, once again, for some reason, made no
mention of the fact that the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham (ISIS) has a full-fledged chemical weapons
programme, according to the conclusions of the seventh
report of the Special Adviser and Head of the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (see S/2021/974).
It is quite difficult for us to understand why, time
and again, such an important aspect is not the focus
of the OPCW’s attention. The Technical Secretariat
has been in possession of that information since
September 2021, but no mention of it was made in
the note I mentioned or during the meeting of the
governing body of the organization. That information
was not provided to Member States. Yet the threat of
the use of chemical weapons by terrorists continues.
As recently as 26 February, the Russian Ministry of
Defence announced that fighters from Jabhat Al-Nusra
in Idlib were to receive containers containing toxins, in
all likelihood chlorine. Due to careless handling during
their transport, one of the cylinders was badly damaged.
As a result, approximately 10 terrorists received
chemical burns on their skin and respiratory tracts.
The OPCW Technical Secretariat has little hope.
We need only to think of the infamous report of the
Fact-Finding Mission on alleged chemical weapons’
use in Syria, which recounts the incident that took
place in Douma in 2018. Its conclusions were edited
with an anti-Syrian bias, as compared with the initial
version, following pressure from some. That was
confirmed by various sources, including former OPCW
inspectors who were part of the investigation team. It
was quite simply a sham. However, despite calls from
States Members of the United Nations and the broader
international community, addressing those issues is not
on the agenda of the Technical Secretariat.
12/16

28/02/2022

In the same vein, we highlight the work of the
Investigation and Identification Team (IIT), whose
establishment was railroaded through the OPCW
Executive Council, in violation of the principle of
consensus and article XV of the Chemical Weapons
Convention (CWC). Its products and outcomes are
baseless. It is technically illiterate, not to mention
factually unverified and politically biased. IIT
methodology, as with that of the Fact-Finding
Mission, violates the Convention and the principles
for conducting investigations, primarily with regard to
ensuring the chain of custody.
Investigations conducted much later, by definition,
cannot be accurate. It is very difficult to establish
a chain of events several years later. Furthermore, it
is practically impossible to conduct investigations
remotely based on testimonies from vague sources. We
also believe that the goal of the IIT’s work is not to
establish a true picture of events but to bend its content
to fit the conclusion that Damascus is guilty — that
is, to fulfil a political agenda. Therefore, we dismiss
its findings — those in existing IIT reports and in its
future products.
The biased findings of the IIT were the basis for the
punitive decision to strip Syria of its rights on fictitious
grounds. That is the first time that such a step was
taken concerning a sovereign State that believed it was
in compliance with the Convention. The decision, made
by the Conference of the States Parties, was forced
through by Western delegations, in violation of CWC
standards and the principle of consensus. Nevertheless,
the Syrian Government has not refused to engage in
dialogue with the OPCW. However, the policy of double
standards at the Technical Secretariat is also manifest
in the closure of the remaining issues related to Syria’s
initial declaration. Damascus has fulfilled, in good
faith, all of its obligations by acceding to the CWC
in extremely difficult circumstances due to military
and political instability and an externally-fuelled
terrorist threat.
Nevertheless, it is subject to unjustifiably
harsh requirements and there has been an artificial
frenzy stoked around that subject. We have no other
explanation for the repetition in the latest report of
the Director General of the OPCW (S/2022/76, annex)
on the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013) of
the same elements that we have seen before and
that still do not hold water. Perhaps Mr. Arias could
provide some clarification, but it seems he prefers
22-27095

28/02/2022

The situation in the Middle East

not to come to the Security Council, thereby running
the risk of undermining not only his own reputation
but the authority of the OPCW itself, one of the most
important pillars of the weapons of mass destruction
non-proliferation regime.
In conclusion, I would also like to note the need
to reduce the number of meetings that the Security
Council holds on Syria. We hope that we will soon be
able to return to that issue.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Two days ago, the Security Council reaffirmed
its commitment to resolution 1540 (2004), which seeks
to prevent non-State groups from possessing weapons
of mass destruction and their means of production and
delivery, including chemical weapons (see S/PV.8977).
My country fully supports that commitment to putting
an end to the possession and use of chemical weapons
and other weapons of mass destruction by terrorist
organizations, and hopes that the resolution will be
implemented more effectively.
In that connection, I note that my delegation
has always provided information to the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004)
and to the Secretariat on the possession and use of
chemical material by terrorist organizations, as well
as on fabricated chemical incidents in Syria, including
information on the terrorist Al-Nusra Front, which
possesses toxic chemical material and rockets that have
been modified with these toxic chemical agents in Idlib
governorate. The aim is to fabricate a chemical incident
while accusing the Syrian Arab Army and its allies
of perpetrating it. That is based on directives from
foreign intelligence agencies. Numerous terrorists from
the Al-Nusra Front have been burned and suffocated
recently when they had to carry containers which
include toxic chemical agents in Idlib governorate.
My delegation listened carefully to the briefing
by the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs.
Regrettably, she continues to make incomplete
presentations that provide a one-sided version of recent
developments, including the fact that she ignored the
cooperation of Syrian authorities with the technical
teams of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the facilities granted to

S/PV. 8982

them. She also failed to mention important information
provided by us.
Syria has maintained its cooperation with the
OPCW. We have presented our ninety-eighth report
on activities regarding the destruction of chemical
weapons and chemical weapons production facilities
on Syrian territories. We also continue to prepare
for the holding of a high-level meeting between the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates and the
Director General of the OPCW, including an agenda for
that meeting, in order to make tangible progress on a
number of issues related to wrong practices undertaken
by the technical teams of the OPCW.
In this regard, I would also like to note the letters
from the Chair of the Syrian National Committee to
the Director General of the OPCW. In those letters, he
reiterated that the Technical Secretariat should work
professionally and avoid using incomplete or imprecise
information in the OPCW reports and briefings. That
information is being twisted by some adversary States
to make false accusations against Syria.
Regarding the allegations that have been repeated
by certain States on Syria’s initial declaration, I would
like to reiterate my country’s position. We reject any
attempt to call that declaration into question. We
reaffirm the fact that the work of the Declaration
Assessment Team should help Syria and that it is not an
investigative team.
I also note in this regard the facilities provided
by the Syrian National Committee during the twentyfourth round of consultations between the Declaration
Assessment Team and the Syrian Committee,
which resulted in resolving a number of pertinent
pending issues.
In terms of holding the twenty-fifth round
of consultations, the Syrian National Committee
welcomed a visit from the Declaration Assessment
Team to Syria 10 months ago. The Director General
did not announce that last summer. Syria stresses its
reservations regarding the exercise of its sovereign
right to refuse access to a member of the team, which
should not be used as a pretext to undermine the
Declaration Assessment Team’s work or to tarnish
Syria’s cooperation with the Team in recent years. It is
not acceptable and logical for the work of the Team to
be disrupted due to a single member.

22-2709513/16

S/PV.8982

The situation in the Middle East

The reports of the Fact-Finding Mission in Syria,
including the two most recent ones on the two alleged
incidents in Marea and Kafr Zeita (S/2022/85, annex
and S/2022/116, annex, respectively), do not change
our firm position about the gross defects and serious
irregularities that overwhelm the working methods of
the Fact-Finding Mission, especially their inconsistency
with the rules contained in the Convention and their
lack of commitment to the reference criteria. That
includes methods for gathering and preserving evidence
and samples, while depending on open sources and
information provided by terrorist organizations, such
as the White Helmets terrorist organization.
Moreover, during its inquiries, the Mission applies
double standards and neglects to notify the Syrian
Government. The Fact-Finding Mission insists on
pursuing that erroneous approach. That is why its reports
are false and significantly tarnish the professionalism
and credibility of the OPCW, The report on the alleged
incident in Douma is a clear example of that.
We are rightly concerned by the manipulation in
the Fact-Finding Mission’s reports. Certain Western
States interfere in its work and exert political pressure
on it. The United States knows the conclusions of the
Mission’s reports in advance, before the reports are
published. We all clearly heard evidence of that in the
statement made by the United States delegation during
the previous meeting of the Security Council on the
matter (see S/PV.8977). There are many examples of
United States interference in the work of the FactFinding Mission. Washington has already sent a team of
its experts to The Hague to meet with the Fact-Finding
Mission and pressure it to remove some sections of its
reports and highlight others.
I would also like to recall that the Fact-Finding
Mission received guidance from senior OPCW officials
to delete the reports of two inspectors on the alleged
incident in Douma. The reports acknowledged that the
attack in that incident was a staged spectacle. They
were to be replaced by non-scientific and illogical
reports. That was not only the case. The Fact-Finding
Mission until now postpones publishing its reports on
the five incidents, on which the Syrian Government
had requested an inquiry in 2017. That is despite
our repeated requests, while the Mission hastily
investigated and issued misleading reports on alleged
incidents promoted by terrorist organizations to tarnish
the image of the Syrian Government. What neutrality,
14/16

28/02/2022

independence and professionalism are they therefore
talking about?
The Syrian Arab Republic once again expresses
its total condemnation and rejection of the use of
chemical weapons by anyone, anywhere, anytime and
under any circumstances. Syria would like to recall
that we voluntarily acceded to the Chemical Weapons
Convention and destroyed our chemical stockpiles
in record time. By doing so, Syria fulfilled all its
obligations under the Convention. Syria reaffirms that it
is cooperating with the OPCW, despite its suspicion due
to the erroneous methodology and imbalanced approach
of the OPCW Technical Secretariat. We hope that the
OPCW will be able to rectify its working approach and
focus on the technical nature of its work, because it is
one of the pillars of the non-proliferation regime and an
important framework for multilateralism.
The role of the OPCW should not be to illegally deny
Member States of their rights. Rather, it should focus
on the destruction of the chemical arsenals of Member
States. The United States remains the only State that
has not destroyed its chemical weapons to date.
Moreover, the OPCW should not call into question
the commitments of its States parties. It should
undertake efforts so that States that have not yet
acceded to the Convention will do so, at the forefront of
which is Israel, which possesses a significant arsenal of
chemical weapons.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Ms. Ershadi (Islamic Republic of Iran): As a major
victim of the most systematic use of chemical weapons,
Iran once again expresses its strong opposition to the
use of chemical weapons by anyone, anywhere and
under any circumstances.
We reiterate our call for the full, effective and
non-discriminatory implementation of the Chemical
Weapons Convention and the upholding of the authority
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW), and we stand ready to actively
and constructively contribute to that end. We repeat,
however, our concern about the serious effects of
politicizing the Convention’s implementation on its
authority and credibility.
The OPCW must not be used to advance politically
motivated national objectives. In the past couple of
22-27095

28/02/2022

The situation in the Middle East

years, Syria has been experiencing such attempts by
some State parties.
We welcome Syria’s ongoing cooperation with
the OPCW, including the filing of its 98th report on
17 January 2022, relating to the destruction of chemical
weapons and associated production facilities on
its territory.
Furthermore, during the past year, letters were
exchanged between Syria’s Foreign Minister and the
OPCWs Director-General in the context of the issues
developed through years of collaborative work.
The information provided by Syria to both the
Technical Secretariat of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the Secretariat
of the United Nations about the possession and use of
chemical materials by terrorist organizations, as well
as about the fabrication of chemical incidents to accuse
the Syrian army, need to be taken up by the Council.
It is equally important to note that the meetings of
the Security Council on the chemical file should not be
dedicated to the repetition of positions of Member States
and discussions of unfounded allegations, given that the
Syrian Government has made substantial progress in
fulfilling its obligations under the Convention. It would
therefore be wise for the Council to revisit the decision
to continue to hold monthly meetings to discuss the
Syrian chemical file. Such meetings undermine the
Convention’s authority and the OPCW’s reputation,
rather than achieving the Convention’s purposes.
Only the thorough the destruction and elimination
of all chemical weapons globally and the implementation
of all essential measures to ensure that such weapons
are not created in the first place can we be certain that
chemical weapons will not be used again. That objective
has yet to be realized because the United States, as the
only remaining possessor State party, is not complying
with its obligations regarding the final extended
deadline for the destruction of chemical weapons.
Another stumbling block is the Convention’s lack
of universality. If we are to achieve that great goal, the
Israeli regime must be compelled to join the Convention
immediately and without conditions.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): I thank
Representative Nakamitsu for her briefing.

High

S/PV. 8982

Today’s meeting is one that none of us could
have imagined 11 years ago. The Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) DirectorGeneral has submitted his 100th report (see S/2022/76)
on the Syrian chemical file. Moreover, it has been 100
months since the OPCW confirmed that the Al-Assad
regime failed to provide information regarding the true
scope of its chemical weapons programme.
The outstanding issues in relation to the Syrian
regime’s initial declaration persists. How long will it
take the Security Council to unify and respond to that
brazen violation of the Chemical Weapons Convention?
How many more milestones should pass before the
Council members urge the regime to comply with its
obligations? The Council’s inertia is of the utmost
concern. This unacceptable passivity only emboldens
the violators of international law. While the world waits
for the Council to act, the scientific evidence keeps
piling up. We have taken note of the two latest reports
of the Fact-Finding Mission, which confirmed the use
of chemicals as weapons in Marea on 1 September 2015
and in Kafr Zeita on 1 October 2016 (S/2022/85, annex
and S/2022/116, annex, respectively).
We also look forward to the conclusion of two
ongoing investigations by the Investigation and
Identification Team (IIT), which is mandate to establish
responsibility in the chemical weapons attacks in
Syria. However, we are most concerned that the regime
continues to refuse visas to the IIT experts, thus
deliberately hindering their ability to discharge their
mandated duties. Pursuant to resolution 2118 (2013), the
Syrian regime has the obligation to provide immediate
and unfettered access to personnel designated by
the OPCW. The Security Council must be united in
enforcing it.
The use of chemical weapons by anyone, anywhere
and under any circumstances is prohibited by
international law and constitutes a violation of the 1925
Geneva Protocol, the Chemical Weapons Convention
and Security Council resolutions. Turkey strongly
condemns the repeated use of chemical weapons by the
Al-Assad regime against its own people, which amounts
to crimes against humanity. As of now, the regime has
been found responsible for using chemical weapons on
at least eight occasions.
The OPCW and its investigative bodies play
a crucial role in unearthing the truth about those
gruesome attacks. We commend the independence,

22-2709515/16

S/PV.8982

The situation in the Middle East

professionalism and impartiality of the OPCW
Technical Secretariat and caution against futile attempts
to discredit it.
The twenty-fifth anniversary of the OPCW serves as
a sobering reminder of the need to protect the universal
norm prohibiting the use of chemical weapons and to
protect innocent civilians. Turkey is proud to be one of
the States members to have joined the OPCW in 1997.
We will continue to actively participate in efforts to
uphold the Chemical Weapons Convention. It is critical
that we take urgent action towards accountability
in the face of the regime’s present violations of that
fundamental legal document. We once again highlight

16/16

28/02/2022

the special responsibility of the Security Council in
that regard.
It is imperative that we take steps to end impunity
in order to achieve lasting peace in Syria. The people
of Syria deserve much more, but we should be able to
uphold accountability at the very least.
The President (spoke in Russian): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I will now
adjourn the meeting so that the Council can continue its
discussion on the subject in closed consultations.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

22-27095
