Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

developing countries, and especially the relatively less
developed among them,
Convinced also of the importance of ensuring the
optimum impact of the multiplier effect of assistance
provided to the developing countries, and in particular
the assistance provided by the United Nations Development Programme,
Recalling paragraph 4 of its resolution 2814 (XXVI)
of 14 December 1971 on the capacity of the United
Nations development system,
1. Invites the Governing Council of the United
Nations Development Programme to convene, through
the Administrator of the Programme and in consulta!ion with the interested Member States, a working group
m order to:
(a) Examine and make recommendations on the
best way for developing countries to share their capacities and experience with one another with a v,iew
to increasing and improving development assistance;
(b) Examine the relative possibilities and advantages of regional and interregional technical co-operation among developing countries;
2. Calls upon the Governing Council of the United
Nations Development Programme also to give priority
to the improvement of procedures for the elaboration
and implementation of inteI1regional, regional and subregional programmes of the United Nations Development Programme in accordance with paragraphs 21,
22 and 23 of the annex to General Assembly resolution 2688 (XXV);
3. Also invites the Governing Council of the United
Nations Develop,I1ent Programme to consider at an
early session measures that are needed to reduce the
administrative costs of the Programme;
4. Requests the Governing Council of the United
Nations Development Programme to submit to the
General Assembly at its twenty-ninth session, through
the Economic and Social Council, a report and recommendations on the matters indicated in paragraph 1
above.
2109th plenary meeting
14 December 1972

2975 (XXVII). Measures to strengthen the executing agencies of the United Nations Development Programme

The General Assembly,
Recognizing the important role of the United Nations
development system for attaining the goals and objectives of the International Development Strategy for
the Second United Nations Development Decade30
and the responsibility of the United Nations Development Programme, as well as of the participating and
executing agencies, effectively to assist Member States
in their efforts to achieve economic development and
social justice as weU as qualitative and structural
changes in society,
Recalling the consensus adopted by the Governing
Co_uncil of the ~nit~d Nations Development Programme
at its tenth sessmn, m June 1970,31 designed to increase
3 0 Resolution 2626 (XXV).
31 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council

Forty-ninth Session, Supplemem No. 6A (E/4884/Rev.1)'.
para. 94. See also General Assembly resolution 2688 (XXV),
annex.

41

the capacity of the United Nations development system
to respond effectively and rapidly to the needs of
developing countries in accordance with their own
development objectives and priorities,
Further recalling the decision adopted by the Economic and Social Council on 22 July 1970 to recommend to all executing agencies of the United Nations
Development Programme that they take the necessary
administrative and organizational steps for the common
endeavour of implementing the consensus and improving the delivery capacity of the United Nations
development system,32
Bearing in mind its resolution 2688 (XXV) of
11 December 1970 on the capacity of the United
Nations development system,
Aware of the fact that operational activities financed
by the United Nations Development Programme represent a very large and growing share of the total
activities of the agencies,
l. Emphasizes the need for effective and t,imely
preparation as well as implementation of the country
programmes and other activities financed by the United
Nations Development Programme;
2. Stresses that administrative overhead costs involved in the execution of projects of the United
Nations Development Programme should be minimized
in order to secure increased resources for direct assistance to recipient countries;
3. Requests the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme to take all necessary measures
at the headquarters and in the field offices of the
Programme to ensure the timely approval and execution
of projects;
4. Invites the governing bodies of the participating
and execut,ing agencies to strengthen the executing
capacity of their respective agencies in accordance with
the above-mentioned, as well as other relevant, resolutions and decisions of the United Nations;
5. Further invites the governing bodies of the participating and executing agencies, on the basis of
problem-oriented documentation prepared by the secret-ar~ats concerned, to discuss periodically and keep under
review the problems encountered by their respective
organizations in the planning and implementation of
the country programmes, taking into account the
desirability of achieving a high rate of project implementation and the need to promote high quality programmes and projects;
6. Requests the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme to gather all relevant information on difficulties encountered and measures taken bv
the agencies to strengthen their operational structure
and their delivery capacity and to submit periodic
reports thereon, together with his comments. tll the
Governing Council of the Programme.
:! ! 09th ple11arv meeting
14 Deccmher 797.?

2976 (XXVII). Unitf'd Nation;, Capital Developuu'nt Fund

The General AS'sembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2186 (XXI) of l 3 December 1966, 2321 (XXH) of 15 December I %7. 2-t 1(1
32 /bid., Supplement No. l (E/4904 and Corr.I), Other
deci~ions, p. I 7.

42

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

(XXIII) of 17 December 1968, 2525 (XXIV) of
5 December 1969, 2690 (XXV) of 11 December 1970
and 2812 (XXVI) of 14 December 1971,
Decides to preserve the original functions of the
United Nations Capital Development Fund until 31 December 1973, in accordance with the measures set
forth in paragraph 1 of General Assembly resolution
2321 (XXH).
2109th plenary meeting
14 December 1972

this matter, taking into ,account the status of implementation of the Action Plan and future developments
in the field of the environment, and report its views
and recommendations to the General Assembly so that
the Assembly can take a decision on all aspects of the
matter not later than at its twenty-ninth session.

2112th plenary meeting
15 December 1972

299,'i ( XXVII). (:o-operation between States in
the field of the environment

2994, (XXVII). United Nations Conference on the
Human Environment

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the responsibility of the international
community to take action to preserve and enhance the
environment and, in particular, the need for continuous
international co-operation to this end,
Recalling its resolutions 2398 (XXIII) of 3 December 1968, 2581 (XXIV) of 15 December 1969,
2657 (XXV) of 7 December 1970, 2849 (XXVI) and
2850 (XXVI) of 20 December 1971,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
Conference on the Human Environment, 33 held at
Stockholm from 5 to 16 June 1972, and the report of
the Secretary-Genc-ral thereon, 34
Expressing its satisfaction that the Conference and
the Preparatory Committee for the United Nations
Conference on the Human Environment succeeded in
focusing the attention of Governments and public
opinion on the need for prompt action in the field of
the environment,
l. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the
United Nations Conference on the Human Environment;
2. Draws the attention of Governments and the
Governing Council of the United Nations Environment
Programme35 to the Declaration of the United Nations
Conference on the Human Environment86 and refers
the Action Plan for the Human Environment37 to the
Governing Council for appropriate action;
3. Draws the attention of Governments to the recommendations for action at the national level referred
to them by the Conference for their consideration and
such action as they might deem appropriate;
4. Designates 5 June as World Environment Day
and urges Governments and the organizations in the
United Nations system to undertake on that day every
year world-wide activities reaffirming their concern for
the preservat,ion and enhancement of the environment,
with a view to deepening environmental awareness and
to pursuing the determinatic)J] expressed at the Conference;
5. Takes note with al'{HPciation of re:mlution 4 (I)
of 15 hHH 1972:is adopted hy th~ Conference on the
convening of a scccnd United Nations Confr:cnce on
the Hum,m Environment and refi-1 s tliis malter to the
Governing Council ,-,r :he United ·\fati,ms EnYirnnment
Programme with
1·.:que,t that the Council study

t:,.

:;a A/CONF.48/14 and Corr.l.
:: 1 A/8783 and Add.1, Add. I /Con. l and Adu .2
:.c. S<."c r~solution 2997 (X), VI I). s•:,t. L
:,,,. !\/CONF.41<.'14 and Cor: I c!:a1;. 1.
:!7 lhid., chap. H.
'18 /hid., chap. IV.

The General Assembly,
Having considered principle 20 as contained in the
draft text of a preamble and principles of the declaration on the human environment,:rn referred to it for
consideration by the United Nations Conference on the
Human Environment,
Recalling its resolution 2849 (XXVI) of 20 December 1971 entitled "Development and environment",
Bearing in mind that, in exercising their sovereignty
over their natural resources, States must seek, through
effective bilateral and multilateral co-operation or
through regional machinery, to preserve and improve
the environment,
1. Emphasizes that, in the exploration, exploitation
and development of their natural resources, States must
not produce significant harmful effects in zones situated
outside thei,r nat,ional jurisdiction;
2. Recognizes that co-operation between States in
the field of the environment, including co-operation
towards the implementation of principles 21 and 22
of the Declaration of the United Nations Conference
on the Human Environmcnt, 40 will be effectively
achieved if official and public knowledge is provided
of the technical data relating to the work to be carried
out by States within their national jurisdiction, with a
view to avoiding significant harm that m:1y occur in
the environment of the adjacent area:
3. Further recognizes that the teclmical data referred
to in paragraph 2 above will be given and received in
the best spirit or cn-upcration and guod-neighhourlincss,
without this being construed as enabling each State to
delay or impede the programmes and projects of exploration, exploitation and development of the natural
resources of the States in whose territories such programmes and projects an~ carried out.

2112th plenary meeting
15 Dccm1ber 1972
2996 (XXVII). lntrrnationaJ rrspom,ihili1y of
Statei- in regar,l to the environnwnt

The General Asst'mbly.
Recalling princir,lcs 21 and 22 of the Declaration
<'f the lTnitcd

N;1tions Conference on the Human
Fnvironmcntll (:<1nccrning the international responsibility of States in regard to the environment,
Bearing i11 111111d t h,1 t thme principks Jay down the
basic rules guvcrning this matter.,
.. ,, Se(' A 1 CONJ

iS '-1-. :,nnn. <;,cc also J\ ·coNF 48 ! 4 ,1ml

( 'orr.1, chap. X. se,t. D.
w A 1 CON F.4i'' I 4 and Corr. L chap. I.
11

/I-id.
