S/2015/468

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
23 June 2015
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and
2191 (2014)
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is the sixteenth submitted pursuant to paragraph 17 of
Security Council resolution 2139 (2014), paragraph 10 of Security Council
resolution 2165 (2014) and paragraph 5 of Security Council resolution 2191 (2014),
in which the Council requested the Secretary-General to report, every 30 days, on
the implementation of the resolutions by all parties to the conflict in the Syrian Arab
Republic.
2.
The information contained in the present report is based on the data available
to United Nations agencies on the ground, from the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic and from open sources. Data from United Nations agencies and partners
on their humanitarian deliveries have been reported for the period from 1 March to
31 May 2015 when available. More recent data have been included when available.
Pursuant to paragraph 3 of resolution 2191 (2014), the Security Council decided to
conduct a six-month review of the implementation of paragraphs 2 and 3 of
resolution 2165 (2014). Information relevant to those paragraphs is inclu ded in the
annex to the report.

II. Major developments
A.

Political/military
3.
Widespread conflict and high levels of violence continued throughout the
Syrian Arab Republic in May. Indiscriminate aerial bombings, including the use of
barrel bombs, by Government forces and indiscriminate shelling by non -State armed
groups and extremist and listed terrorist groups 1 resulted in the deaths, injuries and
displacement of civilians. The conduct of hostilities by all parties continued to be
characterized by widespread disregard for the rules of international humanitarian
law and their obligation to protect civilians.

__________________
1 On 30 May 2013, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and the Nusra Front were

designated as terrorist groups by the Security Council under resolution 1267 (1999). The two
groups operate in the Syrian Arab Republic.

15-10152 (E)

240615

*1510152*

S/2015/468

4.
In Aleppo governorate, heavy fighting continued in May with indiscri minate
attacks by Government forces, non-State armed groups and the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL). According to information received by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), over 200 civilians,
including 24 children, were killed by Government forces across the governorate
during May. For example, on 30 May, according to OHCHR sources, more than
70 civilians were killed and dozens injured in three different aerial attacks. Reports
indicate that two barrel bombs hit a market in Al-Bab town controlled by ISIL,
north-east of Aleppo city, killing at least 45 civilians and injuring dozens more.
Sources informed OHCHR that no ISIL buildings or combatants were hit in the
attack. Analysis by the Operational Satellite Applications Programme of the United
Nations Institute for Training and Research of satellite imagery collected on 3 June,
indicated multiple destroyed structures in the vicinity of the market, corresponding
with the reports of barrel bombing. Also on 30 May, barrel bombs reportedly hit
residential areas in the Al-Shaar and Al-Ferdous neighbourhoods in eastern Aleppo
city, killing over 30 civilians and injuring several more.
5.
Non-State armed groups continued to launch attacks inside Aleppo city, with a
reported increase in the number of projectiles landing on Government -controlled
parts of the city in April and May, including mortars, gas cylinders and homemade
rockets. According to local sources, at least 86 civilians, including 12 women and
33 children, were killed in May. On 15 June, approximately 200 shells landed on
Al-Neil Street, Al-Khalidieah, New Shahba, Al-Sulimanieh, New Syrian, and Faysal
street neighbourhoods of Aleppo city. At least 30 civilians were reportedly killed,
including 2 women and 9 children, and more than 100 civilians injured.
6.
At the end of May, ISIL made advances in northern Aleppo to a number of
villages held by non-State armed groups, most significantly taking over Souran
town located around 10 km from the Bab al-Salam border crossing. ISIL forces
further mobilized south towards Mare’a and north towards the Shimareen area. As at
mid-June, however, ISIL advancements were repelled following heavy clashes with
non-State armed groups.
7.
In Idlib governorate, heavy fighting continued during the reporting period. In
May, according to information gathered by OHCHR, Government aerial attacks
increased in Idlib following the territorial gains made by non-State armed groups,
killing and injuring several civilians. For example, on 14 May, barrel bombs
dropped by Government forces on the town of Khan Shaykhun reportedly killed
1 woman and 2 children and injured at least 15 civilians. On 16 May, Government
planes reportedly hit the towns of Kafr Oueid and Saraqeb with missiles, kill ing at
least 15 civilians in each attack. Furthermore, according to reports on 8 June, air
strikes by Government forces reportedly killed at least 49 civilians when a strike hit
a public square in Al Janudiya. The two largely Shia majority villages of Foua h and
Kefraya, north-east of Idlib city, remain surrounded by non-State armed groups.
8.
Heavy fighting continued in and around Damascus during May, resulting in
civilian casualties and damage to civilian property. Non-State armed groups targeted
the western part of Damascus city with mortar rounds. For example, on 19 May,
mortar rounds hit al-Safarat neighbourhood, causing damage to buildings including
the Embassy of the Russian Federation. Also on 19 May, several mortar rounds hit
al-Thaqafi School in the al-Maleki neighbourhood, killing 1 teacher and injuring at
least 20 schoolchildren. Two other mortar rounds hit al-Mazra’a neighbourhood,

2/16

15-10152

S/2015/468

killing one civilian. On 4 May, a non-State armed group wearing Syrian military
uniforms infiltrated the Rukn Al-Din neighbourhood in Central Damascus and carried
out two person-borne improvised explosive device attacks, followed by a brief gun
battle with Government forces, reportedly causing three deaths.
9.
Following ISIL infiltration of Yarmouk camp in Damascus in early April, the
humanitarian situation in the camp deteriorated as a result of frequent armed clashes
and the use of heavy weapons. On 26 and 27 May, Government forces reportedly hit
the camp with six barrel bombs, killing one person and injuring four oth ers. Armed
clashes reportedly continued inside Yarmouk between pro -government Palestinian
factions and non-State armed groups in the northern area of the camp. Fighting also
continued between ISIL and non-State armed groups around Al-Hajar Al-Aswad and
Al-Taqadom districts south of Yarmouk, as well as between the Nusra Front and
Palestinian armed groups. The continued absence of protection for civilians in
Yarmouk remains a grave concern.
10. During the reporting period, fighting continued in Rif Dimashq. Government
forces continued to carry out air strikes on several towns in eastern and western
Ghouta resulting in civilian casualties, including children. In Moadamiyet, the local
agreement in place since 2014 remains fragile. On 4 May, Government forces
reportedly dropped barrel bombs on the western part of the town which, according to
OHCHR sources, resulted in the injury of at least 10 civilians. The Syrian authorities
have continued to implement strict restrictions on the movement of both civilians and
supplies to and from Moadamiyet since mid-February, creating a dire humanitarian
situation inside the town. The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and
the Syrian Arab Red Crescent visited Moadamiyet on 15 June for the first time since
December 2014 and delivered medical supplies sufficient for 5,000 people.
11. On 16 May, Government forces carried out an air strike on Douma town in
eastern Ghouta, which reportedly hit a school, killing five schoolchildren and
injuring at least 10 others. On 20 May, Government forces reportedly dropped
bombs on Douma, injuring at least 12 civilians, including women and children.
12. In Qalamoun, the situation remains fluid following an intensification of
fighting in early May. Some media sources reported on the advances made by
pro-Government forces backed by Hizbullah around the towns of Jirud and Falita in
the eastern part of the governorate while in western Qalmoun fighting continued
between non-State armed groups and ISIL.
13. Fighting also continued between Government forces and ISIL in Deir ez-Zor
governorate during the reporting period. Reports indicate that ISIL fighters
continued their offensive to capture the remaining Government -controlled areas of
Deir ez-Zor city, besieged by ISIL forces, including launching an attack on the
military airport on 6 May. Government forces also continued their aerial attacks on
the ISIL-controlled areas of Deir ez-Zor governorate. According to OHCHR
sources, on 18 May, eight civilians were killed, including two children a nd four
women, when Government forces carried out an air strike on Albo Omar village in
Deir ez-Zor.
14. In Hasakeh governorate, on 9 May, the Kurdish People’s Protection Units
(YPG) regained control over some areas that had previously been captured by ISI L,
following fierce clashes in Arna and Hadid. On 30 May, ISIL launched a major
assault on Hasakeh city and reached the city’s southern periphery, where clashes

15-10152

3/16

S/2015/468

took place with pro-Government forces. One civilian was reported dead and another
nine injured as a result of multiple mortar attacks launched by ISIL in the centre of
the city on 31 May.
15. Following clashes with the Government and pro-Government forces, ISIL
captured the ancient city of Palmyra/Tadmur on 21 May and the surrounding gas
fields of al-Hail and Arak. Following the takeover, the city has been hit by
Government forces, causing civilian casualties. Between 24 and 26 May, at least
27 civilians were reportedly killed when Government planes hit a civilian area of
Palmyra/Tadmur. Seven other civilians, including two children, were reportedly killed
as a result of Government shelling of a neighbourhood suspected of harbouring ISIL
fighters. In the western part of Palmyra/Tadmur, OHCHR sources reported that ISIL
planted landmines to prevent Government forces from launching attacks.
16. On 15 June, YPG and the Free Syrian Army took control of Tel Abyad city and
border crossing from ISIL as well as the neighbouring town of Ayn el Issa, with the
support of the international anti-ISIL coalition air strikes. An estimated
23,000 people from the city were displaced into Turkey between 13 and 16 June,
and an estimated additional 35,000 people moved to Raqqa city from Tel Abyad,
Ayn el Issa and Suluk in May.
17. Civilian infrastructure continued to be attacked during the reporting period,
and basic services, including electricity and water, continued to be cut. For example,
according to reports by local partners, on 4 June ISIL targeted an electricity
substation in Panorama Square south of Hasakeh city, cutting off 80 per cent of the
power supply to the city. The current population of the city is estimated at
500,000 people.
18. Schools continue to be affected by violence. According to information verified
by the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), in April, six schools in the Ariha
subdistrict of Idlib governorate were occupied and being used as temporary bases,
shelters and barracks by Government troops recently withdrawn from Idlib. On
7 April 2015, the Sayadiy School in Arihawas was attacked and the school building
damaged, and on 24 April a mortar hit the Seblo School, causing damage to one
classroom. The school was being used as a shelter for internally displaced persons at
the time of the attack. There were no child casualties reported. On 25 April, a rocket
attack on the Banat Ariha School caused damage to the school building. Similar
attacks were also reported in March by UNICEF in Idlib, Hama and Rif Dimashq
governorates.
19. Tens of thousands of people continued to be displaced by fighting and
insecurity during the reporting period. In Idlib governorate, on 31 May, an estimated
52,500 people were displaced from the town of Ariha mainly towards Idlib city,
including people who had previously been displaced, in anticipation of possible air
strikes by Government forces. As at the end of May, 50 per cent of the more than
175,000 people displaced from Idlib city are estimated to have retur ned to their
homes. Following the takeover of Palmyra/Tadmur by ISIL, some 6,500 civilians
have fled the areas surrounding the city to Qaryatein village, while another
2,000 have fled to Mahin village. Also, in Homs governorate, 22,000 people were
displaced from the villages of Tesnine and Kafran following the advances made by
non-State armed groups. In Aleppo, over 2,000 people were reportedly displaced as
a result of ISIL advances in the northern part of the governorate in late May and
early June. Furthermore, the increased attacks on Government-controlled areas led

4/16

15-10152

S/2015/468

to the displacement of an estimated 15,000 people from western Aleppo city,
towards the coastal areas. In Raqqa governorate, nearly 21,000 people have been
displaced to various parts of the governorate owing to fighting between YPG and
ISIL. In Dar’a, following the takeover of Brigade 52 by the Free Syrian Army’s
Southern Front, some 15,000 people have reportedly been displaced.
20. My Special Envoy for Syria continues the Geneva consultations with Syrian,
regional and international delegations, with a view to developing recommendations
on the operationalization of the Geneva Communiqué. The Special Envoy also
visited Damascus from 15 to 17 June to discuss the views of senior Syrian officials
on the Geneva Consultations. At the conclusion of the visit, he released a statement
condemning all attacks on civilians, underlining that the use of barrel bombs is
unacceptable and that all Governments have the obligation under international
humanitarian law to protect their civilians. On 4 June my Special Envoy also held
discussions with the National Coalition of Syrian Revolutionary and Opposition
Forces in Istanbul, Turkey. He expects the Geneva consultations to continue into
July and in the coming weeks intends to brief me on his findings from that process.

B.

Human rights
21. During the reporting period, OHCHR continued to gather information on
human rights violations in the Syrian Arab Republic. The counter -terrorism court
established in 2012 continued to prosecute civilians, including human rights
defenders for their participation in anti-Government peaceful protests, in trials that
violated minimum due process standards. On 13 May, the issuance of a verdict in
the case of three human rights defenders from the Syria Centre for Media and
Freedom of Expression was postponed for the tenth time. The three human rights
defenders were last seen in Adhra prison in Damascus on 6 May, after which they
were reportedly transferred to an undisclosed location.
22. ISIL continued to violate international humanitarian law and commit human
rights abuses during the reporting period. For example, on 5 May, according to
reports received by OHCHR, ISIL crucified and killed a 15 -year-old boy after
accusing him of stealing money and weapons from an ISIL vehicle. On 20 May,
ISIL arrested a woman in Maadan town of rural Raqqa for alleged witchcraft, and
she is reportedly awaiting execution. In Deir ez-Zor governorate, on 14 May, ISIL
reportedly beheaded a man from al-Hawayij village for theft. In addition, a man was
reportedly blindfolded and thrown off a building in Abu Kamal town on 17 May for
his alleged sexual orientation.
23. In Palmyra/Tadmur, according to information gathered by OHCHR, ISIL
reportedly carried out door-to-door searches for suspected Government agents and
executed at least 14 civilians suspected of affiliation with the Government.
According to OHCHR sources, it is estimated that some 60 civilians were executed
by ISIL since its takeover of Palmyra/Tadmur. OHCHR cannot independently verify
the number of those civilian casualties.
24. The fate of hundreds of prisoners and detainees who were reportedly detained
at the Palmyra/Tadmur central prison remained unknown. Information received by
OHCHR indicated that prior to retreating from the city, Government forces
transferred all detainees and prisoners to detention centres in other cities, including

15-10152

5/16

S/2015/468

Homs. On 30 May, ISIL circulated photos purporting to show its members
detonating explosives demolishing the prison’s empty buildings.
25. On 10 May, local sources informed OHCHR that YPG had detained six
civilians from al-Qamishli in Hasakeh and had taken them to an undisclosed
location. The whereabouts of the arrested civilians remain unknown.
26. According to reports by the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, on 11 June
the Nusra Front killed 23 members of the Druze community in the village of Ain
Larooz in Idlib governorate. The incident was reportedly prompted by a dispute
over the confiscation of a house. Following the incident, the Nusra Front and
several non-State armed groups released a statement condemning the killing.
27. During the reporting period, Syrian cultural heritage sites continued to be
under threat. Serious concerns have been expressed ov er the historical sites located
in the city of Palmyra/Tadmur. On 23 May, ISIL entered the Palmyra/Tadmur
museum, whose collection had been evacuated earlier, with the exception for some
large items that could not be moved. On 27 May, the ISI L military chief in
Palmyra/Tadmur announced the organization’s intention to destroy the statues at the
World Heritage site but not the site itself. As at 29 May, no damage was reported
except for the alleged destruction of the ancient statue of the God Lion.

C.

Humanitarian response
28. Some 12.2 million people require humanitarian assistance in the Syrian Arab
Republic, including more than 5 million children. Around 7.6 million people are
internally displaced and 4 million people have fled the Syrian Arab Republi c to
neighbouring countries and North Africa.
29. Despite the challenging operating environment, United Nations humanitarian
agencies and partners continued to reach millions of people in need between 1 March
and 31 May through all modalities from within the Syrian Arab Republic and across
borders, pursuant to resolutions 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014). The World Food
Programme (WFP) delivered food assistance to an average of 4.1 million people per
month. The World Health Organization (WHO) distributed medici nes and supplies to
over 2.7 million people per month on average. UNICEF reached almost 2.2 million
people per month on average with water, sanitation, hygiene, health, education and
protection support, including an expansion of nutrition services througho ut the
country. The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) reached
over 244,000 people per month on average with core relief items, as well as
protection services. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
(FAO) distributed agricultural supplies in support of 32,972 people per month on
average. The International Organization for Migration reached an average of
194,182 people per month with multi-sector assistance. The United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) continued to
provide support to up to 480,000 Palestine refugees on a monthly basis.
30. Cross-border deliveries continued during the reporting period. Between
1 March and 31 May, the United Nations and its implementing partners sent
50 shipments — 19 from Jordan and 31 from Turkey — to the Syrian Arab Republic
under the terms of resolutions 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014), including food

6/16

15-10152

S/2015/468

assistance equivalent for over 1.8 million people; 2 non-food items for over
290,000 people; water and sanitation supplies for over 150,000 people; and medical
supplies for some 660,000 treatments in Aleppo, Latakia, Idlib, Dar’a Quneitra and
Hama governorates. Many of the medical supplies shipped can be reused and will
benefit more patients in the next few months. In line with resolutions 2165 (2014)
and 2191 (2014), the United Nations notified the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic in advance of each shipment, including details of con tent, destination
district and number of beneficiaries.
31. There continued to be a positive trend in the overall amount of United Nations
cross-border assistance between 1 March and 31 May compared with the previous
three months. There was a 131 per cent increase in the amount of food and a 77 per
cent increase in the amount of health items shipped across borders during the
reporting period compared with the previous three months. Lesser amounts of basic
relief items and water and sanitation support were shipped across the border
compared with the preceding three months, primarily as a result of the phasing out
of winterization programmes and funding challenges.
32. The United Nations monitoring mechanism continued its operations in Jordan
and Turkey. During the reporting period, the mechanism monitored a total of
1,309 trucks in 50 United Nations humanitarian shipments, confirming the
humanitarian nature of each and notifying the Syrian authorities after each shipment
had crossed the border. The mechanism continued to benefit from excellent
cooperation with the Governments of Jordan and Turkey during the reporting period.
33. United Nations agencies continued to use the Nusaybin/Qamishly crossing
with the consent of the Governments of the Syrian Arab Republ ic and Turkey during
the reporting period. WFP completed the transportation of food rations sufficient for
230,000 people in both March and April, and 113,350 people in May. UNHCR
delivered non-food items for 25,000 people through the crossing in April. UN ICEF
also completed the transportation of water treatment to cover the needs of
2.1 million people in April, along with multisectoral supplies for 100,000 people.
34. Four inter-agency convoys across conflict lines proceeded between 1 March and
31 May 2015. On 3 March, teams reached Talbiseh in Homs governorate, completing
the planned delivery of aid to 60,000 people. A three-phase convoy to Rastan in Homs
was carried out over March and April, delivering aid to approximately 81,000 people.
Despite approval by local authorities, medical equipment and supplies were removed
from the convoys to Talbiseh and Rastan by local security forces. During April and
early May, an inter-agency convoy reached Yalda, Babila and Beit Sahm in several
phases in order to respond to the influx of people displaced from Yarmouk and to the
needs of vulnerable host communities and previously displaced families, with over
26,000 people reached overall. On 13 May, an inter-agency convoy, through the
Syrian Arab Red Crescent, delivered multisectoral assistance to 50,000, as well as
health supplies for almost 190,000 people, to Big Orem in Aleppo governorate.

__________________
2 Assistance by the World Food Programme is provided in the form of monthly rations; some

beneficiaries were assisted more than once over the three -month reporting period. Accordingly,
the number of unique beneficiaries (namely, people reached once or more than once over the
reporting period) is approximately 1.3 million. The 1.8 million figure refers to the cumulative
amount of food rations dispatched through the cross -border modality over the three months.

15-10152

7/16

S/2015/468

35. In addition to inter-agency convoys, United Nations agencies also conducted
single-agency convoys across conflict lines during the reporting period. For
example, UNRWA, UNICEF and WFP provided assistance to Yalda, Babila and Beit
Sahm. WFP also provided food assistance for 50,000 people in Al Wa’er in Homs
during April and May. In May, WHO delivered medical assistance for over
143,000 treatments through cross-line deliveries to eastern Aleppo city.
36. Non-governmental organizations continued to reach millions of people with
urgent food, health, sanitation and other assistance in the Syrian Arab Republic,
including through the provision of ongoing services between March and May. They
reached over 1.2 million people per month on average with multisectoral assistance,
including services and assistance for over 500,000 people on average per month in
Aleppo; over 280,000 people in Idlib; and over 260,000 people in Dar’a. Access by
non-governmental organizations to people in need continued to be hampered by
increased conflict in Aleppo and Idlib governorates during the reporting period.
Furthermore, NGOs reported significant protection concerns in May, with scores of
attacks against civilians, medical facilities, humanitarian personnel and premises in
Aleppo and Idlib governorates. The attacks resulted in deaths and injury, widespread
damage to infrastructure and the temporary suspensio n of relief services.

D.

Humanitarian access
37. Despite significant deliveries of humanitarian assistance to people in need
between March and May, the delivery of humanitarian assistance remained
extremely challenging during the reporting period owing to active conflict,
insecurity and shifting front lines, deliberate obstructions and interference by the
parties, including restrictions on movements and burdensome administrative
procedures. In addition to the challenges above, the level of funding for
humanitarian activities also continued to be outpaced by the scale of needs. The
2015 Syria Regional Crisis Response Plan was 25 per cent funded as at 15 June.
38. Active conflict, insecurity, as well as shifting front lines, continued to inhibit
deliveries in the Syrian Arab Republic during the reporting period. Intensified
conflict in several governorates hindered the effective delivery of humanitarian
assistance and access to essential services, such as health and education. For
example, UNICEF has been unable to send water treatment supplies to 1.3 million
people in Deir ez-Zor and Raqqa governorates for the past 12 months owing to the
difficulty of delivering humanitarian supplies through ISIL -controlled areas.
Elsewhere, the security situation in Idlib governorate, particularly along key access
routes, has constrained the effective delivery of aid, including the implementation of
polio and measles vaccination campaigns over the past three months. In the southern
area of the Syrian Arab Republic, the capture by non-State armed groups of the
Nasib crossing with Jordan in April and the subsequent closure of the border
continued to disrupt humanitarian operations. Increased insecurity was noted along
the Salamiyah-Aleppo road during the reporting period, a major supply route used
by the United Nations for reaching Aleppo from within the country.
39. Deliberate interference and restrictions also prevented aid delivery. Following
the closure by ISIL of the humanitarian operations of a number of
non-governmental organizations in January, WFP continued to suspend its food
deliveries to ISIL-controlled territory. As a result, some 700,000 people in need in

8/16

15-10152

S/2015/468

Aleppo, Hasakeh, Deir ez-Zor and Raqqa governorates have not reached with food
assistance over the past three months. ISIL did not permit polio or measles
vaccination campaigns to be conducted, neither through mobile teams nor in health
centres during the reporting period. Furthermore, following the ISIL takeover of
Palmyra/Tadmur at the end of May, ISIL reportedly seized the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent warehouse in the city, which contained food assistance for 35,000 people
and hygiene kits for 15,000.
40. In response to reports of United Nations humanitarian assistance supplies
having been found at the Government’s Mastoumah military camp in Idlib in
mid-May, the United Nations raised concerns about the alleged diversion and
requested that the Government investigate the matter. The United Nations reiterated
that humanitarian assistance is provided solely to civilians in need and that its
diversion for any other use jeopardizes the principles of humanitarian action,
undermines the integrity of the programmes and the Organization’s reputation.
41. No major changes in the administrative procedures required by th e
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic were reported over the past three months.
The current administrative procedures continued to delay or limit the delivery of
assistance by United Nations agencies.
42. The United Nations continued to face challenges with regard to the issuance of
visas for international staff members during the reporting period. Since 1 March, a
total of 278 requests for visas (new visas and renewals) were submitted, of which
210 visas were approved. Many of the approvals were for three-month visas only.
Fourteen visas were rejected, bringing the total number of rejections in 2015 to 30,
exclusive of the 4 United Nations staff members who had been declared personae
non gratae in February, compared with a total of 28 visa rejections fo r the whole of
2014. As at 31 May, 85 visa requests by the United Nations (new and renewal)
remained pending, 42 of which had not yet exceeded the 15-working day processing
limit and 43 of which had. In a positive development, a number of missions were
provided with short-term visas in May and June.
43. Since 1 March, the number of international non-governmental organizations
approved by the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic have been reduced from
16 to 15 following the decision of 1 international non -governmental organization to
withdraw its presence in the country in April to focus on strengthening and building
the capacity of its national organization. International non -governmental
organizations continued to face a series of administrative hurdles a nd restrictions
that had an impact on their ability to operate. They remain restricted in their ability
to partner with national humanitarian organizations, open sub -offices, conduct
missions, join inter-agency convoys and undertake independent needs assessments.
Regarding visas for international non-governmental organizations, progress was
noted between March and May, with 26 visas approved, 2 visas rejected and 8 visas,
submitted in mid-May, pending.
44. The number of national non-governmental organizations authorized to partner
with the United Nations has increased from 114 to 118 since 1 March. During the
reporting period, five were added by the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to
the list in Damascus, Homs and Latakia governorates. One operating in Deir ez-Zor
was removed from the list. As at 31 May, the 118 national non -governmental
organizations were authorized to operate 173 branches across the country. Some
governorates, such as Rif Dimashq, Quneitra, Idlib, Dar’a and Raqqa, have an

15-10152

9/16

S/2015/468

insufficient number of national non-governmental organizations authorized relative
to the level of humanitarian need and response required.
45. In 2015, the United Nations submitted 48 requests to the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic for inter-agency convoys to access besieged, hard-to-reach
and other areas located across conflict lines in the country, including one for an
airlift. Following the meetings of the joint committee held on 9 April and 17 June,
20 requests for access to besieged, hard-to-reach and other areas across front lines
were approved in principle by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, of which 7 have been
completed and two partially completed. Altogether, the completed and partially
completed convoys reached an estimated 426,500 people in need. The remaining
11 approved requests are at various stages of preparations, leaving 16 requests
awaiting approval from the Government. Twelve requests were put on hold by the
United Nations owing to insecurity.
46. Access to the 4.8 million people in hard-to-reach and besieged areas remains a
grave concern. Between 1 March 2015 and 31 May 2015, United Nations agencies and
partners reached 44 of the 131 hard-to-reach and besieged locations (34 per cent) on
average per month during the reporting period. United Nations agencies and partners
reached 25 locations with food assistance and agricultural support for 667,457 people
per month; 13 locations with health support for 259,612 medical treatments;
18 locations with water, sanitation and hygiene for an average of 716,417 people per
month; and 12 locations with core relief items for about 42,976 people per month. Of
the 131 hard-to-reach locations, 65 (50 per cent) were not reached; 22 (17 per cent)
have been reached in one of the past three months; 23 (18 per cent) have been reached
twice; and 21 (16 per cent) have been reached three times. There has been no tangible
improvement in the number of hard-to-reach locations accessed between March and
May, compared with the preceding three months.
Besieged areas
47. Of the 4.8 million people in hard-to-reach areas, some 422,000 remain
besieged in the Syrian Arab Republic, including 167,500 people besieged by
Government forces in eastern Ghouta and Darayya; 26,500 people besieged by
non-State armed groups in Nubul and Zahra; and 228,000 people besieged by ISIL
in the Government-controlled western neighbourhoods of Deir ez-Zor city. Since
early April, Yarmouk experienced an escalation of violence, infiltration by ISIL and
the subsequent flight of several thousand Palestine refugees and Syrians to adjacent
communities in the south-eastern part of the country. With the facilitation of Syrian
authorities and local community leaders, United Nations agencies and the Syrian
Arab Red Crescent have distributed humanitarian assistance to the displaced and
host communities, and to those still inside Yarmouk, provided that they were able to
travel safely back and forth from the camp to Yalda, Babila and Beit Sahm to
receive and bring back assistance. On days when access to these locations was
permitted, UNRWA was able to make significant deliveries of humanitarian
assistance and to provide some medical and dental care to civilians. Nonetheless,
since 8 June, access for UNRWA to the three neighbourhoods has been on hold due
to the sudden withdrawal of authorizations by the Government. Separately, United
Nations agencies and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent have continued to provide
sustained assistance to affected people in Yalda, Babila and Bei t Sahm. While no
precise, verifiable figures are available, it is estimated that several thousands of

10/16

15-10152

S/2015/468

civilians remain inside Yarmouk. No humanitarian access has been granted directly
inside the camp since 28 March.
48. In eastern Ghouta, some 163,500 people remain besieged by Government
forces. United Nations assistance reached besieged locations in eastern Ghouta
twice during the reporting period, including WHO contributing medical assistance
sufficient for over 22,047 treatments through a Syrian Arab Red Crescent convoy
travelling to Douma in eastern Ghouta in early May.
49. In Darayya, Rif Dimashq, about 4,000 people remain besieged by Government
forces. No United Nations assistance reached Darayya during the reporting period.
People in the area have not been assisted by the United Nations since October 2012.
50. In Nubul and Zahra, about 26,500 people remain besieged by non -State armed
groups. No United Nations assistance reached the two areas during April and May,
although there were consistent and credible reports that access to and from the
enclave for both commercial goods and people had improved during the reporting
period.
51. In the Government-controlled western neighbourhoods of Deir ez-Zor city,
some 228,000 people remain besieged by ISIL. Some United Nations assistance
reached the besieged area between March and May, including 140 sheep provided
by FAO in March; 695 medical treatments provided by WHO through a local partner
in May; and water, sanitation and hygiene support for over 17,000 people provided
by UNICEF in April and May. Separately, the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and ICRC
airlifted more than 100 tons of rice and oil, as well as medical supplies, to the
besieged parts of Deir ez-Zor city in April and May. Also in May, the Government
approved a series of emergency airlifts to be conducted by the United Nations to the
besieged Government-held districts of the city. The airlifts will be conducted from
Damascus using commercial airfreight, and planning is under way. On 9 June, the
Ministry of Health airlifted WHO supplies to the besieged parts of Deir ez -Zor city,
including six tons of essential medicines.
52. Parties to the conflict further restricted access to besieged areas between
March and May 2015. Over the three months, the United Natio ns and partners
reached an average of 1.4 per cent of people with food, compared with 0.4 per cent
in the preceding three months; and 2 per cent of people with health assistance, not
including polio vaccines, compared with 0.08 per cent in the previous thr ee months.
No basic relief items have been delivered to besieged areas during the reporting
period, compared with 0.4 per cent in the previous three months.
Free passage of medical supplies, personnel and equipment
53. WHO and its implementing partners delivered medicines and medical supplies
for 8.1 million treatments to local health authorities, non -governmental
organizations and private medical facilities in 12 governorates within the Syrian
Arab Republic between 1 March and 31 May 2015. That figure represents nearly
four times the number of treatments compared with the previous three months, when
nearly 2 million treatments were delivered in 13 governorates. The increase is
attributable to an increase in agency-specific deliveries to hard-to-reach areas,
especially to Aleppo, as well as inter-agency convoys.
54. During the reporting period, some 612,046 treatments were delivered to hard to-reach locations and through cross-line deliveries in Aleppo, Hasakeh, Damascus,

15-10152

11/16

S/2015/468

Dar’a, Deir ez-Zor, Homs, and Rif Dimashq governorates, compared with
171,733 treatments in the previous three months. In early May, following approval
from the Government, WHO contributed medical assistance sufficient for over
22,047 treatments to a Syrian Arab Red Crescent convoy to Douma in eastern
Ghouta. Additional approvals have been sought to provide assistance on a monthly
basis to Douma. In May, WHO delivered medical assistance for over
143,000 treatments through cross-line deliveries to eastern Aleppo city. WHO also
delivered 695 medical treatments through a local partner to the besieged areas in
Deir ez-Zor city controlled by the Government.
55. Between March and May 2015, three nationwide immunization campaigns were
conducted: two against polio in March and May and one against measles in April.
None of the campaigns were able to reach their planned targets since the security
situation halted the full implementation of the campaign in Idlib governorate, while
ISIL did not permit the campaigns to be conducted in Raqqa and parts of Deir ez-Zor
and Aleppo governorates. As a result, a total of 550,000 children were not vaccinated
against polio in March, and 1.1 million children were not vaccinated against measles
in April. Preliminary results of the May polio campaign revealed that 2.1 million
children were vaccinated out of the targeted 2.9 million. A number of districts in
Homs, Aleppo, Idlib, Deir ez-Zor and Rif Dimashq governorates were not able to
implement the campaign owing to active fighting.
56. Despite the significant increase in the delivery of medical assistance during
the reporting period, access to medical supplies and equipment continued to be
restricted to some areas as a result of insecurity and access constraints by parties to
the conflict. Medical items and surgical supplies were removed from four convoys
to Homs, Aleppo and Rif Dimashq governorates, resulting in 78,902 people being
deprived of lifesaving medical treatments. Furthermore, with the intensification of
conflict in several governorates and the increasing number of hospitals and health
facilities affected by the conflict, there were reports of significant gaps in basic
medical supplies and surgical equipment, including maternal and child health
services in many areas.
57. During the reporting period, WHO sent 12 requests to deliver medical
assistance to 38 hard-to-reach and cross-line locations in seven governorates:
Aleppo, Dar’a, Deir ez-Zor, Damascus, Hama, Rif Dimashq and Idlib. With the
exception of the convoy to Douma which proceeded, other requests have gone
unanswered.
58. Attacks on medical facilities, ambulances, and medical personnel continued
during the reporting period. In May, Physicians for Human Rights documented
15 attacks on 14 medical facilities, all of which were air strikes by Government
forces, representing the highest number of attacks the organization had documented
in a single month since the start of the conflict. Six attacks occurred in Idlib, five in
Aleppo, two in Deir ez-Zor, and two in Hama governorates. In May, the
organization documented the deaths of 10 medical personnel, of whom at least 6 had
been targeted or killed in the line of duty. Seven had been killed by Government
forces, 1 by ISIL, and 2 by unknown forces. Two of the deaths had occu rred in
Aleppo, two in Hama, two in Idlib, one in Damascus, one in Deir ez -Zor, one in
Homs and one in Raqqa.
59. Since the start of the conflict, Physicians for Human Rights has documented
271 attacks on 202 separate medical facilities: 243 of the facilities were hit by

12/16

15-10152

S/2015/468

Government forces, 11 by non-State armed groups, 6 by ISIL and the Nusra Front,
1 by anti-ISIL coalition forces and 10 by unknown forces. Aleppo and Idlib
governorates had the highest number of attacks with 68 and 44 attacks respectively.
In total, the organization has documented the deaths of 633 medical personnel:
611 killed by Government forces, 6 by non-State armed groups, 5 by ISIL and 11 by
unknown forces.
Safety and security of staff and premises
60. On 2 May, one staff member of UNRWA was injured by mortar fire on the
Midan area of Aleppo.
61. On 6 May, a Syrian Arab Red Crescent volunteer was killed and four were
injured in Douma. On 15 May, another incident occurred in Al Dhameer in Rif
Dimashq, killing one Syrian Arab Red Crescent volunteer.
62. On 20 May, a staff member of an international non -governmental organization
was killed when air strikes hit the market in Darkoush town in Idlib governorate.
Prior to that, a staff member of another international non -governmental organization
was killed when air strikes hit Darkoush town on 26 April.
63. A total of 32 United Nations staff members, 28 of whom are UNRWA staff,
continue to be detained or missing. The total number of humanitarian workers killed
in the conflict since March 2011 is 77, including 17 staff members of the United
Nations, 45 Syrian Arab Red Crescent staff members and volunteers, 8 volunteers
and staff members of the Palestinian Red Crescent Society and 7 staff member s of
international non-governmental organizations. Of the 77, 10 have been killed since
1 January 2015.

III. Observations
64. The parties to the conflict continued to show an utter disregard for the most
basic rules of international humanitarian law and their obligations to protect
civilians with horrific consequences for the people of the Syrian Arab Republic. I
am particularly concerned about reports that the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic continues to indiscriminately drop barrel bombs on defenceless civilians in
populated neighbourhoods. I am also concerned by the indiscriminate and relentless
use of mortars and shelling of residential neighbourhoods by non -State armed
groups. Symbols of community life — markets, bakeries, schools, hospitals,
transportation hubs, mosques, churches — have been reduced to rubble. Such
attacks must stop immediately. I again remind all the parties to the conflict that the
deliberate targeting of civilians is a war crime and that those behind the attacks
should be held responsible.
65. Children continue to bear the brunt of this horrific conflict. Children have
been killed, injured and maimed, suffering the direct consequences of the
indiscriminate violence of the parties to the conflict. Grave violations of children’s
rights continue with total impunity. I remain extremely concerned that schools
continue to be attacked and used for military purposes. More than 2 million children
inside the Syrian Arab Republic are not in school as a consequence of the
occupation, destruction and insecurity of schools. With in creasing numbers of

15-10152

13/16

S/2015/468

children being recruited to fight, the vulnerability and lack of protection for children
will have profound and long-lasting consequences for the country and the region.
66. The United Nations and partners continue to require the use o f all modalities
to deliver assistance to meet the needs of Syrians severely affected by the conflict.
Since the adoption of Security Council resolution 2165 (2014), as extended by the
Council in resolution 2191 (2014), there has been a tangible difference on the
ground, enabling the United Nations and its partners to reach more people in need,
particularly in areas that had previously been inaccessible. In the light of the
scale-up of cross-border assistance over the past six months, cross-border operations
have become a vital delivery mechanism for the United Nations, enabling agencies
to reach some areas in a more regular and sustainable manner than ever before and
complementing the tremendous work carried out by non -governmental organizations
over the past few years.
67. The United Nations monitoring mechanism is fulfilling its mandate as
envisaged by the Security Council, ensuring the strictly humanitarian nature of
United Nations operations. The United Nations will continue to adapt the scale of
the mechanism to ensure that it has the capacity to do the job required while
remaining light and flexible.
68. The positive developments should not take attention away from those who
continue to deliberately hinder access to people who desperately need assista nce.
Despite the tremendous efforts of humanitarian organizations, millions of people
still have insufficient or no assistance at all. I again urge the parties to the conflict
to remember their obligations to allow and facilitate rapid and unimpeded access to
all those in need, particularly those in hard-to-reach and besieged locations, who
have remained cut off from assistance for months.
69. My Special Envoy for Syria continues to hold discussions with the parties to
the conflict as a part of the ongoing Geneva consultations in an effort to find a
political solution to the country’s five-year-long conflict. The goal is ambitious, but
the Organization must not lose sight of it. I stress again that there is no military
solution to the crisis. Only political action can address the underlying causes of the
conflict. I urge all parties to engage positively in the consultations launched by my
Special Envoy on operationalizing the Geneva Communiqué.
70. I also ask the Council to take urgent action in the face of the continuing
atrocities and human rights abuses taking place in the Syrian Arab Republic on a
daily basis. Lack of action will throw the country deeper into chaos and deprive the
country of a peaceful and prosperous future.

14/16

15-10152

S/2015/468

Annex
Information on the review by the Security Council of
paragraphs 2 and 3 of resolution 2165 (2014), pursuant to
paragraph 3 of resolution 2191 (2014)
1.
Pursuant to paragraph 3 of resolution 2191 (2014), the Security Council
decided to conduct a six-month review of the implementation of paragraphs 2 and 3
of resolution 2165 (2014). The information contained in the present annex covers
the period under review.
2.
Following the adoption of resolution 2165 (2014) on 24 July, the SecretaryGeneral requested the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and the
Emergency Relief Coordinator to work on the establishment of the monitoring
mechanism, including its deployment. On 16 July, the Secretary-General deployed
an advance team of the monitoring mechanism to Turkey. The first cross -border
shipment crossed from Bab al-Salam on 24 July. Operations started in Jordan on
6 August, and on 20 August from Bab al-Hawa.
3.
Since 1 December, the United Nations has utilized three of the four border
crossings authorized by the Security Council under resolution 2165 (2014) —
Al-Ramtha with Jordan, and Bab al-Hawa and Bab al-Salam with Turkey. Since
1 December, 92 shipments — 33 from Jordan and 59 from Turkey — have crossed into
the Syrian Arab Republic, including 38 from Bab al-Hawa, 21 from Bab al-Salam and
33 from Al-Ramtha. The Al Yaroubiyah crossing with Iraq has not been utilized since
the adoption of resolution 2165 (2014) owing to the security situation in north-western
Iraq. The United Nations continues to monitor the status of Al Yaroubiyah and other
border crossings and assess their feasibility for use by the United Nations.
4.
The United Nations and its implementing partners have gradually scaled up
their cross-border assistance pursuant to resolutions 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014),
ensuring the efficient use of the available border crossings. The 92 shipments
delivered since 1 December have included food assistance for 2.6 million people;
non-food items for over 1 million people; medical supplies and treatments for over
1 million people; and water and sanitation supplies for over 600,000 people.
5.
There has been a significant scale-up in the amount of assistance delivered
across key sectors over the past six months. For example, food sufficient for
1.8 million people was shipped between March and May 2015, compared with 778,000
between December 2014 and February 2015 and 170,000 between September and
November 2014. Similarly, medical treatments sufficient for some 660,000 people
were shipped between March and May 2015, compared with 375,000 between
December 2014 and February 2015 and 190,000 between September and November
2014. It is important to note that United Nations cross-border operations have
complemented the cross-border work undertaken by non-governmental organizations
that were operational prior to the adoption of the resolution and that deliver assistance
and services to hundreds of thousands of people every month.
6.
United Nations cross-border operations have shipped assistance to districts in
Aleppo, Idlib, Hama and Latakia governorates from Bab al -Hawa and Bab al-Salam
crossing with Turkey, while assistance has been shipped to districts in Dar’a and
Quneitra governorates from the Al-Ramtha crossing with Jordan.

15-10152

15/16

S/2015/468

7.
The United Nations monitoring mechanism has confirmed the humanitarian
nature of each consignment it has monitored without any irregularities. Throughout
the mandate, the mechanism has introduced new tools to aid its activities including
security seals and tamper evident tapes.
8.
The adoption of resolutions 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014) has contributed to
increased access to people in need, enabling the United Nations and partners to
reach those among them who had been largely inaccessible prior to the resolutions. a
With accessibility to different parts of the country evolving as a result of the impact
of cross-border operations, as well as conflict dynamics and shifting front lines and
control by parties, the United Nations reduced the number of hard -to-reach locations
both from within the country and across borders in December 2014, from 287 to
131 locations. A significant number of the locations removed from the list have been
reached by either the United Nations or non-governmental organization partners
since the adoption of resolution 2165 (2014). The importance of cross -border
operations as a modality for the United Nations over the past few months was
evident. For example, cross-border operations enabled the World Food Programme
to maintain deliveries of food to those areas after the onset of heavy fighting in Idlib
governorate in March, which forced the interruption of all cross -line deliveries in
opposition-held areas to the governorate.
9.
The operating environment for cross-border operations remains challenging,
particularly in light of the changing front lines in the northern area of the Syrian Arab
Republic over the past months, including territorial advances and the presence of
ISIL. Insecurity in the proximity of the Bab al-Salam border crossing has meant that
it has been non-operational at times over the past months. Another challenge over the
past six months has been the identification of suitable partners able to handle the
delivery of assistance at scale, as well as delays in finalizing agreements with new
partners that constrained the effective scaling-up of operations. Furthermore, lack of
funding for agencies has limited the amount of assistance that has been delivered and
made long-term planning for cross-border programmes challenging.
10. Access to people in need from within the Syrian Arab Republic via cross -line
deliveries continues to be challenging overall. The Syrian humanitarian country
team has looked into the possible application of a clause in the resolutions that
would enable the United Nations and its partners to conduct cross-line deliveries
through a notifications system, as is done for cross-border deliveries. Given the
difficulty in effectively negotiating ceasefires and guaranteeing staff security
through the notification system for cross-line deliveries, the team has not been able
to make use of that provision due to operational and security constraints.
11. Given the deteriorating humanitarian situation in the Syrian Arab Republic and
the rapidly changing frontlines, the United Nations and its partners continue to
require all modalities, including regular programmes, cross -border and cross-line
operations, to effectively meet the needs of millions of Syrians w herever they may
be in the country.
__________________
a In his ninth report (S/2014/840) on the implementation of Security Council resolutions 2139

(2014) and 2165 (2014), the Secretary-General detailed access trends since the adoption of
resolution 2165 (2014) and the commencement of cross-border operations in July 2014 and
November 2014, noting the improved reach by the United Nations and non-governmental
organizations to hard-to-reach locations in Aleppo, Idlib, Dar’a, and Quneitra governorates.

16/16

15-10152
