174

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

I. Notes with apprecwtwn the report of the Human
Rights Committee on its eleventh, twelfth and thirteenth
sessions66 and expresses satisfaction at the serious and constructive manner in which the Committee is continuing to
undertake its functions;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the States parties to the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights that
have extended their co-operation to the Human Rights Committee when submitting their reports under article 40 of the
Covenant and urges States parties that have not yet <lone
so to submit their reports to the Committee as speedily as
possible;
3. Urges the States parties to the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights that have been requested by
the Human Rights Committee to provide additional information to comply with that request;
4. Takes note of the decisions of the Human Rights
Committee on the question of periodicity. and on guidelines regarding the form and content of reports from States
parties under article 40, paragraph I (b) of the Covenant
as well as of the adoption by the Committee of general
comments under article 40, paragraph 4. of the Covenant; 67
5. Commends the States parties to the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights that have
submitted their reports under article 16 of the Covenant and
urges States that have not yet done so to submit their reports
as soon as possible;
6. Takes due note of Economic and Social Council decision 198 I/ 162 of 8 May I 98 I concerning the review of
the composition, organization and administrative arrangements of the Sessional Working Group of Governmental
Experts on the Implementation of the International Covenant
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and looks forward
to further results in this regard at the first regular session
of the Council in 1982;
7. Again invites all States that have not yet done so to
become parties to the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights and the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights as well as to consider acceding
to the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights;
8. Invites the States parties to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights to consider making the
declaration provided for in article 41 of the Covenant;
9. Appreciates that the Human Rights Committee continues to strive for uniform standards in the implementation
of the provisions of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights and of the Optional Protocol thereto;
10. Emphasizes the importance of the strictest compliance by States parties with their obligations under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and,
where applicable, the Optional Protocol thereto;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to keep
the Human Rights Committee informed of the activities of
the Commission on Human Rights, the Sub-commission on
Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities
and the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination and also to transmit the annual reports of the Human
Rights Committee to those bodies;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session a report on
the status of the International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights, the International Covenant on Civil

66
Official Records of the General AH<'mhlv, Thirt,·-.,ixth s,,.uion. Supplement No. 40 (N36/40).
·
67
Ibid., annexes V-Vll.

and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;
13. Welcomes the measures taken by the Secretary-General to improve the publicity for the work of the Human
Rights Committee and requests the Secretary-General to
consider the most appropriate steps for the publication of
the Committee's documentation and to report on this question to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take
all possible steps to ensure that the Division of Human
Rights of the Secretariat is able to assist effectively the
Human Rights Committee and the Economic and Social
Council in the implementation of their respective functions
under the International Covenants on Human Rights, taking
into account General Assembly resolutions 3534 (XXX) of
17 December 1975 and 31/93 of 14 December 1976.
73rd plenary meeting
25 November /98/

36/59.

Capital punishment

The General Assembly,
Recalling its decision 35/437 of 15 December 1980,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 68
I. Invites Member States to submit further comments
and observations on the draft resolution entitled "Measures
aiming at the ultimate abolition of capital punishment (draft
Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights)" ,69 submitted at the thrity-fifth
session of the General Assembly, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to submit to the Assembly at its thirty-seventh session a report containing the views expressed by Governments;
2. Decides to consider at its thirty-seventh session, under the item entitled ·'International Covenants on Human
Rights", the idea of elaborating a draft of a second optional
protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, 70 aiming at the abolition of the death penalty.
73rd plenary meeting
25 November /98/

36/60.

Torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration on the Protection of All Persons
from Being Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman
or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, adopted by the
General Assembly in its resolution 3452 (XXX) of 9 December 197 5,
Bearing in mind article 7 of the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights,7 1
Recalling also its resolutions 32/62 of 8 December 1977,
in which it requested the Commission on Human Rights to
draw up a draft convention against torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment in the light
of the principles embodied in the Declaration, and 32/63
of 8 December 1977,
Noting that, in its resolution 11 of 5 September 1980, the
Sixth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime
"' A/36/441 and Add. I and 2.
"" Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fifth Session, Annew,. agenda item 65, document A/351742. para. 20.
"' Resolution 2200 A I XXI). annex.
,, Ibid.

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

and Treatment of Offenders ex.pressed the belief that the
draft convention should be finalized at the earliest possible
time, 72
1. Welcomes Economic and Social Council resolution
1981/37 of 8 May 1981, by which tht: Council authorized
an open-ended working group of the Commission on Human
Rights to meet for a period of one week prior to the thirtyeighth session of the Commission to complete the work on
a draft convention;
2. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to complete as a matter of highest priority, at its thirty-eighth
session, the drafting of a convention against torture and
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
with a view to submitting a draft, including provisions for
the effective implementation of the future convention, to
the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled "Torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment".
73rd plenary meeting
25 November 1981
36/61.

Draft Code of Medical Ethics

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the Declaration on the Protection of All Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, as unanimously adopted in General Assembly resolution 3452
(XXX) of 9 December 197 5.
Recalling its resolution 31/85 of 13 December 1976, in
which it invited the World Health Organization to prepare
a draft code of medical ethics relevant to the protection of
persons subjected to any form of detention or imprisonment
against torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
Expressing its appreciation to the Executive Board of the
World Health Organization which, at its six.ty-third session
in January 1979, endorsed the principles set forth in a report
entitled "Development of codes of medical ethics" containing, in an annex., a draft body of principles prepared by
the Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences and entitled "Principles of medical ethics relevant to
the role of health personnel in the protection of persons
against torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment",
Recalling also resolution I I adopted on 5 September 1980
by the Sixth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of
Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, in which the Congress expressed the hope that the General Assembly would
adopt the draft Code, subject to any amendments which
might appear to be necessary. 72
Taking note with appreciation of the Guidelines for Medical Doctors concerning Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman
or Degrading Treatment or Punishment in relation to Detention and Imprisonment, adopted by the twenty-ninth
World Medical Assembly, held in Tokyo in October 1975.
Bearing, in mind Economic and Social Council resolution
1981/27 of 6 May 1981, in which the Council recommended
that the General Assembly should take measures to finalize
a draft Code at its thirty-six.th session,

72
See Sixth United Nations Conf?ress on the Prevention of Crime and
the Treatment of Offenders, Caracas. 25 August-5 September I 980: Report
prepared by the Secretariat (United Nations publication. Sales No.

E.81.IV.4), chap. I, sect. B.

175

Recognizing that throughout the world significant medical
activities are increasingly being performed by health personnel other than physicians. such as physicians' assistants.
physical therapists and nurse practitioners,
Alarmed that not infrequently members of the medical
profession or other health personnel are engaged in activities
which are difficult to reconcile with medical ethics,
Convinced of the need to set standards in this field which
ought to be implemented by members of the medical profession and other health personnel as well as by government
officials,
I. Takes note with appreciation of the comments on the
proposed principles of medical ethics endorsed by the Executive Board of the World Health Organization which were
received by the Secretary-General from Governments, specialized agencies and non-governmental organizations; 73
2. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate among
Member States for their further comments the revised draft
principles of medical ethics set forth in the annex. to the
present resolution;
3. Decides to consider this question at its thirty-seventh
session with a view to adopting the draft Principles of Medical Ethics relevant to the role of health personnel in the
protection of persons against torture and other cruel. inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
73rd plenary meeting
25 November /98/
ANNEX
Draft Principles of Medical Ethics relevant to the role of health personnel in the protection of persons against torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment
Prisoners and detainees have the same rights to the protection of
physical or mental health and the treatment of disease as those who are
not in prison or detained.
2. It is a gross contravention of medical ethics for health personnel.
in particular physicians, having clinical responsibility for prisoners or detainees, to engage, actively or passively, in acts which constitute participation in, complicity in, incitement to or attempts to commit. torture or
other cruel. inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. 74
3
It is a contravention of medical ethics for health personnel, in
particular physicians. to be involved in any relationship with prisoners or
detainees that is not a medical relationship in the sense that its purpose is
the protection or improvement of the physical or mental health of the
prisoner or detainee.
4. It is also a contravention of medical ethics for health personnel.
in particular physicians:
(al To apply their knowledge and skills in order to assist in methods
of interrogation:
(/,) To certify prisoners or detainees tit for any form of punishment
that may adversely affect physical or mental health.
~
Participation of health personnel. in particular physicians, in any
procedure for restraining prisoners or detainees, is not in conformity with
medical ethics unless it is detem1ined by purely medical criteria in a manner
which presents no hazarJ to the health of prisoners or detainee, and is
necessary for the physical or mental health and safety of the prisoner
himself and/or of his fellow prisoners or detainees or of his guardians

6
There may be no derogation from the foregoing principles nn an 1
ground whatsoever. including public emergency.

"See A/35/372 and Add.1--1. A/36/140 and Add.1-4.
'" For the purpose of the present Declaration, torture means any act by
which severe pain or suffering. whether physical or mental. is intentionally
inflicted by. or at the instigation of. a publi,· official on a person for such
purposes as obtaining from him or a third person information or confession,
punishing him for an act he has committed or is suspected of having
committed, or intimidating him or other persons: it does not include pain
or suffering arising only from. inherent in or incidental to lawful sanctions
to the extent consistent with the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment
of Prisoners. Torture con,titutes an aggravated and deliberate form ol cruel.
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
