United Nations

S/PV.6468

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6468th meeting
Tuesday, 18 January 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Barbalić . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bosnia and Herzegovina)

Members:

Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Salam
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Sangqu
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-20932 (E)

*1120932*

S/PV.6468

The meeting was called to order at 10.30 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
The President: I should like to invite the
representative of the Sudan to participate in this
meeting under rule 37 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure.
I should also like to invite Mr. Haile Menkerios,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Sudan, and Mr. Benjamin Mkapa, Chairperson of the
Secretary-General’s Panel on the Referenda in the
Sudan, to participate in this meeting under rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure. I
welcome Mr. Menkerios, who is joining today’s
meeting by video teleconference from Khartoum. I
welcome Mr. Mkapa, who is joining today’s meeting
by video teleconference from Juba.
I now give the floor to Mr. Menkerios.
Mr. Menkerios: Last week’s peaceful conclusion
of polling in the Southern Sudan referendum marked
an historic milestone in the implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA). This is a
testament to the commitment of the two parties to the
Agreement they signed six years ago and an illustration
of their strategic decision to uphold the CPA as they
approach the final and decisive stages of its
implementation. I would like to take this opportunity to
commend President Al-Bashir and Vice-President Kiir
for the leadership and courage they displayed in taking
the country along this difficult path, and call on them
to continue such a partnership, which, as we have
witnessed during the past few weeks, is absolutely
critical to the successful completion of the peace
process.
Polling, which started, as required by the CPA, on
9 January, concluded as planned on 15 January. Despite
the short time frame and logistical challenges, all
materials were distributed on time to the referendum
centres. Registered voters in Southern Sudan, Northern
Sudan and out of country were able to vote without any
major problems. No significant security incident
affected polling areas. Voting was disrupted only by
weather conditions in Brisbane, Australia, and was
extended by three days to guarantee that all registered

2

persons could vote. I would like to take this
opportunity to applaud the work of the Southern Sudan
Referendum Commission, the Southern Sudan
Referendum Bureau, the State High Commissions and
the polling centre staff, as well as all their national and
international partners who have worked tirelessly for
the past few months and organized a remarkable
polling process.
The Southern Sudan Referendum Commission
announced on 13 January that the required 60 per cent
threshold of registered voters — that is, 2,359,553
voters — had been reached by the fourth day of
polling, making the referendum legally valid.
Subsequently, on 16 January, the Southern Sudan
Referendum Commission Chairperson, Professor
Khalil Ibrahim, announced that 83 per cent of
registered voters had cast their ballots, a remarkable
turnout.
The United Nations Mission in the Sudan
(UNMIS),
the
United
Nations
Development
Programme and other international partners worked
closely with the Southern Sudan Referendum
Commission and its subsidiary bodies, providing
technical assistance and guidance on all aspects of the
process. United Nations air assets were heavily utilized
to deliver and retrieve polling materials and to
transport key referendum staff and international
observers. The international community, through its
generous financial contributions, made possible the
timely procurement of ballots, polling kits and other
materials, and helped finance the training of polling
staff and referendum security officials.
Security remained calm throughout the polling
period in the South except for some minor clashes
between the Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA)
and a rebel group in Unity state at the start of polling
and some disturbances by cattle rustlers in Western
Bahr el Ghazal, but none had any connection with the
referendum, and the disruption these events caused to
the polling process was minimal. Clashes in Abyei,
where no voting was scheduled to take place, also had
no direct impact on referendum security.
The referendum was closely observed and
monitored by large numbers of domestic and
international observers. More than 22,000 domestic
observers were accredited to oversee the process,
alongside approximately 600 international observers.
Observers were present in the overseas centres in eight

11-20932

S/PV.6468

countries. As Mr. Mkapa will undoubtedly mention in
his briefing later, the Secretary-General’s Panel on the
Referenda in the Sudan noted in its preliminary
statement that, based on its observations and those of
its staff in the field, the Panel is satisfied that the
process allowed the people of Southern Sudan to
express their will freely. Similarly, the observer
missions of the African Union (AU), the European
Union, the Carter Centre, the Arab League and the
Intergovernmental Authority for Development have
issued statements concluding that the polling was free
and fair.
The counting of ballots at each referendum centre
commenced immediately after the closure of polls on
15 January. Results have been posted at each centre
and are to be forwarded and aggregated at the next
level between 17 and 23 January. Results from all
referendum centres will be verified, approved and
progressively announced. The Southern Sudan
Referendum Commission will announce preliminary
results for the entire referendum on 2 February. Barring
any legal appeals, the final results will be declared on
7 February and, in the case of appeals, on 14 February.
Senior officials of the National Congress Party in
Khartoum have already announced that the referendum
would most probably meet the standards necessary for
its outcome to be recognized and accepted.
With regard to post-referendum negotiations, as
we move into the final six months of the CPA interim
period, much remains to be done. The African Union
High-Level Implementation Panel on the Sudan, led by
President Mbeki, is mediating the negotiations on postreferendum arrangements with the help of UNMIS, the
United States and other partners. We hope that the
successful completion of the Southern Sudan
referendum will help to enhance confidence between
the two parties and help them make the necessary
compromises to find solutions to the future status of
Abyei and a host of other pending issues, as well as
accelerate the popular consultations in Southern
Kordofan and Blue Nile states. The parties now have
the chance to launch a new stage in their relationship
and to begin building a foundation for trust and
cooperation.
As members of the Council are aware, the
referendum for Abyei did not take place. Nonetheless,
the parties remain engaged in the search for a
resolution to the area’s future status. The AU HighLevel Implementation Panel has presented a set of

11-20932

proposals to the two parties, but they have not yet
agreed on any of the options or presented alternatives.
The talks are scheduled to resume on 27 January in
Khartoum at the presidency level.
Uncertainty over Abyei continues to present a
risk to peace and stability on the ground, and the Abyei
area remains tense and volatile. Incidents on 7 and
8 January in different areas in the northern part of
Abyei culminated in a significant confrontation
between Ngok Dinka police forces and Misseriya
communities on 9 January near the village of Makier
Abior, approximately 13 kilometres north-west of
Abyei town. Following the incidents, UNMIS was
repeatedly denied access to the area and could not
confirm the number of casualties, which is estimated at
between 20 and 60. Soon thereafter, reprisal operations
were launched by some of the affected Misseriya
community members against a convoy of southern
returnees while they were passing through Southern
Kordofan on their way to cross the border home.
UNMIS moved quickly to prevent any escalation
of violence, both through political intervention with
political leaders and by directing increased patrolling
on the ground. With UNMIS encouragement and
participation, an intercommunal conference was
quickly organized in Kadugli to address immediate
concerns over the impending migration of the
Misseriya, and a subsequent governmental meeting
took place yesterday to address outstanding security
needs in Abyei, returning internally displaced persons,
Southerners living in the North and vice versa. The
parties agreed to bolster security in Abyei, particularly
its northern part, with an additional two battalions of
joint integrated units, and to pull back the 300 Ngok
Dinka policemen who had come from Wau, in the
South, and had been deployed to northern Abyei posts,
which triggered Misseriya reactions. They also agreed
to completely disarm all communities in Abyei, to
escort returnees to safe destinations, and to ensure the
freedom of movement and security of migrants with
their cattle through Abyei and southwards into other
grazing areas in Southern Sudan.
UNMIS has increased both the size of its military
deployment to Abyei and its military and civilian
patrolling in the area in order to deter further attacks.
Movement restrictions were placed on UNMIS patrols
by both Ngok Dinka and Misseriya forces, which
impeded the Mission’s efforts in responding to the
violence. Furthermore, incidents involving the

3

S/PV.6468

commandeering of United Nations vehicles by and
direct threats to United Nations personnel by these
armed elements reoccurred, which cannot and will not
be tolerated.
These efforts to reduce tensions and prevent
violence can help contain the situation. However, the
continued absence of a final settlement for the future
status of Abyei leaves open the possibility of further
clashes between the communities on the ground. I
therefore call on the parties to redouble their efforts to
settle the Abyei dispute and display the same
leadership and courage they have displayed regarding
the Southern Sudan referendum.
Regarding Southern returnees, I welcome
statements from both parties on their commitment and
arrangements to protect and respect the rights of
Southerners in the North and Northerners in the South,
respectively. Over 1.2 million Southerners have
returned since the signing of the CPA, with a recent
surge since October 2010 involving approximately
160,000 Southern returnees. This process needs careful
handling to avoid a humanitarian crisis. The United
Nations is providing humanitarian support to the return
process and stands ready to provide additional
technical support as necessary. I welcome the recent
decision taken by the Government of Southern Sudan
to promote return and reintegration, in accordance with
internationally accepted principles of voluntariness,
safety and dignity.
Ahead of the referendum, the Government of
Southern Sudan pursued its road map for political
accommodation in the South with the signing of a
ceasefire framework agreement between the SPLA and
Lieutenant General George Athor. This is most
welcome. The implementation of the promises made by
the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement (SPLM)
during the all-party conference of October 2010 will
similarly be critical to consolidating Southern stability
in the post-referendum environment. UNMIS stands
ready to provide support and assistance to this process
and encourages the SPLM to move forward with it.
Regarding the popular consultations, the
achievements of the CPA and the future of governance
in Northern Sudan are also supposed to be reviewed
through popular consultations in Blue Nile and
Southern Kordofan. Unfortunately, however, no
sufficient political commitment has yet been
demonstrated or clarity of objectives provided by the

4

parties to meet the requirements of the peace process in
the two states. One can hardly say that even in Blue
Nile state, where elections have taken place, there is
real confidence that the popular consultations will be
carried out properly and lead to a solution to the
inequities that led to marginalization and conflict in the
past.
The popular consultations represent one of the
key final benchmarks of the CPA and require both
clarity and attention from the parties. Neither of them
can afford to leave grievances and fears between rival
communities in the two states unaddressed, and risk a
resumption of hostilities in the border areas. Progress
will absolutely need to be made on that front in the
next six months if the gains achieved by the peace
process so far are to be consolidated.
The
Southern
Sudan
self-determination
referendum is probably the single most important
foundation for the future peace and stability of the
Sudan and of the entire region.
The next few months will provide the basis for a
transition to the post-CPA environment. As with any
transition, it will be marked by a degree of uncertainty,
considerable expectations and hopes for some, and
fears of the new and unknown for others. Both the
SPLM and the National Congress Party need to
continue displaying the remarkable leadership,
statesmanship and political courage they have
demonstrated in the past few weeks to guide the Sudan
through this difficult period.
Whatever the referendum’s outcome, both
Northern and Southern Sudan will remain multi-ethnic,
multicultural and multireligious societies. Such
diversity is always the strength of nations, never their
weakness. With the conclusion of the CPA, both the
North and the South will need new constitutional
arrangements. This represents an important opportunity
for both of them to engage relevant stakeholders and
consolidate the peace and stability achieved under the
CPA.
The United Nations and the rest of the
international community will need to continue
supporting the parties through the rest of the peace
process and help to ensure that peace is maintained
between them while stability and democracy are
consolidated and deepened within them. The Sudan is
on the eve of a new dawn, and it is going to need a
heavy dose of encouragement and support from the

11-20932

S/PV.6468

international community to make sure that committed
implementation of the CPA signifies a final and
definitive break with the past and opens a new era of
prosperity and stability for all Sudanese.
The President: I thank Mr. Menkerios for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Benjamin Mkapa,
Chair of the Secretary-General’s Panel on the
Referenda in the Sudan.
Mr. Mkapa: I am grateful for the opportunity to
brief the Council once again on the Southern Sudan
referendum. My statement will be short, since I do not
have much to add to the statement that the SecretaryGeneral’s Panel issued two days ago.
During the week of polling, the Panel members
and I visited referendum centres in eight states, and the
Panel’s staff monitored the process in all Southern
states and across the North. Based on our own
observations and those of our staff in the field, as well
as on accounts conveyed by various interlocutors in the
Sudan, I can report on behalf of the Panel that we are
satisfied that the process so far has been conducted in a
peaceful and transparent manner, allowing the people
of Southern Sudan to express their will freely.
Preliminary statements issued by international observer
groups have made similar assessments of the process.
Our reports indicate that polling procedures were
properly followed overall. Polling centres generally
opened on time and were well staffed and stocked.
Referendum staff carried out their work in accordance
with established procedures, and security was
maintained at all locations monitored. The referendum
staff appeared to be well-trained in counting and resultaggregation procedures, including security and
transparency requirements. Ballots were counted in the
presence of observers and results posted at referendum
centres. The Panel has so far found no evidence to
suggest that there was any systematic or widespread
attempt to undermine the polling process.
We are now closely following the aggregation of
results. The process of transmitting the results from
nearly 3,000 referendum centres to county
subcommittees and state high committees, and then to
Juba and Khartoum, is under way. We understand that
any alleged errors or fraud will be thoroughly
investigated and that any results tainted by verified
cases of errors or fraud will be dealt with appropriately.

11-20932

A mere three months ago, when the Panel
undertook its first visit to the Sudan, the timely, orderly
and smooth conduct of polling was hard to imagine.
The dedication and work of the commissioners and
staff of the Southern Sudan Referendum Commission
and its Bureau, the registration and polling officers and
the security officers involved are to be commended.
As we stated on 16 January, we would like to
recognize the courage and leadership demonstrated by
President Omer Al-Bashir and First Vice-President
Salva Kiir Mayardit, as well their commitment to
implementing a major milestone of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement. In order for the outcome of the
referendum to be sustainable, it is essential that a
number of outstanding post-referendum issues between
the parties be resolved. The Panel has urged
governmental authorities and the Southern Sudan
Referendum Commission to make every effort to
ensure that all citizens are kept well informed of
progress towards the final results. The Panel also called
on the media and political forces to report on the
process in a responsible manner.
Both parties have given important and
unequivocal public assurances about respecting the
outcome of the referendum. Leaders of both parties
have also given assurances about the rights and safety
of Southerners in the North and Northerners in the
South. Early clarity on citizenship could ease some of
the anxiety felt by those communities. The positive
momentum achieved can be sustained only by further
demonstration of goodwill and political commitment
from both sides.
The President: I thank Mr. Mkapa for his
briefing.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Haile Menkerios for the support that
the United Nations Mission in the Sudan is providing
for the referendum process, as well as President Mkapa
for the work of the Secretary-General’s Panel. I also
thank both of them for their briefings this morning.
This has been an impressive United Nations operation.
Although we are concerned about events in
Abyei, we are very encouraged by the peaceful and
orderly conduct of the voting process in the
referendum and by the Panel’s assessment that the
voting process allowed the people of the Sudan to
express their will freely. Both the Intergovernmental

5

S/PV.6468

Authority on Development and the African Union
called the referendum free, fair and credible. The
Southern Sudan Referendum Commission and both
Sudanese parties should be highly commended for this
successful process. We welcome the timeline that the
Southern Sudan Referendum Commission has
established for the announcement of the results. It is
important that the timeline and the results, when
announced, be respected by all parties. We must all
work to ensure that the aggregation and counting
process takes place in an atmosphere of patience and
calm.
We deplore the clashes that took place in Abyei
between 7 and 10 January and deeply regret the loss of
life. We welcome the efforts of the parties’ local
leaders and of Special Representative Menkerios to
restore calm and secure the local peace agreement
reached on 13 January. We urge all parties to continue
to work to that end. Such clashes underline the urgent
need for reaching a lasting agreement on Abyei. We
urge the swift resumption of talks and call on the
parties to make the compromises necessary to secure
long-term peace and stability.
A similar spirit of compromise will be needed to
resolve crucial post-referendum issues, which include
the border, citizenship and wealth-sharing. We call on
the parties to show leadership in these areas, as they
have done on the referendum. The Security Council
remains united in its support for a peaceful and
credible referendum and for the full implementation of
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement.
I cannot close without addressing the situation in
Darfur, which remains of deep concern. The recent
abduction of United Nations Humanitarian Air Service
employees in West Darfur highlights the lack of
security in Darfur and its impact on humanitarian
operations there. We call on all parties to cease
hostilities immediately and to ensure full and
unhindered access for humanitarian workers and the
staff of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur. We continue to support the work
of African Union-United Nations Chief Mediator
Djibril Bassolé and his efforts to negotiate a peaceful
settlement in Darfur. Genuine and enduring peace in
Darfur will require a comprehensive and inclusive
agreement. We therefore call on all rebel groups to join
the peace process without delay or preconditions.

6

Ms. Rice (United States of America): I also want
to thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Menkerios and President Mkapa for their
important briefings today.
This is a historic moment. I join President Obama
in congratulating the people and leaders of the Sudan
on the successful completion of voting on the
referendum on independence. The people of Southern
Sudan, after decades of war and more than 2 million
killed, have cast their votes peacefully and expressed
their will. The promise of self-determination was made
to the Southern Sudanese people in 2005. Thanks to the
commitment of the people of the Sudan and the support
of the international community, that promise was
finally fulfilled. Let us not underestimate what this
referendum means to the people of Southern Sudan. We
have all heard reports of long lines forming overnight
on 8 January and of people standing in line for hours to
vote. We have even heard of a case in which a river
ferry broke down and voters jumped into the
presumably crocodile-infested river and swam across
to reach the polling station. As President Obama said
after the polling closed,
“The past week has given the world renewed faith
in the prospect of a peaceful, prosperous future
for all of the Sudanese people — a future that the
American people long to see in Sudan.”
The United States commends the men and women
of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS)
for their outstanding work. Thanks to their tireless
efforts under daunting challenges and difficult
circumstances, the people of the Sudan have been able
to take a huge step forward on the path towards the full
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA), which ended a 23-year civil war.
My
Government
congratulates
Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Menkerios,
who is performing an incredibly difficult job with
grace and wisdom. We thank him.
We also welcome the work that the Southern
Sudan Referendum Commission, the Southern Sudan
Referendum Bureau, the Government of the Sudan and
the Government of Southern Sudan have done to
ensure that this historic referendum occurred on time
and peacefully and reflected the will of the people.
We welcome the 16 January statement from the
Secretary-General’s Panel on the Referenda in the

11-20932

S/PV.6468

Sudan, in which it stated that it was satisfied that the
referendum process had “allowed the people of
Southern Sudan to express their will freely”. A number
of other observer missions have also already released
preliminary statements. On 17 January, the Carter
Center called the referendum peaceful and credible and
broadly consistent with international standards. The
Arab League stated that the process was “in line with
international standards”. The European Union observer
mission commended a “peaceful, credible voting
process with overwhelming turnout”. On 16 January,
the Inter-Governmental Authority on Development and
the African Union called the referendum “free, fair and
credible.” We commend the work of the hundreds of
international and thousands of domestic observers. The
United States continues to urge everyone to respect the
results of the referendum.
Of course, we must all focus on the challenging
and promising road ahead. We urge the parties to return
to the negotiating table as soon as possible to negotiate
a rapid and sustainable resolution to the question of
Abyei and other outstanding CPA issues. The United
States fully supports the efforts of the Chair of the
African Union High-Level Implementation Panel,
President Thabo Mbeki, to facilitate these agreements.
We reiterate that any resolution regarding the future of
the Abyei area must be reached with the consent of
both parties and through a political settlement or a
process that respects the rights and needs of those
communities traditionally associated with the area.
Along with the status of Abyei, there are other
outstanding issues that require urgent attention, such as
border demarcation, citizenship, wealth-sharing
agreements, natural resource management, the division
of the national debt, security arrangements, currency
arrangements and international treaties and legal
obligations, which are all equally important. We also
consider peaceful, inclusive popular consultations in
Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan states that reflect the
will of the people to be essential components of the
implementation of the CPA. We call on the parties to
bring the same spirit to those negotiations as they have
brought to the conduct of the referendum itself.
For all of the inspiring events in the Sudan over
the past week, the United States laments the loss of life
in Abyei and the border region and reiterates its deep
concern regarding the arrest, detention and harassment
of human rights activists and journalists by the
Government of the Sudan’s security forces, which

11-20932

prevented both a Sudan People’s Liberation Movement
leader and an Umma Party leader from conducting
television interviews. In addition, four university
students were arrested in separate incidents for trying
to host discussions. We urge Council members to join
us in calling on the Government of the Sudan to release
those who have been imprisoned unjustly, including
those jailed for exercising such basic rights as freedom
of speech, freedom of expression and freedom of
assembly.
As President Obama has made clear, the United
States wants the leaders in the Sudan to choose the
path of peace and prosperity for all of the Sudanese
people. He has extended the hand of the United States
in that spirit. In order for that future to be realized,
however, the Sudan, too, must work with the
international community. That includes cooperating
with UNMIS and the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) to facilitate
full freedom of access and movement for United
Nations peacekeepers and for humanitarian workers.
That access is especially important given the
alarming reports that Sudanese armed forces have
burned homes and blocked civilians’ access to
UNAMID in Khor Abeche and that the Government of
the Sudan violated the North-South ceasefire with
repeated aerial bombardments into the Kiir River
valley. That is in addition to the all-too-frequent
reports of aerial bombardment in Jebel Marra and the
Government of the Sudan’s ongoing refusal to grant
UNAMID patrols access to affected populations in
spite of the status-of-forces agreement.
We are deeply saddened and troubled by the news
that on 13 January three Bulgarian helicopter crew
members contracted to the World Food Programme
were kidnapped in Darfur. We convey our condolences
to their families and we urge the Government of the
Sudan to do its utmost to facilitate their safe return.
We recall that 40,000 residents of Darfur were
displaced from their homes in December alone.
Civilians continue to live under the threat of attack and
sexual and gender-based violence. It is therefore in all
of our interests to continue to work to prevent
genocide.
The United States again calls on the Government
of the Sudan to immediately halt aerial bombardments.
We condemn attacks on civilians in the strongest
possible terms. Obtaining a ceasefire between the

7

S/PV.6468

Government of the Sudan and the armed movements
should be the immediate objective of the peace
process. The political process for a Darfur peace
agreement must be reinvigorated. All relevant parties
must come back to the negotiating table.
As we discussed during consultations on the
Sudan on 6 January, the unity shown by the Council
has gone a long way towards supporting the parties as
they have stayed on the path of peace. We need to
continue to watch closely as the parties continue to
implement the CPA. As progress is made, we should
welcome it and offer continued encouragement. But
just as important, we need to be prepared to insist upon
and to support the full and final implementation of the
CPA on such issues as protection of minorities and
rejection of proxy militias and other threats to peace
and security in the Sudan.
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in
French): Allow me also to thank President Mkapa and
Mr. Menkerios for their very detailed briefings on the
recent consultative referendum on Southern Sudan.
I would like to comment briefly on the
referendum, which took place in a peaceful
atmosphere, as well as on the challenges that remain to
be addressed and the situation in Darfur.
The referendum held on 9 January marked a
decisive turning point in the history of the Sudan. By
respecting the timetable set out by the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement, the Sudanese parties once again
showed their courage and their capacity to overcome
their differences to push forward peace and stability in
their country. I would therefore like to pay them a
warm tribute. My delegation urges them to show the
same restraint until the announcement of the final
results and to respect the outcome.
We would also like to congratulate the Southern
Sudan Referendum Commission for having ensured the
smooth conduct of the ballot. We are also grateful to
the various international observers, who made it
possible to monitor the ballot and affirmed its fair and
democratic nature. Likewise, the support of the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS), the United
Nations Development Programme and other partners
deserve to be commended here.
We remain convinced that the same clearsightedness shown by the Sudanese parties during the
referendum will prevail in addressing the no less

8

crucial issues that remain to be settled, in particular
border demarcation, citizenship, the sharing of
resources, the management of assets and debts, and
security provisions. The future of fraternal relations
and peaceful coexistence between the North and the
South depend on that.
To that end, we are encouraged by the
establishment of a framework to guide the talks on
those important issues, and we would like to commend
the role played by the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel in that regard. Such progress,
although minimal, merits support. The international
community should encourage the parties to continue
their efforts and to make the necessary concessions in
order to reach a final agreement.
Moreover, we urge the parties to take courageous
decisions in order to find an agreement on the issue of
Abyei. The clashes that occurred during the voting
show the volatility of the situation in that region. They
also require the strengthening of UNMIS in the most
sensitive areas of the border between the North and the
South.
The success of the referendum in the Southern
Sudan should not conceal the precarious nature of the
situation in Darfur and its impact on civilian
populations and humanitarian workers. Here too, the
mobilization of the international community is
important. We must keep the pressure on all parties and
support the peace process, which is having difficulty in
moving forward.
We welcome the joint efforts of Joint Chief
Mediator Djibril Bassolé and Qatar that have made it
possible to establish committees for talks between
Khartoum and the Liberation and Justice Movement on
issues such as power-sharing, wealth and security.
We reiterate our support for the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID). We also call on the Sudanese authorities
to lift the restrictions imposed on UNAMID and
humanitarian workers in order to allow them access to
the needy populations in Darfur. Gabon hopes to see
the Doha talks end in an inclusive peaceful agreement.
To conclude, my delegation would like to
encourage the international community to invest in the
economic development of the Southern Sudan in order
to guarantee lasting peace and security, whatever the
outcome of the referendum.

11-20932

S/PV.6468

Finally, my delegation will support the draft
presidential statement to be adopted at the end of our
discussions.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): My delegation joins
others in thanking the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ambassador Haile Menkerios, and
President Mkapa, Chair of the Secretary-General’s
Panel on the Referenda in the Sudan, for their
respective valuable briefings to the Council.
South Africa welcomes the convening of this
important meeting, and we wish to focus our
intervention on the following three pertinent issues: the
referendum process and post-referendum issues, the
need for continued political leadership and
engagement, and the need to address the situation in
Darfur.
South Africa followed the referendum process
very closely, with the participation of 35 South
Africans in the 110-member African Union (AU)
observer mission. We pay tribute to the sterling work
done by the Southern Sudan Referendum Commission
and the Southern Sudan Referendum Bureau in
executing what many have described as a historic and
momentous achievement in the implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement.
We note that, between 9 and 15 January, the
citizens of Southern Sudan, located in the South and
the North and spread across the globe in eight
countries, exercised their right to vote and to determine
their future during the referendum on self-determination.
The registration of more than 3.9 million voters and a
voter turnout of more than 80 per cent are testament to
the resolve and determination of the Southern
Sudanese to exercise their right to vote and of their
faith in the referendum process.
We commend the role of the Southern Sudan
Referendum Commission, which, in four months,
achieved such astonishing success, and of the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan and the international
community, which provided support for the process.
My delegation joins previous speakers in saluting the
millions of people who participated in the voting
process for achieving this important milestone.
Instructive in that regard are the preliminary
statements of the African Union observer mission on
the Southern Sudan referendum, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, and the Chair of the

11-20932

Secretary-General’s Panel on the Referenda in the
Sudan, who is here today, that the referendum process
was free, fair and credible and that it was conducted in
accordance with the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
and the Referendum Act.
We believe that it is vital that the peace and calm
that characterized the referendum process be
maintained as we await the outcome of the referendum.
The observance of the rule of law is critical; in that
regard, all aspects of the referendum must be
conducted in compliance with the legislative
framework set out in the Referendum Act, and all
timelines respected.
On the need for continued political leadership and
cooperation, South Africa commends the personal
leadership and courage shown by President Al-Bashir
and First Vice-President Salva Kiir Mayardit, in
particular on facilitating a conducive and peaceful
environment in which citizens were able to participate
freely and without fear in casting their ballot. My
delegation also welcomes the commitment of the
parties to respecting the outcome of the results.
We are impressed by the call made by First
Vice-President Salva Kiir for forgiveness and
reconciliation, and for his security forces to protect the
citizens of the North and their property in the South.
That is demonstrative of the political will and desire to
secure a peaceful future for all the people of the Sudan
and echoes similar sentiments for coexistence and
cooperation previously expressed by President
Al-Bashir. My delegation believes that the desire for
cooperation and to secure peaceful post-referendum
relations augurs well for peace and stability between
the North and the South.
We call on all the parties in the Sudan to continue
and maintain their close cooperation, whatever the
outcome of the referendum may be. However, the
successful holding of the referendum is not an end in
itself, but represents a critical step in an onward
journey to sustainable peace, stability and
development. The international community should
therefore continue to focus on the many challenges still
confronting the Sudan.
In that regard, we are convinced that the work of
the African Union High-Level Implementation Panel on
the Sudan, chaired by former President Mbeki, continues
to play an important facilitation role in finding mutually
agreed outcomes to the post-referendum issues, such as

9

S/PV.6468

external debt, citizenship and border security
arrangements. We encourage the parties to continue their
cooperation with the Panel, and to invoke the same
political will and level of commitment in guiding them
towards agreement on the remaining issues.
As the violent and deadly events in Abyei last
week clearly demonstrated, sustainable peace will
require the continued commitment of the parties, as
well as full implementation of the existing agreements.
My delegation welcomes the agreement reached
between the communities that brought an end to the
hostilities and violence. We regret the loss of life
suffered during the clashes. Those events again
underscore the urgency and importance of concluding
the political negotiation on Abyei, as facilitated by the
AU Panel. My delegation remains convinced that such
challenges are not insurmountable. It remains confident
that such issues can be resolved with the continued
support of the international community, as well as the
necessary political will of the parties.
With regard to Darfur, the deteriorating security
situation resulting from the clashes between the
Sudanese Armed Forces and the Sudan Liberation
Army (SLA)-Minni Minawi and the Justice and
Equality Movement has led to the displacement of
more than 40,000 people. We call on all the parties to
cease hostilities and for the SLA-Minni Minawi to
recommit to a comprehensive ceasefire agreement.
My delegation is deeply concerned about the lack
of progress in the Doha negotiations, and we urge
parties to redouble their efforts to find a peaceful and
comprehensive solution to the conflict in Darfur. We
encourage the Government of the Sudan, the Justice
and Equality Movement and the Liberation and Justice
Movement to give consideration to the proposals
presented by the mediation as a basis for seeking
compromise and agreement to conclude these peace
processes. We also encourage the launching of the
inclusive political process, in the form of a DarfurDarfur conference and with the objective of reaching a
global political agreement, as soon as conditions allow.
Durable peace and development are brought
about by cooperation rather than confrontation and by
ballots rather than bullets. It is important that the
parties in Darfur be inspired by the progress made in
the North-South conflict and collectively seek a
peaceful and negotiated solution to the conflict in
Darfur. The international community should stand

10

ready to assist the people of the Sudan in finding a
lasting solution to that conflict.
In conclusion, I wish to commend the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan; Special Representative
Menkerios; the Secretary-General’s Panel on the
Referenda in the Sudan, led by former President
Mr. Benjamin Mkapa; the African Union High-Level
Panel on Darfur, chaired by former President
Mr. Thabo Mbeki; and the Joint African Union-United
Nations Chief Mediator for Darfur, Mr. Djibrill
Bassolé, for their continued and tireless commitment to
bringing peace and stability to the Sudan.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Like others, I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Sudan, Mr. Haile Menkerios,
and President Mkapa for their comprehensive briefings
and for the very significant work they have undertaken
thus far. We are encouraged by their analysis and
evaluation of the problems that still lie ahead.
Portugal welcomes the conclusion of the
generally peaceful and orderly polling process for the
referendum on the self-determination of Southern
Sudan, consistent with international standards, and
congratulates the Sudanese people on their patience
and peaceful determination to cast their ballots in an
orderly fashion. We also congratulate the leaders of the
Sudan on their historic accomplishment. This was
indeed a milestone, in terms not only of the
implementation of the 2005 Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA), but also of underlining the Sudanese
people’s attachment to the democratic process.
Let me also commend the work of the Southern
Sudan Referendum Commission in Khartoum and in
Juba for its efforts to make the referendum happen,
despite serious time constraints and numerous
challenges. Portugal also commends the two parties to
the CPA for maintaining the political commitment
required to ensure that the peace process moves
forward.
Portugal would like to voice appreciation for the
support provided by the United Nations Mission in the
Sudan, and for the work of the observer groups,
including the very significant European Union election
observation mission, which travelled throughout the
Sudan to assess the situation. We also extend a word of
gratitude and appreciation to the Secretary-General’s
Panel on the Referenda in the Sudan for its work.

11-20932

S/PV.6468

The process is not finished, however. The
transmission of results from nearly 3,000 referendum
centres has only just begun. We call on the people and
the parties of the Sudan to exercise the necessary
restraint until the Southern Sudan Referendum
Commission announces the final result of the
referendum, for which timelines have already been set.
We believe it essential that, during this period, all
citizens be kept well-informed of progress made
towards the final results. We call on all the parties to
respect the outcome of the referendum, which
translates the expression of the free will of the people,
and to refrain from any unilateral action.
While the Sudan awaits the provisional and final
results, the protection of the fundamental rights of all
Sudanese citizens is paramount. We therefore urge the
parties to the CPA to reassure people of all nationalities
in the Sudan, including Southerners in the North and
Northerners in the South, that their rights, safety and
property will continue to be respected.
Despite the remarkable operational and political
achievement that the referendum represents, the work
of completing the implementation of the CPA is not
over. It will require persistent, patient and methodical
negotiation by both parties and a spirit of compromise
and cooperation. We are encouraged by the public
commitments made by President Al-Bashir and first
Vice-President Salva Kiir to continuing negotiations on
outstanding CPA issues once the results have been
announced.
In that context, it is of the utmost importance that
the parties reach an agreement on Abyei, the absence of
which is responsible for ongoing instability and acts of
violence that we strongly deplore. Along with the future
of the Abyei region, my delegation also recalls the need
for timely and transparent popular consultations in
Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile states.
Unfortunately, the peaceful climate of the
referendum cannot be extended to Darfur. We remain
deeply concerned by the increase in violence and
insecurity in Darfur. We condemn the kidnapping on
13 January of three members of the United Nations
Humanitarian Air Service and urge their immediate
release. Portugal calls on the parties to cease hostilities
immediately, to ensure full and unhindered access for
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur throughout the mission area, and to allow

11-20932

humanitarian workers to provide assistance to all
populations in need.
My delegation continues to underscore the need
for a political resolution to the crisis and urge all
groups to join and actively engage in the peace process
without further delay or preconditions.
In conclusion, over the past two weeks, the
Sudanese authorities conducted the referendum on selfdetermination for Southern Sudan, as envisaged in the
2005 Comprehensive Peace Agreement that ended 22
years of civil war. The calm and orderly environment
in which it took place gives us renewed faith in a
peaceful and prosperous future for all Sudanese. To
achieve that goal, we need the continuing engagement
of all parties, including international and bilateral
partners. It is of fundamental importance that the
international community continue to support both the
North and the South, regardless of the referendum
outcome. Portugal stands ready to play its part.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): Allow me to join previous
speakers in expressing Brazil’s appreciation to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Sudan, Mr. Haile Menkerios, and President Benjamin
Mkapa for their briefings today.
My delegation is very pleased that the Southern
Sudan referendum was carried out peacefully and in a
transparent manner. The announcement by the Southern
Sudan Referendum Commission that the 60 per cent
threshold had been achieved, thus making the
referendum legally valid, is also encouraging. Brazil
welcomes the indications that the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement parties acknowledge that the voting process
was fair and their assurances that they will accept and
implement the results. We welcome the work of the
Secretary-General’s Panel on the Referenda in the
Sudan and its conclusion that the polling allowed the
Sudanese people to freely express their will.
Brazil has sent a team of observers to the Sudan.
They have reported that the voting proceeded well and
that the Sudanese people showed enthusiasm,
commitment, patience and determination. We therefore
salute, first and foremost, the Sudanese people for this
important achievement. Their leaders, as well as the
Southern Sudan Referendum Commission and its
Bureau, deserve our appreciation for their outstanding
work. We are also grateful for the support provided by
the United Nations. We commend Mr. Haile Menkerios
for his dedication and skilful work, and thank President

11

S/PV.6468

Mkapa and the members of the Panel for their
invaluable contribution.
Our collective attention now turns to the process
of counting the votes, which we hope will proceed in a
manner as orderly and effective as the registration and
voting, in an environment of calm and transparency. In
this phase as in the previous ones, the parties will have
a special responsibility to maintain public tranquillity
and ensure that the electoral process moves forward as
planned.
Nowhere is calm needed more right now than in
Abyei. We deeply regret the clashes that took place in
Abyei between 7 and 9 January. We welcome the fact
that Abyei communities have worked together to ease
tensions. We appreciate the efforts made by the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan and the Sudanese
authorities to contain hostilities and avoid escalation.
As we know, resolving the question of Abyei is
critical to sustainable peace in the Sudan. Therefore, no
effort should be spared to address the issue effectively
and definitively as soon as possible. Holding popular
consultations in the Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile
states is also imperative.
Given the key role played by the United Nations
in Sudan, we reiterate our call on all Sudanese parties
to fully respect and cooperate with the Organization, in
particular its representatives on the ground. In this
regard, we condemn in the strongest terms the recent
kidnapping of three United Nations Humanitarian Air
Service staff members.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Mr. Menkerios, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Sudan
and head of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan
(UNMIS), and Mr. Mkapa, Chair of the SecretaryGeneral’s Panel on the Referenda in the Sudan, for
their briefings.
The referendum in Southern Sudan has been
completed smoothly with the joint efforts made by the
North, the South and the international community. This
is an important step towards the full implementation of
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA), which
China welcomes. China also welcomes the
contributions made by such regional organizations as
the African Union, the League of Arab States, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
African Union Mission in the Sudan and the Secretary-

12

General’s Panel on the Referenda in the Sudan. We
thank them for their efforts, which contributed to the
smooth holding of the referendum.
The referendum in Southern Sudan is not an end
in itself. The ultimate goal of implementing the CPA
remains that of attaining sustainable peace, stability
and development in the Sudan. Regardless of the
outcome of the referendum, it is imperative to ensure
long-term peace and stability in the Sudan and the
wider region. We hope that the North and the South
will continue to engage in dialogue and consultations
in order to reach an early agreement on such issues as
Abyei, wealth-sharing and border demarcation so as to
further promote the North-South peace process.
China donated $500,000 to assist the Southern
Sudan Referendum Commission in the holding the
referendum. We also provided the Southern Sudan
Referendum Bureau with support in kind and sent a
team of observers to the Sudan. We are ready to work
with the international community and the parties
concerned and to continue to play an active and
constructive role in promoting the long-term peace,
stability and development of the Sudan.
China supports a peaceful and comprehensive
settlement of the Darfur issue, in particular by
addressing the root causes of the conflict. At present,
the security situation in Darfur is very fragile and the
humanitarian situation is facing a number of
difficulties. The root cause is the lack of a strong and
widely supported political agreement in Darfur. China
therefore calls on the Security Council and the
international community to strengthen their support to
the political process in Darfur and to urge the rebel
groups there to join the peace talks without conditions
or delay. We also support the continued efforts of
UNMIS to promote the political process in Darfur in
accordance with resolution 1935 (2010).
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I would like to
join other colleagues in thanking President Benjamin
Mkapa, Chair of the Secretary-General’s Panel on the
Referenda in the Sudan, and Mr. Menkerios, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Sudan, for their informative briefings and, more
important, for the commendable work they have been
doing.
It is a matter of great satisfaction that the
referendum in Southern Sudan was completed
successfully and peacefully over a one-week period. A

11-20932

S/PV.6468

very large number of eligible voters are reported to
have cast their ballots. By all accounts, the turnover
was well above the required threshold. The Southern
Sudan Referendum Commission and the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS), as well as
other international and regional organizations that
partnered with the South Sudanese authorities, deserve
our highest appreciation for the conduct of the
referendum. That it was conducted peacefully and
without violence is all the more remarkable.
The successful conduct of the referendum was an
important element in the implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement reached between the
Sudanese parties. The commitment of these parties,
expressed at the highest levels, to respecting the
outcome of the referendum is equally praiseworthy. We
commend this commitment and hope that the same
spirit of cooperation and commitment will be shown by
the parties to resolve the post-referendum issues that
remain to be agreed upon.
While the referendum was held without violence,
we witnessed during the course of the week a high and
worrying level of violence in the Abyei region, which
led to the loss of lives. This is cause for concern. We
urge the leaders of the Misseriya and Ngok Dinka
communities to show restraint and faithfully implement
the agreement mediated by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General. We commend Ambassador
Menkerios and UNMIS for their role in facilitating this
agreement.
The violence witnessed last week in Abyei should
remind us of the need to remain vigilant with regard to
the situation on the ground, which remains fragile. We
hope that the parties will cease their support for proxy
forces and seek to resolve all issues through
negotiation and dialogue.
The situation in Darfur also remains cause for
concern. The problem there requires dialogue with the
participation of all groups — not only those armed
groups but civil society at large. We therefore urge all
parties to return to the negotiating table and reach an
agreement expeditiously.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The self-determination referendum in
Southern Sudan marks the culmination of the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA) by the Sudanese parties. Russian
representatives were involved in monitoring the

11-20932

referendum; according to them, the polling took place
in a generally calm and free environment, and no
serious breaches of electoral procedures were noted.
Given the participation rate of approximately 80 per
cent of registered voters, the people were indeed able
to express their will freely.
Similar assessments were made by a range of
other international observers, including the United
Nations Secretary-General’s Panel led by Mr. Mkapa.
We note the significant work carried out by the United
Nations and Special Representative Menkerios in
preparation for the voting in the Sudan.
Russia was actively involved in international
efforts to ensure the timely and peaceful holding of the
referendum. This issue was one of the main topics
addressed during a recent telephone conversation
between President Medvedev of Russia and President
Al-Bashir of the Sudan, as well as during the visit of
the Sudanese Foreign Minister to Moscow and the talks
with the special representative of the Russian President
on the Sudan.
We now await the objective evaluation of the
outcome of the referendum. During this time, all
Sudanese parties and Sudan’s partners must refrain
from drawing hasty conclusions and making
declarations. We believe that the leaders of both the
North and the South will unswervingly uphold their
commitments to accepting any result as the expression
of the will of the population of the South.
In the coming six-month transition period, there
is a need to settle the main points of contention
between the Sudanese parties, such as the status of
Abyei, border demarcation, the distribution of oil
revenues, issues of citizenship and external debt. In
this context, we are particularly concerned by the
failure to settle the situation in the Abyei border region
where armed clashes led to fatalities during the
referendum. The parties to the CPA must ensure that
there are no clashes during the transition period. There
is undoubtedly a need for further active support for the
efforts of the parties in this regard.
Thus, the implementation of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement, which is the basis for a settlement in
the Sudan, is entering its final phase. The full
implementation of the CPA remains crucial to both the
governance in the Sudan and to peace and stability in
the subregion. Whatever the results of the referendum,
a new chapter is beginning in the political development

13

S/PV.6468

of this country. We trust that this phase will see the
aims of post-conflict recovery and social and economic
progress met, and ensure the democratic rights and
interests of Sudanese citizens.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Haile Menkerios for his outstanding
work heading the United Nations Mission in the Sudan.
I would also like to thank President Mkapa for his
briefing and his assessment of the process.
What has been reported to us here today about the
Sudan is good news. The self-determination referendum
began on the scheduled date and proceeded under
transparent and credible conditions. France commends
all participants who made it possible for this important
stage of the implementation of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement to take place, beginning with the
authorities in Khartoum and Juba, who embarked on a
constructive path of partnership rather than
confrontation. We also commend the SecretaryGeneral’s Panel on the Referenda in the Sudan, which
organized the voting under very difficult conditions,
and the United Nations Mission in the Sudan, which
provided logistical and technical support critical to
organizing the referendum in the largest country in
Africa. Lastly and most importantly, we commend the
people of the Sudan, whose peaceful participation,
according to the latest reports, far exceeded the 60 per
cent quorum required to validate the voting.
The parties, however, still have much to do to by
the end of the interim period provided for in the
Agreement. First, a solution must be found in Abyei.
Like previous speakers, we are concerned by the
violence that has occurred there. An agreement appears
to have been reached by the parties, but a lasting
solution must be outlined regarding the status of the
province and the coexistence of the ethnic groups
there. Moreover, post-referendum issues left pending
must be settled. The future of the relationship between
the North and the South depends on a shared
understanding of the placement of the border, security
matters, citizenship and the sharing of wealth.
Regarding Abyei, as with other post-referendum
matters, we support the facilitation work conducted by
the African Union High-Level Implementation Panel
headed by President Mbeki. We encourage the parties
to spare no effort and to make the concessions
necessary to a lasting peace.

14

While we welcome the successful conduct of the
referendum, we cannot fail to note the deterioration of
the situation in Darfur. What is taking place is not a
case of sporadic attacks; it is a war between the
Sudanese Armed Forces and rebel groups that is also
being waged against civilians, sowing death and
creating tens of thousands of newly displaced persons.
We are also very concerned about the Bulgarian pilots
abducted on 13 January.
Given the current instability, what is needed is for
the Sudanese Armed Forces and the rebel groups to
achieve a genuine ceasefire and sustainable peace. To
that end, peace talks must take place between the
combatants. The only framework for such negotiations
that exists today is the Doha talks, conducted by Joint
Chief Mediator Djibrill Bassolé with the support of the
Government of Qatar. This framework is open to
improvement. New incentives must be found to bring
the Sudanese Government and all rebel groups back to
the table. We must nurture this tool because it is today
the only means of bringing those warring parties
together.
We continue to lend our full support to the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur and strongly condemn the obstacles placed in
its way. It must redouble its efforts to protect civilians,
as required by its mandate. We believe that progress is
possible.
I would like to conclude by saying that there can
be no peace without justice in Darfur, in keeping with
the implementation of resolution 1593 (2005).
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like at the outset to express my appreciation to
Mr. Mkapa for his briefing. I also thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Sudan,
Mr. Menkerios, for his valuable preliminary remarks.
We would like to express our satisfaction with the
peaceful and impartial conduct of the referendum in
Southern Sudan, which has allowed the people to
exercise their right to self-determination in a free and
democratic manner. Such impartial and peaceful
circumstances are a clear result of the implementation
of the 2005 Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA)
and the efforts of the United Nations, the African
Union and the League of Arab States. We further recall
that the pledge by the Sudanese President to accept the
results of the referendum is cause for optimism and a
step in the right direction in the post-referendum

11-20932

S/PV.6468

period. We stress the importance of the bonds linking
the North and the South and of coexistence and
cooperation between them, irrespective of the results of
the referendum, including cooperation within a new
political framework in the service of their mutual
interests.
We also stress the importance of following up on
such pending matters as the situation in Abyei and
post-referendum issues, including citizenship, wealthsharing, oil and water revenues, debt and others. On
the subject of Abyei, we commend the role of
Mr. Menkerios and the parties to the CPA, as well as
the local leadership, in containing the recent clashes.
We call on those parties and local leaders to resume
their efforts to reach an agreement on Abyei.
We also welcome the efforts of the State of Qatar
to reach a peace agreement in Darfur, in parallel with
the new strategy of the Sudanese Government in this
matter, and we stress that such an agreement would
have positive consequences for the overall situation in
the Sudan.
In conclusion, we praise the work of the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan and the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): This is the first time that
Germany is taking the floor in the Council as one of the
new non-permanent members. Allow me to express my
country’s determination to assume the responsibility
associated with membership in the Security Council.
Germany will contribute to the work of the Security
Council in the interest of the United Nations as a
whole.
Like others, I would like to express our gratitude
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for the Sudan, Mr. Haile Menkerios, and to President
Benjamin Mkapa for their informed and encouraging
briefings.
Germany welcomes the peaceful voting during
the referendum and joins others in congratulating the
parties to the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA)
and the people of the Sudan. Germany also extends its
gratitude to the Southern Sudan Referendum
Commission in Khartoum and the Southern Sudan
Referendum Bureau in Juba. Without their tireless
efforts and careful preparations, this success would not
have been possible. Germany is also grateful for the
invaluable contribution of the United Nations Mission

11-20932

in the Sudan under the leadership of Special
Representative Menkerios. We commend all domestic
and international monitoring teams that followed the
process closely.
My country took part in the observer mission of
the European Union, and Germany also supported voter
education, continues to support the Southern Sudan
Police Service and is engaging in intense political
dialogue with the parties. We are happy to have been
able to contribute to the success of the referendum
process.
All parties in the Sudan now need to continue to
cooperate in good faith in the resolution of their
differences. Multiple and serious challenges remain.
The violence in Abyei during the first days of the
referendum demonstrated that a swift and durable
solution of the question of Abyei was of the utmost
importance. We urge all parties in the area to refrain
from using violence and to seek peaceful solutions to
their conflicts. We urgently call upon the parties to the
CPA to reach an agreement on Abyei as well as on
other remaining CPA and post-referendum issues, such
as citizenship, the rights of Northerners in the South
and of Southerners in the North, wealth sharing, border
demarcation and security arrangements. All these
issues have the potential to undo the progress realized
so far.
We therefore suggest that the Sudan Consultative
Forum, under the joint chairmanship of Thabo Mbeki
as Head of the African Union High Level
Implementation Panel on the Sudan and the United
Nations, meet at the earliest convenience to address
those questions.
The parties and the Security Council also need to
look beyond the CPA and be prepared to act swiftly to
address the challenges ahead and prevent future
conflict. In any event, the Security Council and the
international community will have to continue to
extend their support to institution-building in South
Sudan.
Furthermore, we must not lose sight of the
developments in the Northern part of the Sudan. It is in
the interest of regional stability to provide a
perspective there, including an economic perspective to
master the upcoming challenges. Debt relief, free trade
and economic and development cooperation in the
North and the South are necessary to open a path
towards a peaceful and prosperous future.

15

S/PV.6468

The positive news on the referendum must not
divert our attention from the situation in Darfur. We are
very concerned about the continuing violence in that
region and about the displacement of thousands of
people. The situation of children in particular should be
one of our primary concerns. We call upon all parties
to the conflict to fully respect the humanitarian
principles, including humanitarian access.

The referendum in the Sudan shows what the
Council can achieve for the maintenance of
international peace and security if it acts in a timely
and united manner that includes clear messages. We all
know that huge challenges remain for peace and
stability in the Sudan. Germany is ready to contribute
to the work of the Security Council towards a peaceful
and prosperous future for the Sudan.

We are especially concerned about the abduction
by an unidentified armed group of three Bulgarian
members of the United Nations Humanitarian Air
Service in Darfur. We demand their immediate release.

Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): My first words must be to
congratulate President Omer Hassan Al-Bashir, First
Vice-President Salva Kiir and others leaders of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) for steadfastly
steering the tortuous process that led to the recently
concluded referendum in Southern Sudan. I should also
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Haile Menkerios and President Benjamin Mkapa, Chair
of the Secretary-General’s Panel on the Referenda in
the Sudan, for their comprehensive briefings today.

We also repeat that those responsible for the most
serious crimes of concern to the international
community as a whole committed in Darfur must be
brought to justice. In that context, we recall resolution
1593 (2005).
We support the Doha peace talks and call upon all
parties to participate in the peace process hosted by the
Government of Qatar, as well as to cooperate with
Joint African Union-United Nations Mediator Bassolé.
We expect all parties to carefully study the proposals
elaborated by the mediation in Qatar and we urge all
parties to the conflict in Darfur to continue
negotiations and to conclude a ceasefire agreement
immediately and without preconditions.
We repeat our calls to ensure full and unhindered
access for the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) throughout the
mission area. While we support all efforts by
UNAMID, particular attention must be paid to the
mission’s core mandate, namely, the protection of
civilians and humanitarian access.
For several years now, the Security Council has
assumed responsibility for the situation in the Sudan
and the implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement, which led to the Southern Sudan
referendum. The determination and the unity of the
Council have been key to the negotiations and the
preparations that preceded the referendum. The parties
to the CPA were always able to count on the support of
the Council. At the same time, what the Council
expected from the parties in the Sudan was very clear.
By holding this meeting today, three days after the
conclusion of the polling, the Security Council again
sends a strong message of concern and responsibility to
the parties and people in the Sudan.

16

To say that the referendum represents a significant
milestone for the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
would be a gross understatement. Regardless of its
outcome, the fact that it was conducted without rancor
has opened up a new vista for the Sudan, the subregion
and Africa as a whole. Nigeria sent a team of observers
that joined its counterparts from other countries and
organizations, including the United Nations, to witness
the conduct of this historic exercise. We are satisfied
with the reports, and particularly gratified, that the vote
took place in a relatively peaceful, orderly and
transparent atmosphere in spite of initial uncertainties
and apprehension. By living up to their obligations, the
parties to the CPA — the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement and the National Congress Party — have
contributed significantly to this landmark achievement.
We therefore commend them, as well as the Southern
Sudan Referendum Commission and the Southern
Sudan Referendum Bureau, for overcoming the
daunting challenges of conducting a credible vote. We
also commend the United Nations Mission in the Sudan
(UNMIS) for providing the technical and logistical
support that greatly facilitated the vote.
In that regard, I want to note the complaint of
Mr. Menkerios regarding the freedom of movement of
UNMIS, as we often do with regard to that of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID). May I also acknowledge that,
through the appointment of President Mkapa and his
team, the United Nations has enhanced its role in the
referendum process.

11-20932

S/PV.6468

I would be remiss not to acknowledge the critical
role that the Security Council has played, not only
through its mission to the Sudan but also by remaining
united and keeping the subject high on its agenda.
As we await the final result of the voting, we call
on the parties not only to remain calm but especially to
continue to respect their obligations and refrain from
any acts capable of undermining the process. Nigeria is
pleased that the parties have unequivocally restated
their commitment to accept the outcome of the
referendum in good faith. It is our hope that the
successful conclusion of the referendum will help to
promote very positive post-referendum relations
between the North and the South.
Both parties should draw the inspiration to work
tirelessly between now and July — the interim period —
to complete the key outstanding tasks under the CPA.
More especially, they should spare no efforts in reaching
workable compromises on the Abyei question, the
North-South border, popular consultations in the states
of Blue Nile and South Kordofan and security
arrangements between the North and the South.
Mutually satisfactory agreement is also required on the
issues of citizenship, oil, water resources, assets and
liabilities, currency and economic cooperation.
We commend the African Union’s High-Level
Implementation Panel on the Sudan, led by President
Thabo Mbeki, for facilitating the negotiations towards
a framework agreement between the parties. The
Panel’s role in fostering a stable relationship between
the North and the South in the long run cannot be
overemphasized. We therefore urge the Panel to
intensify its efforts in the interim period.
The Council and the international community
should not be lulled into ignoring the enormity of the
challenges that still exist in Southern Sudan by the
euphoria of the referendum. While attaining
independence is an inalienable aspiration, the real
business of State-building will become even more
acute in the South with rising expectations of
economic, political and social transformation.
Adequate attention must therefore be given to
managing people’s great expectations through good
governance and the sound management of scarce
resources and opportunities. Nigeria recognizes that
Southern Sudanese leaders cannot achieve these things
acting alone. Now more than ever, the Council and the
international community must stand in solidarity with

11-20932

Southern Sudan. Indeed, our solidarity will be put to
the test in the type of assistance that we give to
Southern Sudan.
More than ever, greater political engagement
between the North and the South and increased
external assistance and pressure will be required to
solve their outstanding issues. The Council’s role will
be more meaningful if it remains as united, resolute
and committed as it has been in the past. We urge the
African Union (AU), the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, neighbouring countries and bilateral
partners to also remain engaged. We do hope that the
forthcoming high-level meeting on the Sudan on the
margins of the AU Summit in Addis Ababa will
reinforce the message of peace, solidarity and stability
in the Sudan and in the region.
On Darfur, Nigeria remains gravely concerned
about the increase in violence and insecurity and
condemns in the strongest terms the kidnapping of
three members of the United Nations Humanitarian Air
Service. We commend the work of UNAMID under
Ibrahim Gambari. We regret that a comprehensive
peace agreement has yet to be finalized, despite the
concerted and rigorous efforts of Djibrill Bassolé, the
Joint Chief Negotiator. We call for the cessation of
hostilities and the immediate release of the three
members of the United Nations Humanitarian Air
Service. We reiterate our call on the Government of the
Sudan, the Justice and Equality Movement and other
factions to resume the Doha talks without
preconditions. We have an obligation to ensure that the
Doha process does not lose credibility.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by expressing my personal pleasure
and that of Colombia in taking the floor for the first
time as a non-permanent member of this Council. We
do so in celebration of an historic event, which is the
outcome of a process emanating from a peace
agreement that will have great repercussions for the
people of the Sudan and the continent of Africa. I
endorse the thanks expressed to Mssrs. Menkerios and
Mkapa for their briefings, which clearly described the
evolution of recent events in the Sudan.
Indeed, with the conclusion of the polling process
in the Southern Sudan referendum, a major step was
taken towards achieving a peace that we hope will be
stable and durable and calls for the full implementation
of the provisions of the 2005 Comprehensive Peace

17

S/PV.6468

Agreement (CPA). Although the process was not free
of incident, as many previous speakers have
recognized, it is to be noted that the polling took place
in a generally peaceful climate and with broad
participation. We trust that the ballot count and the
posting of final results will be undertaken smoothly
and without incidents that would jeopardize the
peaceful conclusion of the process.
We congratulate the people of the Sudan, the
Southern Sudan Referendum Commission, the
Secretary-General’s Panel on the Referenda in the
Sudan, the United Nations Mission in the Sudan and
electoral observers for their work and the results
achieved so far. Independently of the outcome of the
referendum, and with the objective of achieving a
peaceful and mutually beneficial relationship between
the parties, it is essential to find lasting solutions to all
pending economic, political and social issues.

Sudan,
and
Mr.
Haile
Menkerios,
Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Sudan,
for their briefings. We are encouraged by the smooth
completion of the voting process and the assurances of
the parties to the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
(CPA) that they will respect the result of the Southern
Sudan referendum. Furthermore, in the sensitive time
following the end of the voting, it is vital that the
parties ensure a peaceful and credible conclusion to the
referendum process. It is also important to remind all
stakeholders that only the Southern Sudan Referendum
Commission is authorized to declare the final results of
the referendum.
We commend the Secretary-General’s Panel on
the Referenda in the Sudan for its efforts to monitor
and assess the referendum process. Its presence and
that of international observers have been indispensable
in ensuring the credibility of the referendum process.

To that end, Colombia supports the work
undertaken by the African Union High-Level Panel on
the Sudan, successfully headed by President Mbeki.
We urge the parties to cooperate effectively in seeking
concrete outcomes that will make it possible to identify
the framework governing relations between North and
South upon the conclusion of the interim period
provided for in the Peace Agreement.

We take positive note of the parties’ decision to
continue negotiations on outstanding issues after the
conclusion of the referendum process. We urge them to
redouble their efforts to reach agreement on these
issues, including wealth-sharing, the management of
assets and debts, citizenship and voter security
arrangements, before the end of the interim period in
July 2011.

We should now reflect on the support to be
provided by the Security Council to the implementation
of post-CPA commitments. We would like to reiterate
and share the general opinion of members of the
Council regarding the worrisome situation in Abyei.
The potential for conflict will persist so long as
agreements are not reached on the status and
administration of the area. Similarly, we believe that, in
line with commitments contained in the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement, the popular consultations in Southern
Kordofan and Blue Nile states should be held in a free,
timely and transparent manner.

We welcome the efforts of the African Union
High-Level Implementation Panel in facilitating
negotiations between the parties. As an important part
of the CPA, a solution has to be found with regard to
Abyei in the coming period.

Finally, we restate our support for the peace
process in Darfur led by the African Union and the
United Nations and urge all rebel movements to join
this process immediately and unconditionally.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
I thank Mr. Benjamin Mkapa, Chair of the
Secretary-General’s Panel on the Referenda in the

18

Bosnia and Herzegovina is of the view that now
is the right time for the international community and
the United Nations to anticipate their future
engagement in the Sudan. Special attention should be
given to economic development and extensive
cooperation between the North and the South as a
crucial part of long-term stability in the region.
As for the situation in Abyei, we are concerned
about the recent violence there. It is important that the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS)
continue to closely monitor the situation in Abyei and
that it remain careful to prevent the deterioration of the
security situation there. We welcome the activities of
UNMIS designed to increase its presence in Abyei. We
also welcome the increased presence of UNMIS at hot
spots in order to prevent a possible worsening of the
security situation.

11-20932

S/PV.6468

With regard to restrictions on UNMIS freedom of
movement, we call upon the Sudanese authorities to
ensure such freedom of movement. We commend the
efforts of UNMIS to boost activities related to its
protection mandate. It is of the utmost importance that
all parties cooperate fully with UNMIS with respect to
the protection of civilians.
We are concerned by the recent upsurge of
violence in Darfur. We call upon all parties to cease
hostilities and to ensure freedom of movement and
access for UNMIS and humanitarian workers to the
affected areas and populations in need.
We reiterate our full support for the United
Nations- and African Union-led peace process in Doha
and the mediation efforts of Joint Chief Mediator
Bassolé. It is imperative that all parties seize the
opportunity offered by the Doha peace talks, and we
urge them to join the process without preconditions or
further delay.
Finally, we underline that it is of the utmost
importance that the United Nations and the
international
community
continue
to
deliver
humanitarian assistance, monitor the humanitarian
situation on the ground, and respond duly to any
humanitarian crises that may arise.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to extend my greetings and thanks
to Mr. Haile Menkerios and President Benjamin Mkapa
for their briefings on the voting in the referendum in
Southern Sudan. They have done a praiseworthy job
and are both brilliant sons of Africa. We offer them our
appreciation and gratitude.
We listened to their affirmations that the voting
process was free, fair and transparent, highlighting the
extensive cooperation between the two parties to the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement and reflecting the
wisdom and commitment of the Sudanese leadership to
its undertakings, which were apparent during voter
registration and the voting process itself. We in the
Sudan and Africa as a whole can be proud of the fact
that we established a model of civility that can be used
as a guide to others.

11-20932

As regards the outcome of the referendum, I
should like to emphasize the spirit and letter of the
statement made by President of the Republic Omer
Hassan Al-Bashir on his visit to Juba, the capital of
Southern Sudan. He stressed his full commitment to
respecting the outcome of the referendum and went
even further in expressing his willingness to offer all
possible assistance to Southern Sudan in building its
own State in case of secession. I reiterate here in this
Chamber the full commitment of the Government of
the Sudan to respecting the results of the referendum.
We look forward to enjoying the international
community’s assistance to both parts of the Sudan if
secession should take place. The most important
contribution the international community can make to
Southern and Northern Sudan alike is to cancel the
debts burdening the country and constraining its
economic rebirth. In that way, the United Nations can
do us a true favour and make a positive, praiseworthy
gesture that will promote peacebuilding in the Sudan.
As regards the voting and its outcome, I wish
now to share some of my thoughts about Abyei. Many
speakers have referred to the clashes that took place in
Abyei at the time of the voting, but it is important for
me to make clear that these clashes were between
members of the Misseriya and Ngok Dinka tribes; they
were not between the armed forces of the Sudan and
members of the Sudan People’s Liberation Army
(SPLA). That, too, is a demonstration of the wisdom of
both parties in respecting their agreements.
There is, however, a lesson to be learned here,
and I hope for the Council’s undivided attention in
describing it. We have often warned of the dangers of
clashes between members of the two tribes, and noted
that, unless an acceptable, positive and practical
solution that accommodates the facts on the ground in
Abyei can be found, there will be no peace. If there
should be war, it will be started by members of the two
tribes, and not by the SPLA or the Government of the
North. I therefore commend the calls on both
communities, made in every statement I have heard
today, to avoid taking any unilateral decision
concerning the special situation in Abyei. In that
regard, I appeal to the Council to assist the two parties
to the Agreement in finding an acceptable solution so
as to ensure the sustainability of peace in both the
South and the North.

19

S/PV.6468

I should also like to share some of my thoughts
about Darfur. Before I do, however, I wish to commend
and offer my deep gratitude for the efforts of the
United Nations, through its mission in Darfur, led by
Mr. Alain Le Roy, and of the Secretary-General to
promote the peace process and to find a sustainable
solution to the situation in Darfur.
I also wish to say frankly that we in the Sudan
often hear expressions of concern and denunciation
here in the Security Council regarding events in
Darfur, but see little action to help the Sudan to find a
lasting solution to the conflict there. We look forward
to such action. The Council has the ability to persuade
the insurgent movements to come to the negotiating
table. The Government of the Sudan has affirmed its
resolve, interest in and commitment to a stable and
sustainable settlement in Darfur through negotiations.
Why does the international community delay in
prevailing upon those who are reluctant to come to the
negotiating table, thereby squandering billions of
sorely needed dollars that the United Nations could
direct elsewhere? Instead, approximately $3 billion are
spent every year on the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur. Greater political effort and
more pressure are needed to encourage the insurgent
movements to come to the negotiating table under
United Nations and African Union auspices. The
parties cannot be forced to accept a solution that is not
satisfactory to them. We are willing to engage in a
process of give and take until an acceptable solution
can be arrived at. Merely addressing the symptoms of
the conflict in Darfur would be in vain. I know that the
Council is sincere in its desire to achieve peace and
security throughout the world, and I appeal to it to help
us to address the root causes of the conflict.

In this regard, I would like to share with the
Council the fact that the Government, in its
commitment to addressing the problem, has also
adopted a comprehensive strategy for settling the
conflict in Darfur. The strategy will be implemented
simultaneously with the Doha negotiation forum.
Some may ask what the strategy is, so I will
review some of its features. It seeks to include all
parties in Darfur in the peace process, especially in the
light of the general elections held there, as a result of
which provincial parliaments have been constituted in
Darfur’s three states. It has thus become reasonable
and conceivable for the democratically elected
parliamentarians to participate in the peace process,
particularly since the insurgent factions are numerous
and their members do not represent all the people of
Darfur. We do not want to rule them out, however, and
we do not believe in a policy of rooting them out. By
the same token, however, we want the peace process to
include all those who were elected democratically, as
well as members of armed movements, members of
civil society and tribal leaders. The rationale for that is
to ensure sustainable peace in Darfur. Peace in the
Sudan is integral to peace in the region and in Africa in
general.
In conclusion, I would like to inform the Council
that we in the Sudan wish to proceed with constructive
relations with the United Nations in general and the
Security Council in particular, as one of its most
important organs. We extend our hand to the Council in
cooperation, and ask to be judged by our actions. We
do not wish to remain a captive of the past.
The President: There are no further speakers on
my list. I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

20

11-20932
