S/PV.8270

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8270th meeting

Tuesday, 29 May 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Czaputowicz. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Poland)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Djédjé
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Blok
Mr. Tenya
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Skoog
Ms. Pierce
Mrs. Haley

Agenda
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent Representative of Ukraine to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2014/136)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-16233 (E)
*1816233*

Ukraine

S/PV.8270

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent
Representative of Ukraine to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2014/136)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Ukraine to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Pavlo Klimkin, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Ukraine.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs;
Ambassador Ertuğrul Apakan, Chief Monitor of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine; and Ms. Ursula
Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator.
Ambassador Apakan is joining today’s meeting via
video tele-conference from Minsk.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
Ms. DiCarlo: The conflict in eastern Ukraine is
now in its fifth year. It may no longer make international
headlines, but it is neither dormant nor frozen. It is very
much alive and requires our attention, in particular to
alleviate the human cost.
Repeated pledges to respect the ceasefire have
not stopped the fighting, far from it. While there has
been an overall reduction of violence and casualties
since 2015, the killing, destruction and immense
suffering continues. According to the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
the civilian death toll of the conflict stands at more
than 2,700, with up to 9,000 injured. An estimated
1.6 million people remain internally displaced — the
largest uprooted population in Europe and among the
10 largest in the world.
2/28

29/05/2018

Today’s Council meeting is the first on the situation
in Ukraine since 2 February 2017 (see S/PV.7876),
when an upsurge in violence threatened to spiral out of
control. In the intervening period, diplomatic talks have
continued — in the Normandy format, the Trilateral
Contact Group and through bilateral processes. Despite
such commendable efforts, the security situation on
the ground remains volatile, with the continued use
of weapons proscribed by the Minsk agreements. The
relative calm that held in the early weeks of 2018 was
followed in April and May by a sharp increase in the
number of victims.
The United Nations is deeply concerned about the
recent deterioration of the situation at the contact line,
including in the area around the Donetsk filtration
station. We join the calls by Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Chief Monitor,
Ambassador Ertuğrul Apakan, on 18 May and by the
Special Representative of the Chairperson-in-Office
in Ukraine, Ambassador Martin Sajdik, on 22 May
for an immediate cessation of fighting. The violence
puts civilian lives at risk and causes destruction of
infrastructure, on which people depend for their basic
needs on both sides of the contact line. In the light
of recent reports of increased military preparedness
along the contact line, we highlight the need for the
utmost restraint.
On 17 February 2015, the Council adopted resolution
2202 (2015), which endorsed the package of measures
for the implementation of the Minsk agreements.
The Council called on all parties to fully implement
the package of measures, including a comprehensive
ceasefire. The Minsk agreements remain the foundation
for the international community’s commitment to
restoring peace in eastern Ukraine. Yet, more three
years since the adoption of resolution 2202 (2015),
the Minsk provisions remain largely unimplemented.
Negotiations appear to have lost momentum, with the
main stakeholders unable to reach agreement on key
steps. Except for the exchange of detainees during
the Christmas period last year, efforts to move the
talks forward have achieved little so far. Practical
solutions are often identified but not followed through.
Meanwhile, discussions on a potential international
peace operation have so far been inconclusive.
The United Nations continues to provide
humanitarian assistance, human rights monitoring
and development support, including in the framework
of Ukraine’s reform efforts. But the scale and urgency
18-16233

29/05/2018

Ukraine

of needs resulting from the conflict remain immense.
There are more than half a million civilians living within
five kilometres of the line of contact, subjected night
and day to shelling, gunfire, landmines and unexploded
ordnance. Children miss out on vital education. Health
problems are worsening, with an increase in the number
of cases of drug-resistant tuberculosis and HIV/AIDS.
The area around the contact line is now the third most
mine-contaminated area in the world. Residential areas,
as well as critical infrastructure, are frequently shelled,
deliberately or accidentally. We call on all concerned to
take the necessary measures to protect civilians and to
uphold international human rights obligations.
The United Nations Human Rights Monitoring
Mission in Ukraine continues to report on human rights
violations and abuses carried out on both sides of the
contact line. In accordance with the relevant General
Assembly resolutions, the monitoring of the situation
in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of
Sebastopol is being carried out, but with great difficulty
due to a lack of access.
As a consequence of the conflict, eastern Ukraine
is facing a serious humanitarian crisis. Restrictions and
impediments on international humanitarian access to
conflict-affected areas continue to limit aid delivery
to those in need. With 3.4 million people in need of
humanitarian assistance, we urge everyone to facilitate
humanitarian access and encourage Member States to
do more to support efforts to address the crisis. The
Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,
Ms. Ursula Mueller, will shortly report further on the
humanitarian situation.
The conflict has also had a tragic impact on
families from other nations. We are all aware of the
recent update on the investigation into the downing of
Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17. In its resolution 2166
(2014) the Security Council demanded that all States
cooperate fully with efforts to establish accountability.
As the Secretary-General has expressed, establishing
the truth about that event is an important part of
achieving justice for the victims and their families.
The United Nations strongly supports the lead
efforts on Ukraine of the Normandy four, the Trilateral
Contact Group, the OSCE and other key actors. The
work of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission takes
place under extremely difficult circumstances. The
Mission suffered its first fatality in April of last year.
The United Nations calls for full respect for the OSCE

S/PV. 8270

Mission’s freedom of movement and for an immediate
end to all use of force and threats against its monitors.
We look forward to hearing an update today from the
Chief Monitor of the Mission, Ambassador Apakan.
The Secretary-General travelled to Kyiv early in
his tenure to highlight the serious concern of the United
Nations with regard to the situation in Ukraine and the
plight of the people affected by the conflict. The visit in
July 2017 demonstrated support for the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine within
its internationally recognized borders, in accordance
with the relevant General Assembly resolutions.
The Secretary-General has consistently called
for a demonstration of the necessary political will to
cease hostilities and to end the suffering of the civilian
population — a call he reiterated in his statement
of 23 December 2017, on the eve of the so-called
Christmas ceasefire. In his New Year message to the
General Assembly this year, the Secretary-General also
called for revitalizing relevant mediation initiatives
in Europe, including the Normandy format and the
Trilateral Contact Group in Ukraine. We hope the
intensification of diplomatic engagements in recent
weeks will generate the necessary political impetus for
progress in implementing the Minsk agreements and
improving the prospects for a settlement of the conflict.
To overcome the status quo, it is imperative to inject
efforts with new political energy.
The Ukraine conflict is first and foremost a tragedy
for the Ukrainian people, but it also takes place in a
context of increasing challenges to the international
peace and security framework. The conflict continues
to test the credibility of international and regional
organizations and erodes the trust Member States need
to work together in the interest of the stability of Europe.
Despite the efforts to reach a settlement, a
breakthrough remains elusive. We cannot allow
ourselves to give in to fatigue or complacency. We
must continue to pursue peace with renewed vigour and
ensure the implementation of resolution 2202 (2015). In
that regard, we reiterate our support for the lead efforts
of the OSCE and the Normandy format. For its part,
the United Nations remains committed to supporting
the search for a peaceful resolution of the conflict in
a manner that fully upholds the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and independence of Ukraine, in accordance
with all the relevant Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions.

18-162333/28

S/PV.8270

Ukraine

The President: I thank Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Apakan.
Mr. Apakan: I thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
security situation in eastern Ukraine. I will also provide
an update on the challenges in the implementation of
the Minsk agreements, the impact on civilians and the
longer-term consequences of the ongoing fighting.
Since January the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Special Monitoring
Mission has recorded over 100,000 ceasefire violations.
Following a short pause in the level of violence during
Easter, fighting increased again. Most of the fighting
has remained concentrated in critical areas such as
those around Svitlodarsk and Avdiivka, in the Donetsk
region. Most of the kinetic activity recorded by the
Special Monitoring Mission this year took place in
those two hotspots. We also see that areas that have
remained relatively calm thus far are at risk of further
flare-ups, namely, Horlivka.
I am briefing from Minsk, where tomorrow, under
the auspices of the Trilateral Contact Group, we will
convene the Working Group on Security Issues. In
that context, let me emphasize that there is an urgent
need to agree on the additional measures that would
make the ceasefire sustainable and irreversible. The
disengagement of forces, which the sides agreed
to complete under the September 2016 framework
decision, has remained stalled. The lack of willingness
to take the process further may erode the trust and the
resolve of the sides.
Violence is indiscriminate. Since the beginning
of the year, the Special Monitoring Mission has
recorded the use of weapons and artillery, including
multiple-launch rocket systems, tanks and mortars, on
over 5,000 occasions. All those weapons should have
been withdrawn according to the Minsk agreements. A
renewed effort is needed in that regard. The withdrawal
of heavy weapons — including from specific
sectors — in phases and beginning with populated
areas, should be a priority. Such deadly weapons are
often placed in residential areas and cause destruction
and casualties among civilians. The Special Monitoring
Mission remains ready to monitor and verify the
withdrawal process.
With regard to the protection of civilians and civilian
infrastructure, I would like to highlight the situation of
4/28

29/05/2018

the Donetsk filtration station. The functioning of this
critical civilian infrastructure, which ensures drinkable
water to the population of the area and beyond — over
300,000 people — is at risk. Ceasefire violations in
the area have increased in recent weeks. Recently,
employees of the station were wounded by gunfire.
Since then the Mission has increased its presence in the
area. New damage caused by shelling is exacerbating
the deteriorating infrastructure, which requires regular
maintenance and repair. Nevertheless, the Mission
continues to facilitate dialogue on the ground with a
view to establishing a window of silence that would
allow that much needed repair work to take place.
The Special Monitoring Mission also continues to
document the cost of the conflict and cases of casualties
among civilians. Since the beginning of the year, the
Special Monitoring Mission has corroborated the
cases of 107 casualties among civilians. Most of those
casualties were caused by either shelling incidents or
mines, unexploded ordnance and improvised explosive
devices. Most of them took place in April and May. In
the report of the Mission published today, we described
how a couple, an elderly man and two boys suffered as
a result of the current violence. Mines and unexploded
ordnance litter the areas close to the contact line. It will
take years, probably decades, to fully decontaminate
those areas. Yet, despite explicit agreements on mine
action, the Mission observes that new mines are still
being laid. As violence continues, the conflict is
reshaping peoples’ lives, creating an artificial divide
between communities. Recently, representatives of a
local women’s group living close to the contact line in
the Donetsk region shared their greatest sorrow with
the Mission: they could no longer regularly visit their
children living on the other side of the contact line. As
long as the components for armed violence are still in
place, the risk for escalation remains. We need political
will for a renewed impetus. The people of Ukraine in
and around the contact line are looking for a normal
life, peace and stabilization.
In conclusion, I would like to acknowledge the work
of the members of the Special Monitoring Mission,
the dedicated men and women with whom I have the
honour to work. Their safety is our priority, and I have
to note that, regretfully, threats to Mission personnel
and assets, as well as restrictions on freedom of
movement, continue, mostly in areas not controlled by
the Government. The Special Monitoring Mission, an
18-16233

29/05/2018

Ukraine

unarmed civilian mission, will continue to implement
its mandate with impartiality.
I wish to thank the Council once again for the
opportunity to share the observations of the OSCE
Special Monitoring Mission. I also wish to express
my gratitude for the close cooperation with the United
Nations agencies in Ukraine, both in Kyiv and in
the field.
The President: I thank Mr. Apakan for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mueller.
Ms. Mueller: I thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
humanitarian situation in Ukraine.
After four years, millions of civilians — men,
women and children — continue to bear the brunt of
the conflict in eastern Ukraine, which has become yet
another protracted crisis. Over 2,700 civilians have
been killed and up to 9,000 civilians have been injured
since the outbreak of hostilities. The conflict-affected
area is one of the most mine-contaminated areas in
the world. Landmines maimed or killed 238 civilians
in 2017.
The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs documents 1 million crossings per month of the
457-kilometre contact line that divides eastern Ukraine.
Civilians risk shelling, sniper fire and landmines as
they make the arduous journey through the five official
checkpoints, where processing time can range from
hours to days.
I travelled across the contact line last year and
spoke to people waiting in long lines at one of the
checkpoints. Many of them were elderly. Ukraine has
the highest proportion of elderly people affected by
conflict in the world. They must cross the contact line
every 60 days to register in the Government-controlled
area as internally displaced persons (IDPs). It is the
only way they can access their meagre pensions of
$30 to $60 per month. I commend the Government of
Ukraine for adopting a national IDP plan to address the
situation of 1.5 million registered IDPs. The success of
the plan requires a whole-of-Government approach and
sufficient allocation of resources.
Last week before the Security Council, the
Secretary-General and 80 States Members of the United
Nations called for enhanced protection for civilians
through adherence to the rules of war (see S/PV.8267).

S/PV. 8270

Those rules must be respected by all the parties to the
conflict in Ukraine. Despite repeated appeals, watertreatment workers and facilities have been targeted on
34 occasions in 2018. The Donetsk filtration station,
which supplies water to over 345,000 people, has come
under fire eight times in the past 40 days, with five
workers having been injured last month.
Over 600,000 people are regularly exposed to
hostilities along the contact line. Families live in damp
basements, and more than 100,000 children attend
schools with windows lined with sand bags. More than
40,000 homes have been destroyed or damaged. Only 10
days ago, two schools in the Donetsk region were shelled
when hundreds of children were attending classes.
Wars have limits. The parties to the conflict must
take all feasible precautions to avoid and minimize
civilian harm.
Humanitarians aim to reach 2.3 million people
with vital assistance and protection services in 2018.
However, we face immense access and funding
challenges. We have received only 13 per cent of the
$187 million that we appealed for in the humanitarian
response plan, which has forced such agencies as the
World Food Programme to withdraw from Ukraine,
although 1.2 million people are food insecure.
The health situation is also severe. Millions of
people have limited access to health care. Measles
and hepatitis outbreaks are frequent. HIV/AIDS
prevalence among pregnant women is unacceptably
high. Multi-drug-resistant tuberculosis often goes
undetected or untreated. It is essential for patients to be
able to access appropriate treatment.
After significant effort, I am pleased to inform the
Council that the United Nations recently secured more
humanitarian access in the non-Government-controlled
area. We hope that will facilitate the scaling up the
delivery of critically needed impartial, independent and
neutral humanitarian aid to millions of people in need. I
appeal for urgent funding to support those efforts.
This conflict has stretched millions of Ukrainians
to the breaking point. Many displaced people have
exhausted their savings and means of survival. In
addition to the daily hostilities, they face such risks as
trafficking, transactional sex, drug use and alcoholism.
After four years, eastern Ukraine is now a protracted
protection crisis, requiring an approach that addresses
undeniable humanitarian needs while simultaneously

18-162335/28

S/PV.8270

Ukraine

reinforcing resilience. Humanitarian and development
actors are therefore seeking to apply a new way of
working. The practical approach taken in Ukraine is
already generating dividends.
Before I conclude, I once again call on all the parties
to the conflict in Ukraine to respect international
human rights law and international humanitarian law.
They must take constant care to spare civilians and
critical civilian infrastructure. Finally, I urge the world
to stand in solidarity with the millions of Ukrainians
who urgently need our support. I also urge political
leaders to make every effort to end the conflict. As I
was constantly told by the Ukrainian men and women
I met during my October 2017 visit, peace remains the
only true solution to their dire humanitarian situation.
The President: I thank Ms. Mueller for her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Poland.
To begin with, I would like to thank UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo, Ambassador Apakan and
Assistant Secretary-General Mueller for their useful
and comprehensive briefings.
This year marks the fourth anniversary of the
Revolution of Dignity, which was sparked by the will
of Ukrainian people to be part of a broader community
based on democracy, the rule of law, a flourishing
civil society and a well-founded market economy. That
will and that spirit will not be broken, neither by the
illegal annexation of Crimea nor by the conflict in the
east of the country. Those who thought that it would
misunderstood not only the Ukrainian soul but also
basic rules of democracy. Ukraine and its people have
responded to brute force and direct aggression from
its neighbour with a tremendous effort to reshape and
modernize the country. I congratulate His Excellency
Minister Pavlo Klimkin, his country and his people on
making that effort.
The Ukrainian conflict is lingering, and the world
must not forget it. The aim of today’s meeting is to
discuss the situation in Ukraine and possible ways to
end the protracted conflict. We believe it is vital that
Ukraine be present on the United Nations agenda, and
we should not forget the Security Council’s primary
responsibility, which is to maintain international
peace and security, as stipulated in Chapter V, Article
24, of the Charter of the United Nations. That is a
6/28

29/05/2018

responsibility of all Security Council members — both
permanent and elected.
It is civilians who are paying highest price for
the conflict in eastern Ukraine. As was stated by the
briefers, over 2,800 civilians have been killed and many
thousands wounded in the conflict so far. A number
of people have lost their homes. Over 1.5 million are
internally displaced.
Civilians should be protected in line with
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law. Humanitarian actors must have access to the
entire territory of Ukraine, including the zones outside
of the Ukrainian Government’s control.
We see a systematic human rights violation in
Crimea, in which non-governmental organization
activists and indigenous Crimean Tatars are especially
being targeted. There are also numerous cases of
unlawful or arbitrary detention, torture, ill-treatment
and sexual violence in the area of conflict. Our
utmost priority must be to stop those grave human
rights violations.
We believe in the United Nations role to defend the
human rights of civilians. In that regard, we commend
the work of the United Nations human rights monitoring
mission in Ukraine and the role of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
in the exchange of detainees in eastern Ukraine in
December 2017. The human rights violations that
have taken place have been duly reported in the High
Commissioner’s twenty-first report on the situation of
human rights in Ukraine.
At this juncture, I would like to underline that the
December 2017 General Assembly resolution on the
situation of human rights in the Autonomous Republic
of Crimea and the city of Sebastopol (resolution 72/190)
recognizes that there is an international armed conflict
between Ukraine and Russia, and condemns the
retroactive application of the Russian legal system in
the occupied territory and the imposition of automatic
Russian citizenship on Ukrainian citizens. The
resolution urges Russia to fully implement the order of
the International Court of Justice on interim measures
to restore the rights and freedoms of Ukrainian citizens
on the peninsula and calls on the Russian occupation
authorities to ensure the availability of education in the
Ukrainian and Crimean Tatar languages. It also calls
on Russia to allow the unimpeded entry to Crimea of
international human rights monitoring bodies.
18-16233

29/05/2018

Ukraine

Humanitarian aid for Ukraine is a burning issue.
Poland, along with its consistent support for Ukraine
at the political level, has been providing humanitarian
aid in the Kharkiv, Zaporizhia, Dnipropetrovsk and
Donetsk regions to internally displaced people from
the affected areas. Polish support is not limited to
immediate life-saving assistance. Our initiatives also
seek to integrate internally displaced people with their
host communities and to give them an opportunity
to function independently. I would like to express
my appreciation for the work of the European Union
Advisory Mission Ukraine. For over three years,
the Mission has assisted the Ukrainian authorities in
advancing a sustainable reform of the civilian security
sector through strategic advice and practical support.
Our goal is to make the civilian security sector efficient,
accountable and trustworthy.
International law has an important role to play
as well. During the Council’s 17 May open debate
on upholding international law (see S/PV.8262), the
President of Poland, Mr. Andrzej Duda, stressed that only
international law, its observance and enforcement can
ensure peace and security. Unfortunately, international
law is being violated in the case of Ukraine. Russia’s
belligerent behaviour against a sovereign country and
its illegal annexation of Crimea are glaring examples of
flouting the basic principles and rules of international
law embedded in the Charter of the United Nations, as
well as the Helsinki Final Act, the Charter of Paris for a
New Europe and the Budapest Memorandum. Moreover,
the recognition of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea
and the city of Sevastopol is in itself a violation of
international law, as it constitutes an attempt to legalize
an unlawful situation.
Another breach of international law is the
construction of the Kerch Strait Bridge, carried out by
the Russian Federation without the permission of the
Ukrainian State and contrary to the position adopted by
the General Assembly in 2014 resolution 68/262, on the
territorial integrity of Ukraine.
Despite the steps taken by the international
community so far, the military situation in eastern
Ukraine remains very tense. The Minsk agreements
require an immediate and comprehensive ceasefire and
the withdrawal of heavy military equipment in order to
create a security zone. However, the agreements have
been not honoured and have not prevented continuous
fighting and the regular use of heavy weapons that
severely disrupt the everyday life of the local population.

S/PV. 8270

Russia itself is a signatory to the Minsk agreements,
but its actions on the ground undercut the diplomatic
efforts to settle the conflict. It continues to finance,
arm and train the militants. Russia is continuously and
directly engaged in the fight — as we were reminded
again by recent news on Malaysia Airlines Flight MH17, shot down over the territory of eastern Ukraine in
July 2014, resulting in the deaths of almost 300 people.
On 24 May, the Joint Investigation Team revealed
that the missile launcher used to shoot down the plane
came from the fifty-third anti-aircraft missile brigade
of the Russian Armed Forces. We welcome the recent
findings of the Joint Investigation Team as highly
professional, impartial and independent. We reaffirm
our support for resolution 2166 (2014) and call on all
States to cooperate fully to meet its objectives. We also
call on Russia to accept its responsibility in the matter
and cooperate fully with the process.
We believe Russia should walk back all moves that
contravene the sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity
and independence of Ukraine within its internationally
recognized borders. Russia should use its influence over
the militants in order for them to observe the ceasefire.
It should withdraw heavy weapons, in accordance with
the Minsk agreements, and allow the international
community to provide humanitarian assistance to the
local population. Solutions to settle the conflict, such as
the Normandy format — made up of the representatives
of Russia, Ukraine, Germany and France — have not
brought about the expected outcome.
We notice the positive role and appreciate the
efforts of the Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), mainly through providing credible
information to the international community and
offering real assistance and services to the conflictaffected population. The Mission is made up of more
than 700 people from 44 countries — thereby making
it the largest and the most expensive OSCE mission
ever. Poland has seconded 40 experts to the Special
Monitoring Mission and will do its utmost to support
the further strengthening of the Mission.
I would like to express my appreciation to the Chief
Monitor, Ambassador Apakan, for his dedication and
tireless efforts towards conflict resolution. The Mission
has continued to function despite the numerous cases
of intimidation and attacks it endures. At this juncture,
we urge Russia to return to the Joint Centre for Control

18-162337/28

S/PV.8270

Ukraine

29/05/2018

and Coordination, which used to be an effective tool in
increasing the security of the Mission.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

What should be the role of the United Nations be
in this conflict? Given the stalemate in the political
negotiations and the prolonged suffering of the local
population, the United Nations should strive for the
deployment of a fully fledged United Nations-mandated
peacekeeping mission to the conflict zone. In that
connection, we highly value the efforts of Ambassador
Kurt Volker, United States Special Representative for
Ukraine Negotiations.

I call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Netherlands.

The Mission’s mandate should ensure a sustainable
de-escalation of conflict and the implementation of the
Minsk agreements, facilitate the withdrawal of foreign
armed formations, as well as supervise public order
and the process of reintegration. The Mission should
be able to effectively monitor the entire internationally
recognized Russian-Ukrainian border and areas
affected by the conflict, and to safeguard a secure
environment to enable the holding of local elections.
We also call for the appointment of a United Nations
Special Envoy for Ukraine. That would be tangible proof
of United Nations engagement in conflict resolution
and would give new momentum to the peace process.
The Envoy could monitor and report on the activities of
United Nations agencies and specialized organizations
on the ground.
In conclusion, I reiterate that we believe that the
efforts and dedication of the Ukrainian Government
will allow ordinary Ukrainians to fulfil their ambitions
and aspirations. Poland will continue to support
Ukraine in order to facilitate that goal. We hope the
rest of the world will do so as well.
We believe the Security Council has a role to play in
that regard too. The ongoing violence in eastern Ukraine
and the illegal annexation of the Crimean peninsula
remain one of the greatest sources of instability in the
entire region. The Security Council should contribute
to easing the tensions on the ground and working
out a solution to the Ukrainian issue, including by
establishing a peacekeeping mission and appointing a
United Nations Special Envoy for Ukraine.
We have to remain engaged constructively and
actively and foster our efforts in order to ensure the
territorial integrity of Ukraine in its internationally
recognized borders.
8/28

Mr. Blok (Netherlands): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting today. I would also
like to thank the three excellent briefers. Their
informative presentations highlight the ongoing need
for international involvement, even four years since
the start of the conflict. We have even seen a surge
in violence in recent weeks, with new casualties as a
result. That is why, Mr President, I am so grateful for
your timely efforts to spotlight the situation in eastern
Ukraine again today. The conflict must not be allowed
to persist.
Four years of fighting in Donbas has inflicted a
heavy toll on many parties.
First, it has taken a heavy toll on the people of
Ukraine. More than 10,000 lives have been lost in
that time. Many innocent civilians have had their
daily lives disrupted; some lost their homes or became
displaced. In parts of Donetsk and Luhansk, civilian
infrastructure has been seriously damaged. The power
and water supplies are insecure. Unexploded ordnance
and mines are a daily threat.
Secondly, a toll is being taken on the young
Ukrainian democracy. We admire the steps taken by
the current Ukrainian Government towards reform, as
well as the positive role played by Ukraine’s vibrant
civil society. But the conflict has put pressure on
that young democracy and its economy. We call on
the Government to continue its reforms, and we will
continue to support the Ukrainian Government in its
efforts bilaterally, through the European Union and in
other international institutions.
Thirdly, as I said in this same Chamber two weeks
ago, this conflict is taking a toll on the international
legal order (see S/PV.8262). In Ukraine, we find that
our international rulebook is in jeopardy. The illegal
annexation of Crimea and the active, destabilizing
role of Russia in Donbas go directly against Article 2,
paragraph 4, of the Charter of the United Nations: the
prohibition of the use of force against the territorial
integrity and political independence of any State. Like
others, I therefore reiterate our strong commitment
to the sovereignty, political independence, unity and
territorial integrity of Ukraine.
18-16233

29/05/2018

Ukraine

As the Council is well aware, it is not only the
people of Ukraine who have been affected by the
conflict. On 17 July 2014, 298 innocent people from 17
different countries were dragged into this conflict and
lost their lives. On that fateful day, a Malaysia Airlines
civilian airliner travelling from Amsterdam to Kuala
Lumpur was shot down over eastern Ukraine from a
location controlled by Russian-backed separatists. One
hundred and ninety-six of those victims were citizens
of the Netherlands — men, women and children from
my country.
The Security Council responded immediately,
with the unanimous adoption of resolution 2166 (2014),
proposed by Australia, which was one of the countries
most affected. I also want to remind the Council that
our efforts to establish an international tribunal under
Chapter VII, through the Council, were blocked by a
Russian veto.
My Government announced that it would not
rest before the truth was established and justice was
achieved, together with its international partners. Years
of painstaking, independent international investigations
followed. As a result, it has now been established that
the missile that downed Flight MH-l7 was launched
by a Buk TELAR that came from the Russian Army.
That conclusion was not taken lightly. It is the result of
intensive, in-depth study and analysis.
Last Thursday, the Joint Investigation Team
released additional findings — based on legally sound
and compelling evidence — that the Buk missile system
that downed Flight MH-17 belonged to the fifty-third
anti-aircraft missile brigade of the Russian Army.
On that basis, and motivated by our desire to
establish the truth and achieve justice and accountability,
Australia and the Netherlands announced last Friday
that we hold the Russian Federation accountable for its
part in the downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17.
As a consequence, the Netherlands and Australia
now call on the Russian Federation to engage seriously
and constructively with us in this matter and accept its
responsibility. Along with that, the Russian Federation
needs to start cooperating fully with the Joint
Investigation Team’s ongoing criminal investigation.
That request is nothing new. Indeed, it is a clear
demand set out in resolution 2166 (2014), which I have
in front of me and which was unanimously adopted by
the Council almost four years ago. By voting for that

S/PV. 8270

resolution, all 15 members of the Council, including
the Russian Federation, voted for justice. They voted
for those responsible to be held to account, and for
all States to cooperate fully with efforts to establish
accountability. Unfortunately, four years later,
those demands need to be repeated. I reiterate them
yet again today, supported by a massive amount of
irrefutable evidence.
When it comes to establishing truth and
accountability for what happened to Flight MH-17, no
State has the right to remain silent. Quite the contrary:
all States have a duty to cooperate constructively,
to shed light on the truth and not to obscure it with
continuous mist. I call on the Russian Federation to
take that responsibility.
For our part, we have kept the Council informed
of our efforts and findings on a regular basis, and we
will continue to do so. We are grateful for the broad
support that we have enjoued throughout from the vast
majority of the international community, including
from Australia, the United Nations Secretary-General,
the NATO Secretary General, all our European partners
and countries such as Canada, New Zealand, Ukraine,
Malaysia and the United States.
In conclusion, the downing of Malaysia Airlines
Flight MH-17 is a stark reminder of how an armed
conflict in any part of the world can impact any of us, at
any time. That is another reason why the international
community cannot allow this conflict to persist. After
four years of devastation, Ukraine deserves peace,
lasting peace, on the basis of the Minsk agreements,
supported by all of its neighbours and in accordance
with international law. So too, do the victims of Flight
MH-17 deserve justice.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): Allow me to begin by welcoming the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Poland, Ukraine and the
Netherlands. I would also like to thank Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs;
Ambassador Ertuğrul Apakan, Chief Monitor of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine; and Ms. Ursula
Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, for their comprehensive and detailed briefings
on the political situation in Ukraine.
The conflict in Ukraine is entering its fifth year.
Ongoing ceasefire violations in the Donetsk and
Luhansk regions are a source of concern for us, as

18-162339/28

S/PV.8270

Ukraine

they could spark tensions and cause the situation to
deteriorate as a result of escalating violence in the east
of the country. That, in turn, would undermine the
efforts of the international community, including those
of the Security Council, to find a peaceful solution to
the crisis.
The challenging work of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe to maintain the
ceasefire and reduce tensions requires the cooperation
and efforts of the parties to the conflict. Their
cooperation is essential to achieving a peaceful political
solution to the crisis. We therefore call for an immediate
ceasefire and request that both parties respect the full
implementation of the Minsk agreements, as endorsed
by resolution 2202 (2015), as the only path to stability
in Ukraine.
The impact of the violence and instability on the
civilian population caused by the prolonged conflict
is another source of concern. It generates economic
losses in the region and exacerbates the suffering of
the people, forcing some of them to leave their homes.
We thank the humanitarian organizations for their work
on the ground, and the Assistant Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and her team for their support and
efforts in the region to provide assistance to those who
need it most. We call upon the parties to the conflict to
facilitate safe access for humanitarian workers on the
ground to enable them to provide assistance to those
in need and to improve people’s living conditions.
Failing to do so would constitute a serious breach of the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and the
norms of international law.
In conclusion, we believe that the solution to the
crisis is a peaceful one alone and that it can be achieved
through direct, earnest and inclusive negotiations. The
goal must be a definitive and just solution that attempts
to foster harmonious relations among the various ethnic
groups in Ukraine and between Ukraine and countries
of the region. The solution to the crisis in Ukraine is
not a military one; it is a political one. The international
community must therefore continue to support all
diplomatic efforts for a political solution to the crisis.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Polish presidency of the Security Council through
you, Mr. Minister, for convening today’s important
public meeting of the Security Council on the situation
in Ukraine. Let me also welcome the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands and Ukraine.
10/28

29/05/2018

I would like to thank the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo; the
Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator, Ms. Ursula
Mueller; and the Chief Monitor of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Special
Monitoring Mission to Ukraine, Ambassador Ertuğrul
Apakan, for their very insightful briefings.
Given that French and German authorities are
committed to resolving the crisis, I am honoured to
deliver this statement on behalf of France and Germany.
This joint statement, which is quite extraordinary,
demonstrates the strong commitment of both countries
within the framework of the Normandy format.
As we mark the one hundredth anniversary of the
end of the First World War this year, eastern Ukraine
has been ravaged for more than four years by a conflict
of an intensity rarely seen in Europe. More than 70 years
after the Second World War, in a conflict in which both
Ukraine and Russia paid an extraordinarily high price,
more than 10,000 civilians and military personnel have
lost their lives, millions of people have been displaced
and millions more have been affected by clashes in the
Donbas region.
For four years Germany and France have spared
no effort to ease the suffering of those concerned and
to put an end to the conflict. Following the Minsk
protocol, the Minsk agreements were drafted in 2015
under the Normandy format and specify steps to end the
crisis. Three years after the adoption of resolution 2202
(2015), which endorses the package of measures for the
implementation of the Minsk agreements, now more
than ever before, we call upon all parties to honour their
commitments. We also recall our full support for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine within
its internationally recognized borders.
Against that backdrop, we would like to underscore
three points.
The first point pertains to the security situation,
which is a precondition for improving the plight of the
civilian population. By no means a frozen conflict,
although the parties have promised to silence their
weapons on several occasions, including as recently as
30 March, eastern Ukraine is the site of daily clashes.
Hundreds of ceasefire violations are observed every
day by the OSCE. We pay tribute to that organization
for its excellent work and for the risks its team faces.
We implore the parties, in particular Russia, to do
18-16233

29/05/2018

Ukraine

their utmost to facilitate the freedom of movement of
observers and to ensure their safety and that of their
equipment, including drones.
France and Germany condemn all ceasefire
violations in the strongest terms. We once again
call for the withdrawal of heavy weaponry, which
is again being employed for attacks against civilian
infrastructure. It is unacceptable that schools continue
to be the targets of shelling. Both parties must also
make headway on the disengagement of forces along
the contact line in areas already identified as present
or future disengagement areas. Those first steps will
create a climate of trust and prevent the occurrence of
another tragic event similar to the one that occurred on
17 July 2014 when the 298 passengers and flight crew
of Malaysia Flight Airlines MH-17 tragically lost their
lives after the plane was shot down by a missile. We
commend the professionalism of the Joint Investigation
Team, whose work is fully independent. In order to
shed light on the tragedy and bring those responsible
to justice, it is crucial that investigators have the full
cooperation of all Member States.
Our second point refers to the urgent humanitarian
situation. In April alone, we recorded 23 fatalities,
including five civilians, and 115 injuries. May’s death
toll already exceeds April’s. During the harsh winter
months, hundreds of thousands of people went without
water, electricity and heat for more than a day. They
also faced worsening food insecurity and deteriorating
health, in particular women and children. In order to
ease the suffering of the civilian population, Germany
and France request that humanitarian workers be
granted access to the Donbas region and that their
safety be guaranteed. We implore all parties to protect
key civilian infrastructure, such as the Donetsk
filtration station, and to open additional checkpoints
along the contact line. We encourage another exchange
of prisoners, which would convey trust, which all of
us want.
Lastly, a long-term solution to the crisis also
depends on the political and economic measures that
will be taken. Considerable progress has been made
by Ukrainian authorities over the past three years in
the implementation of the political commitments made
under the Minsk agreements. Legislative arrangements
must still be finalized to enable the holding of local
elections in certain areas of Donetsk and Luhansk and
the development of a plan to ensure they are held in
the best possible conditions. It is expected that specific

S/PV. 8270

measures will be taken to improve the lives of people in
the Donbas region — for example, by guaranteeing the
right to a pension or by dispatching a team of experts on
environmental issues.
France and Germany will continue to stand in
solidarity with the Ukrainian people, who have been
battered in recent years by the conflict in Donbas and
the illegal annexation of Crimea. Our efforts within the
framework of the Normandy format are an expression
of our desire to succeed in alleviating the suffering
of the Ukrainian people and to lay the foundation for
lasting peace throughout the European continent.
Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We should like
to express our thanks for the convening of this meeting,
and we welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of Poland, Mr. Jacek Czaputowicz. We
would like to take this opportunity to congratulate
the Polish presidency on its work during this month.
We should also like to express our gratitude for the
briefings of Mr. Ertuğrul Apakan and Ms. Ursula
Mueller, and of Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, who we believe
will successfully fulfil her new duties at the head of the
Department of Political Affairs.
We also welcome the participation of Mr. Stephanus
Blok, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of
the Netherlands, and of Mr. Pavlo Klimkin, for Foreign
Affairs of Ukraine. We reiterate our commitment to
defending the independence, territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Ukraine, in line with the Charter of the
United Nations.
Peru has been following with concern the complex
and unstable situation in eastern Ukraine, as well as
its serious implications for the country’s governance
and development and for regional stability. The civilian
population has endured deplorable suffering. In four
years of conflict, more than 2,500 civilians have lost
their lives, and 9,000 civilians have been injured.
More than 4.4 million people are in dire need of
humanitarian aid, of which more than 1.6 million are
internally displaced.
We must condemn the use of anti-personnel mines,
which are banned under the Ottawa Convention, as well
as the downing of the Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17,
for which we must ensure proper accountability.
Peru stresses that the Minsk agreements constitute
the legal basis for the political solution required to end
the conflict experienced in eastern Ukraine. In that

18-1623311/28

S/PV.8270

Ukraine

regard, we support the package of measures for the full
implementation of the Minsk agreements, which the
Council endorsed in February 2015.
We reiterate the need to comply with the ceasefire
agreed by the parties and supported by the Council,
as well as the withdrawal of heavy artillery, often
located near populated areas. It is alarming that the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine has recorded
more than 80,000 violations of the ceasefire, many with
weapons that should have been withdrawn, in just the
past three and a half months.
We highlight the work of the Special Mission and
the need to facilitate its safe access on the ground.
In line with the principle of the peaceful settlement
of disputes, we would also like to welcome efforts to
facilitate dialogue between the parties, in particular
within the framework of the Normandy format and the
Trilateral Contact Group.
I should like to conclude by welcoming the
assistance that the international community, in
particular the United Nations, lends in support of the
efforts of the Ukrainian authorities to alleviate the
suffering of the conflict-affected civilian population
and to build sustainable peace.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank the briefers for their
excellent input in today’s discussion. I should like to
express our appreciation to the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Poland, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands and of Ukraine for being present here
today. We very much welcome this opportunity to
discuss the situation in eastern Ukraine, and we want
to thank the Polish presidency for scheduling this very
important briefing.
The redrawing of borders — backed by military
power — as we have seen not only in Ukraine but also
in Georgia, represents a threat that goes beyond Europe.
When a State decides to challenge the international
legal order and the Charter of the United Nations as
such, it constitutes a threat to us all. Security is not a
zero-sum game, and the rules-based order can function
only when everyone adheres to the rules.
We are deeply concerned over the recent escalation
of violence and the deteriorating humanitarian and
human-rights situation in Donbas. Casualties, heavy
shelling, damaged critical infrastructure and imminent
environmental disasters underline how civilians are
12/28

29/05/2018

bearing the heaviest burden. Almost 3.5 million people
are now affected by conflict and need humanitarian
assistance. The thousands of Ukrainians living along
the contact line are in particular need. It is crucial that
humanitarian actors be given full, safe and unhindered
access to people in need of humanitarian assistance, as
has been stated by many around the table today.
We call for an immediate and full implementation
of the Minsk agreements, and we support efforts within
the Normandy format to that end. Our full support
for those efforts does not alter the fact that Russia’s
continuous aggression against Ukraine is the origin of
the conflict, and that Russia has the influence to end
it whenever it so chooses. The withdrawal of foreign
armed formations, military equipment and mercenaries
from the territory of Ukraine, as well as the restoration of
Ukrainian control over its State border, remain crucial.
Sweden will welcome, and be ready to contribute to,
a possible United Nations mission in Donbas. However,
such a mission must, from the outset, cover the entire
occupied area of Ukraine, including the Russia-Ukraine
border, and have as its clear aim the restoration of
Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
We strongly support the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring Mission
to Ukraine. It is unacceptable that the Mission’s
monitors continue to be intimidated, denied access
and to have their equipment destroyed, primarily in
areas held by Russian-backed armed groups. We call
on Russia to use its influence over the armed groups
it supports to ensure the Special Monitoring Mission’s
full, safe and unhindered access throughout Ukraine,
including along the Russia-Ukraine State border and to
the Crimean peninsula.
The recent holding of presidential elections in
illegally annexed Crimea and the inauguration of the
Kerch Bridge, connecting the peninsula to mainland
Russia, constitute clear breaches of international
law. The European Union and Sweden will continue
to remain firm in applying a non-recognition policy
regarding Crimea, including through sanctions.
Human-rights monitors consistently report on the
deteriorating human-rights situation in Crimea, where
torture, kidnapping and house searches have become
commonplace. Full, free and unrestricted access
for international human-rights actors to the whole
territory of Ukraine, including Crimea, continues
to be paramount. We welcome the yearly General
18-16233

29/05/2018

Ukraine

Assembly resolution on the situation of human rights
in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of
Sebastopol, Ukraine, and its bold support.
As the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom
of the Netherlands reminded us today, 298 human lives
were lost in the downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight
MH-17. That was a heinous crime that constitutes an
unacceptable violation of international law. On 24 May
the independent and impartial Joint Investigation Team
concluded beyond doubt that the BUK missile system
used to bring down the flight belonged to the armed
forces of the Russian Federation, based in Kursk.
We condemn that tragedy and call upon the Russian
Federation to accept its responsibility to cooperate fully
with the ongoing international criminal investigation
in order to establish accountability and to provide full
reparations for the injury caused by those unlawful acts.
We reiterate our support for resolution 2166 (2014).
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I join other
colleagues in welcoming the three Ministers for
Foreign Affairs to this important meeting. I should
also like to thank the briefers from the United Nations
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) for their account and for the work they
and their teams do on the ground. The United Kingdom
joins others in welcoming this opportunity for the
Security Council to receive an update on the situation
in eastern Ukraine. As other speakers have done, we
also stand in solidarity with the Ukrainian people.
The fighting in eastern Ukraine has continued
unabated since 2014. The Under-Secretary-General set
out some compelling facts about what is happening on
the ground. But, for me, one of the most shocking facts
was that there have been over 100,000 violations of the
ceasefire. That is 100,000 too many, but 100,000 is an
extremely large number. We should just think about
what that really means for the people on the ground.
Not only the conflict but also the resulting
humanitarian situation, as the Assistant SecretaryGeneral said, and the potential for long-term
environmental damage are among the many reasons
that the topic of Ukraine needs to be on the Council’s
agenda and to be repeatedly discussed here. It is not just
about Ukraine, although that is the subject of today’s
meeting. I want to express my agreement with what my
Swedish colleague said about Ukraine, Georgia and the
rules-based international order.

S/PV. 8270

The situation on the ground remains highly
volatile, as we heard. The deterioration in the security
situation along the line of contact in Donetsk serves to
underline the total failure of the latest recommitment to
the ceasefire. I join others in repeating the appeals for
respect for the laws of war. Despite being agreed by the
Trilateral Contact Group on 26 March, it was only 10
minutes before Russian-led forces shelled Avdiivka, and
they did so with weapons proscribed under the Minsk
agreements. I think that demonstrates the complete
disregard that the Russian-backed separatists have for
the ceasefire and for attempts to grant some relief to
the civilian population of eastern Ukraine. I would like
to once again urge all those involved to recommit to
the ceasefire at the Trilateral Contact Group meeting to
take place on 30 May.
The United Kingdom also remains extremely
concerned by the threats posed to civilian infrastructure
and the potential for long-term environmental damage.
Many speakers today highlighted the Donetsk waterfiltration station, and I would like to add our voices to
that point. We are also concerned by the threats from the
separatists to turn off the pumps at the Yunkom mine.
Flooding of the mine risks contaminating the water
table with radiological waste. More generally, I would
like to urge Russia to intervene with the separatists to
avoid actions that would cause environmental damage
and which could have a huge humanitarian impact
on the civilian population for years to come. Support
and respect for the safe zones around key civilian
infrastructure is crucial if we are to prevent further
humanitarian suffering.
And let us not see repeated the past winter, where
despite international humanitarian assistance, as the
Assistant Secretary-General said, food insecurity
doubled from 600,000 to 1.2 million people.
A number of speakers mentioned Crimea. We share
the view that the annexation of Crimea four years ago
by Russia is illegal and in violation of the first principle
of international law. General Assembly resolutions
68/262, 71/205 and 72/190 reaffirm the internationally
recognized borders of Ukraine and the absence of
any legal basis to change the status of Crimea. The
resolutions characterize Russia as an occupying
Power. They note the primary responsibility of States
to promote and protect human rights. And they call on
Russia to uphold all of its obligations under applicable
international law. Despite that, Russia continues to
ignore calls in the General Assembly for the Office

18-1623313/28

S/PV.8270

Ukraine

29/05/2018

of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights to visit Crimea, most recently in December
last year.

Secretary-General Ursula Mueller and Ambassador
Apakan for their excellent briefings on the situation
in Ukraine.

We heard from the OSCE and the United Nations
how millions of Crimeans remain outside the
monitoring mechanisms of the United Nations, which
means that there is no one who can easily help them. We
call on Russia, as a permanent member of the Security
Council, to uphold the international rules-based system
and respond positively to the General Assembly’s calls.

My country notes with regret the deterioration of
the security situation in Ukraine. The recent upsurge
in fighting along the line of contact in eastern Ukraine,
which has resulted in the loss of human lives and the
destruction of civilian infrastructure essential to the
provision of basic social services to the population,
is a challenge to the entire international community,
and particularly to the Security Council. Above all,
my delegation deplores the lack of progress in the
implementation of the Minsk agreements, signed on
12 February 2015, including the recurrent violations
of the ceasefire and the obstructions to the movement
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) Special Monitoring Mission. These
facts undeniably constitute major obstacles to the
implementation of the agreements, which to date
remains the appropriate framework for resolving the
crisis in Ukraine.

I would now like to turn to Malaysia Airlines Flight
MH-17. I thank the Dutch Minister for his statement
and for the important role the Dutch are playing, along
with other members of the Joint Investigation Team,
in pursuing justice for the victims and their families.
Of the 298 victims, there were 10 British nationals.
We commend the Joint Investigation Team for its
professional, impartial and independent investigation.
Like other colleagues, my Foreign Secretary is on
record as saying we now have clear evidence that the
missile that brought down Flight MH-17 belonged to
the Russian Army. The United Kingdom fully supports
the Netherlands and Australia in their request to the
Russian Federation to accept State responsibility for
its part in bringing down Flight MH-17 and to engage
with them in bilateral negotiations. All States Members
of the United Nations, including Russia, need to fulfil
their obligations under resolution 2166 (2014) to provide
any requested assistance to the investigation.
Since 2014, over 10,300 people have been killed and
25,000 injured in Ukraine. Approximately 3.4 million
people are in need of humanitarian assistance,
particularly along the line of contact. There are real risks
of an environmental disaster. If Russia truly cares about
the people of the Donbas, it should end the fighting that
it started, withdraw its military personnel and weapons
and cease support for the separatists, in line with its
obligations under the Minsk agreements. And it should
show political commitment, as Ambassador Apakan
highlighted, to engage constructively and in good faith
in negotiations to deliver long-term peace.
Mr. Djédjé (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Mr. President, for the honour of presiding
over our meeting today. I also welcome the presence
of Mr. Stephanus Abraham Blok, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Netherlands, and Mr. Pavlo Klimkin,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine. I also thank
Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo, Assistant
14/28

Côte d’Ivoire, which is in favour of a peaceful
resolution of the crisis in Ukraine, calls for respect for
the ceasefire in force by the various parties involved,
and above all for the full implementation of the Minsk
agreements, within the framework of the Normandy
format. My country also supports the efforts of the
OSCE Monitoring Mission and the Joint Centre for
Control and Coordination to de-escalate the conflict.
Against that backdrop, my delegation calls on the parties
to the conflict to take all appropriate steps towards the
easing of tensions, in particular by enabling the Joint
Centre for Control and Coordination to play its role in
supporting OSCE monitors and following up on the
ceasefire agreements.
The humanitarian situation is also worrisome, given
the resumption of fighting in eastern Ukraine since the
beginning of May. The shelling has interrupted the gas
and electricity distribution systems, affecting the living
conditions of all of the people. Since the outbreak of
the conflict, in 2014, civilians have suffered frequent
water and electricity cuts around the line of contact and
in internally displaced persons centres. On 18 April,
350,000 civilians had their water supply disrupted by
damage to the Donetsk water filtration station. The
station is still down and presents increased risks of
contamination due to the numerous attacks to which it
is subjected. My delegation condemns those acts, which
constitute violations of international humanitarian law,
18-16233

29/05/2018

Ukraine

and urges the parties to the conflict to safeguard critical
water infrastructure and the provision of basic social
services, such as water, gas and electricity.
My country welcomes the efforts of the international
community to fill the funding gap in the humanitarian
response plan in eastern Ukraine, estimated at
$186 million, to help the 2.3 million people in need of
assistance in 2018.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its support
for all efforts to find a political solution to the crisis in
Ukraine. To that end, it encourages all parties to respect
the commitments they have undertaken with a view
to ensure the effective implementation of the Minsk
agreements and resolution 2202 (2015), of 17 February
2015, which supports those agreements.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting and to commend you for presiding over it. We
also welcome the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the
Netherlands and Ukraine to participate in this meeting.
At the outset, we would like to thank the UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs, Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, the Assistant Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Ursula Mueller, and the
Chief Monitor of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine, Ambassador Apakan, for their
valuable briefings on the situation in eastern Ukraine.
In this statement we will focus on the political,
security and humanitarian situations. On the political
and security situations, we express our concern about
the renewed fighting in eastern Ukraine, especially
with reports of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission
documenting a large number of violations of the
ceasefire agreement, using weapons that should have
been withdrawn according to the Minsk agreements.
The presence of such weapons, in an environment
marred by lack of confidence and insecurity, contributes
to the escalation of violence.
Moreover, the Donetsk filtration station, which
supplies drinking water to more than 300,000 people
along both sides of the line of contact, is a case in point.
In that regard, we call on all parties to immediately
cease hostilities, fully abide by the ceasefire agreement
and avoid any provocative acts that could lead to
increased tension.

S/PV. 8270

The State of Kuwait stresses the importance of
respecting the unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Ukraine within its internationally recognized
borders. We hope that all parties will fully implement
resolution 2202 (2015) and the Minsk agreements. The
parties should also find a comprehensive and balanced
solution to the crisis through dialogue, especially
within the Normandy format. In that regard, we would
like to commend the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission
for its efforts on the ground, particularly its endeavours
to facilitate the dialogue between all parties to the
crisis. We would also like to urge Ukraine and the
Russian Federation to find a peaceful solution to
the crisis and demonstrate greater political will, not
only to uphold the ceasefire and implement previous
commitments but also to relaunch comprehensive and
sustainable negotiations.
With regard to the crime of the downing Malaysia
Airlines Flight MH-17, which claimed the lives of 298
innocent civilians, the State of Kuwait stresses the
importance of abiding by resolution 2166 (2014), which
calls for carrying out an international investigation
according to the guidelines regulating international
civil aviation. The resolution also demands that
Member States cooperate fully with the efforts aimed
at establishing accountability.
On the humanitarian situation, more than four
years into a crisis that has led to the killing and injuring
of thousands of people, there are still 1.6 million
internally displaced persons, half of whom are elderly.
They are facing tremendous challenges, including a
shortage of food, medicine, heating, and education
for their children. There are 3.4 million people in
need of humanitarian assistance and protection. The
shelling along the 457 kilometre-long line of contact
adversely affects the people living in the area, 40 per
cent of whom suffer daily and directly as a result of the
shelling. Nearly 1 million people who cross the line of
contact every month — an area known to be the most
contaminated by landmines in the world. We emphasize
the need for ensuring the delivery of humanitarian aid to
all conflict-affected areas in order to improve the living
conditions of the people, especially in the light of the
continuing deterioration of the humanitarian situation.
In conclusion, the State of Kuwait calls for finding a
peaceful solution to the crisis in eastern Ukraine, in line
with Security Council resolutions and the agreements
signed between the parties concerned, including the
Minsk agreements. These agreements represent the

18-1623315/28

S/PV.8270

Ukraine

appropriate framework to settle the crisis in its regional
dimension, and through mediation efforts by parties
respected and recognized by both parties to the conflict
and the international community at large.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): Two weeks
ago, the President of Poland convened a very important
debate in the Security Council (see S/PV.8262) on
upholding international law. Many of us talked about
the purposes and goals of the United Nations. It was
an opportunity to ask ourselves why we are here and
what we hope to accomplish. Today’s debate effectively
answers those questions.
The conflict in Ukraine is a textbook example of
the direct violation of the sovereignty of one Member
State by another Member State. It is precisely the kind of
flagrant misconduct this organ was created to address.
When Russian forces entered the Crimean capital in
2014, it was a direct violation of the Charter of the United
Nations. Russian forces seized the Parliament building
and imposed an illegitimate referendum on the people.
Since then, Russia has pushed into eastern Ukraine,
creating a humanitarian crisis that threatens millions.
In response to the resulting outcry, Russia signed the
Minsk agreements, committed to a ceasefire, committed
to countless truces, committed to a withdrawal of heavy
weapons and committed to monitors to guarantee all of
its commitments. Unsurprisingly, Russia has serially
disregarded all of those promises and it has permitted,
if not instructed, its forces to detain, threaten and
even shoot at monitors, their vehicles, cameras and
observation drones. In short, Russia has created a
catastrophe of suffering in Ukraine.
This is not a frozen conflict. The month of May
has seen security conditions worsen, with the increased
ceasefire violations, higher civilian casualties and
growing military casualties. Adding to its complicity,
the Kremlin has neglected every one of the dozens
of previous ceasefire agreements. Russia insults our
intelligence by telling us that this is a home-grown
internal conflict, but everyone in this Chamber knows
better. The militants in eastern Ukraine report directly
to the Russian military, which arms them, trains
them, leads them and fights alongside them. Russia’s
combined forces in eastern Ukraine include thousands
of tanks, armoured vehicles and heavy artillery.
Despite its transparent denials, there is no doubt that
Russia is driving the Ukrainian conflict. How do we
know? Because the Russian forces work hard to conceal
16/28

29/05/2018

who is directing their actions and paying their wages.
They strip patches and insignia off of their uniforms
and equipment. They hide their identities behind face
masks. But we know why they are there and we know
who sent them. Russian soldiers have been captured
by Ukrainian armed forces. Journalists have identified
numerous examples of Russian military equipment
being used by Russian-led forces in eastern Ukraine.
Tragically, that includes the Russia-supplied
missile system that shot down Malaysia Airlines Flight
MH-17 in July 2014 — a civilian aircraft flying from
Amsterdam to Kuala Lumpur — killing all 298 people
on board. The victims include nationals of our Security
Council colleagues: 193 citizens of the Netherlands, 10
British citizens and a dual-national American, among
others. The families of the victims deserve answers. We
welcome last week’s update from the international Joint
Investigation Team, which has handled this case with
professionalism and independence.
We strongly support the call of Australia and
the Netherlands for Russia to acknowledge its role in
the tragedy, to cooperate and bring to account those
responsible for shooting down Malaysia Airlines Flight
MH-17.
Like its role in the Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17
tragedy, we ask Russia to acknowledge another reality
that everyone here knows to be true: Russian soldiers
are in Ukraine, not to “protect Russian-speaking
Ukrainian nationals”, but to impose Russian control on
the country. Let me emphasize that there is an urgent
reason for making this request: the Russian Government
holds the key to solving the crisis in Ukraine. The
resolution of this conflict is not only possible; it is
profoundly straightforward. Russia needs to withdraw
its military forces and equipment, call on its proxies to
honour the ceasefire and fulfil its commitments under
the Minsk agreements.
In Crimea, Russia needs to withdraw from the
peninsula and restore it to Ukrainian control in line
with Moscow’s multilateral and bilateral commitments.
Russia can unilaterally fix this wrong, and the first step
is acknowledging it. Until Russia ends its outrageous
actions in Ukraine, the position of the United States will
not waver. We condemn in the strongest terms Russia’s
involvement in eastern Ukraine and its purported
annexation of Crimea.
Until Russia returns the Crimean peninsula to
Ukrainian control, United States sanctions related to
18-16233

29/05/2018

Ukraine

the invasion of Crimea will continue. Until Russia pulls
its forces out of eastern Ukraine and honours its Minsk
commitments, our sanctions in response to its flagrant
misconduct in the eastern part of the country will stay
in place.
The United States, in close partnership with
France, Germany and Ukraine, is weighing options to
bring peace to eastern Ukraine. However, Russia has
refused to engage meaningfully, and our efforts have
been stalled since January.
On 23 April 2017, Joseph Stone — an
American — was working as a paramedic in eastern
Ukraine. He was serving with the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine in an area under Russian control.
His vehicle was hit by an anti-tank mine. Joseph was
killed. The tragedy of Joseph is joined by many others
in Ukraine — we will not forget his sacrifice, just as
Ukrainians will not forget the death and suffering of so
many of their people.
All those who respect and are committed to defend
the United Nations and its Charter must join us in
demanding justice for Joseph and for all of the victims
in Ukraine.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I express my appreciation to you, Sir, for
presiding over this open meeting. I wish to thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo, Assistant SecretaryGeneral Mueller and Ambassador Apakan, of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
for their briefings.
China has been closely following the developments
in eastern Ukraine. We are concerned about recent
conflicts in the area causing civilian casualties. We
have noted that the Minsk Tripartite Contact Group
held consultations on the implementation of the Minsk
agreements to promote a peaceful settlement of the
Ukrainian issue. While the international community
continues to step up its mediation efforts, we call on both
parties to the conflict to strictly abide by the ceasefire
mechanism and stay the course to a political settlement.
In seeking a fundamental and long-term solution
to the Ukrainian issue, it is necessary to take care of
the legitimate rights and interests of all the regions
and ethnic groups, as well as to address the legitimate
concerns of all the relevant parties to balance their
different interests. China believes that the Ukrainian

S/PV. 8270

issue involves a complicated historical genesis and
reality and that the conflict needs to be addressed at
its roots.
China has consistently maintained that all the
parties concerned must fully implement resolution 2202
(2015). They must effectively cease all hostilities, fully
implement the Minsk agreements and stay committed
to seeking a comprehensive, lasting, balanced solution
to the Ukrainian issue. That must be done through
dialogue and consultation in order to take forward
peace, stability and development in Ukraine and
promote harmony among all ethnic groups in Ukraine,
as well as to facilitate peaceful coexistence between
Ukraine and the countries of the region.
The international community should continue to
support the diplomatic efforts of all the relevant parties
for the political settlement of the Ukrainian issue.
Council discussions should be conducive to a genuine
relaxation in the situation of the relevant regions in
Ukraine and help move towards a proper solution to the
Ukrainian issue.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): My delegation would like to thank
you, Sir, for being here and presiding over our meeting.
We also express our gratitude for the presence of the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands and
Ukraine. We also express our gratitude for the briefings
provided by the Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo; the Chief Monitor
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine
and the Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator,
Ms. Ursula Mueller.
We express our concern about the continued
tension in the region and call upon all parties to cease
hostilities immediately, abide by the ceasefire, allow
unconditional humanitarian access and facilitate full
and safe access for the OSCE Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine so that it can fully complete its
monitoring tasks on the ground.
We see that, despite the joint statement on 2 March
by the Trilateral Contact Group where the parties
reaffirmed their full commitment to a sustainable
and unlimited ceasefire from 5 March 2018 onwards,
there was once again incompliance with that pledge.
In that regard, we call for the parties to abide by the
prohibition of the use of heavy weapons and to strictly

18-1623317/28

S/PV.8270

Ukraine

29/05/2018

abide by resolution 2202 (2015), which endorses a
package of measures for the implementation of the
Minsk agreements. The Minsk agreements continue to
be the basis upon which the international community
has committed itself to seeking lasting peace in
eastern Ukraine. All of this is in line with the Security
Council press statement of 31 January 2017 (SC/12700).
Likewise we call for them to abide by the principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and to
fully abide by international humanitarian law.

Furthermore, we commend the high-level meeting
between the leaders of Russia and France on 24 May,
where it was agreed to re-establish the joint working
groups. We also applaud the meeting held between the
leaders of Russia and Germany on 16 May to continue
seeking a peaceful resolution to the conflict. Likewise,
we firmly support the endeavours of the OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission, which is conducting important
work in difficult circumstances. We encourage it to
continue with its monitoring activities.

We believe that compliance with the stipulations
of those agreements and the development of
confidence-building measures are crucial to consolidate
the efforts the parties must make to seek a political
outcome to the crisis. In that regard, we call upon the
Trilateral Contact Group and the Normandy quartet to
resume the diplomatic process towards implementing
the Minsk agreements.

With regard to the possibility of creating a
peacekeeping mission in eastern Ukraine, we believe it
is imperative for the Security Council to remain united
when establishing its mandate, if such a deployment
were considered appropriate.

Successive violations of the ceasefire have had a
devastating effect on the lives of millions of civilians.
According to statistics from the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, approximately
4 million people have been affected by the crisis,
around 3 million of whom require humanitarian
assistance. Moreover, attacks on urban areas and
civilian infrastructure have affected 60 per cent of
those living along the so-called contact line, which is
457 kilometres long and which is reportedly rapidly
becoming one of the most mine-contaminated areas
in the world. Such circumstances are exacerbated by
harsh winter temperatures.
In that regard, we call on all parties to comply with
resolution 2365 (2017), on anti-mine action, which urges
all parties to armed conflicts to bring an immediate and
definitive end to the indiscriminate to use of explosive
devices in violation of international humanitarian law.
It also urges them to protect civilians, particularly
children, from the threat posed by landmines, explosive
remnants of war and improvised explosive devices.
Along the same lines, we call on the parties to
strictly adhere to their obligations on the protection
of civilians, including resolution 2286 (2016), in
compliance with international humanitarian law.
We strongly condemn any act of violence, attacks or
threats against civilians, hospitals, schools, health-care
facilities and water and energy infrastructure, as well
as attacks against humanitarian personnel, including
doctors, who are risking their lives to help civilians.
18/28

Finally, I wish to state that there can be no military
solution to this conflict. The international community
and the Council must make every effort to achieve a
lasting peace, which will, in the long term, be beneficial
for the region. Above all, it must be the parties who
resolve their differences with the assistance of their
regional organizations.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): My delegation
welcomes you, Sir, and the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of the Netherlands and of Ukraine to the
Security Council. We express our appreciation to
Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo and the
Chief Monitor of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine, Ambassador Ertuğrul Apakan, as
well as Assistant Secretary-General Ursula Mueller, for
their comprehensive updates.
Kazakhstan expresses its concern about the
unpredictable and volatile situation in eastern Ukraine
and the frequent ceasefire violations, which have
a direct impact on the civilian population. Those
violations result in deaths and injuries, along with
many humanitarian consequences.
The humanitarian situation in Donbas has
worsened since the beginning of this month. We also
note an increase in the use of heavy weapons, to the
extent that more than 60 per cent of the people living
along the contact line are affected by regular shelling.
A considerable segment of the population does not have
access to power, water or gas supplies. The deteriorating
security situation in the wider area around the Donetsk
filtration station poses a threat to the facility, its
workers and monitors.
18-16233

29/05/2018

Ukraine

We also express sincere concern for the fate of
youth, women and all vulnerable groups, including
internally displaced persons and refugees, half of
whom are elderly.
In that regard. Kazakhstan reiterates strong support
for the activities of United Nations agencies and the
OSCE Special Monitoring Mission in the conflict area.
We call for the immediate implementation by all sides
of the framework decision on disengagement of the
Trilateral Contact Group and welcome the results of its
latest meeting, held in Minsk on 16 May. We also urge
the parties involved to provide full, safe and unhindered
access to the Special Monitoring Mission monitors in
the conflict zone, which is an essential requirement as
a confidence-building measure.
Bearing in mind that strong political will remains a
key precondition in the process of settling the Ukrainian
crisis, we believe that there is no other alternative to
resolving the crisis except through strictly peaceful
means. That should be based on observance by all
participants of their obligations, strictly complying
with resolution 2202 (2015), on the Minsk agreements.
We are also of the view that a further escalation of
tensions should be prevented to avoid complicating the
situation further. It is therefore necessary for all parties
to withdraw their heavy weapons from the contact line.
It is just as critical for United Nations agencies, regional
organizations and the international community to stand
ready to assist the population, support international
mediation efforts and facilitate the negotiation process
among all parties and their leaders, with a particular
focus on revitalizing the Normandy format. All parties
must therefore meet their obligations to provide free
access to humanitarian assistance in the conflict zone.
Of equal importance is the economic recovery of
the south-east of Ukraine. We therefore propose that
confidence-building measures be introduced in the
economic sphere so as to support greater social stability
for the region.
Last week, the Joint Investigation Team presented
its findings related to the investigation of the downing
of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17 over eastern Ukraine
on 17 July 2014. We urge all the parties involved to
pursue an objective, comprehensive and impartial
investigation of the incident in accordance with the
existing norms of international law and resolution 2166
(2014).

S/PV. 8270

Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We are very pleased to
see you, Mr. Minister, presiding over this important
meeting. We also wish to welcome the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands and of Ukraine.
We thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo, Assistant
Secretary-General Mueller and Chief Monitor Apakan
for their respective briefings on the latest situation in
eastern Ukraine.
We note the statement issued by the Special
Representative of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe Chairperson-in-Office in
Ukraine and in the Trilateral Contact Group seven days
ago expressing concern on the recent surge in combat
activity along the line of contact in eastern Ukraine.
We also understand the impact of the deteriorating
security situation on civilians and critical infrastructure,
and hence the need to respond to the humanitarian
needs on the ground. We believe the implementation of
the ceasefire regime, agreed to by the parties, is vital
in de-escalating the increasing tension and helping
address the needs of the civilian population. We also
note the discussion on the possibility of deploying
a peacekeeping mission, although there are major
differences on the scope and mandate of the mission.
There is no doubt that the resolution of the
situation in the eastern region of Ukraine can be
achieved only through a peaceful settlement. That is
why it is absolutely imperative that the parties remain
fully committed to the implementation of the Minsk
agreements and strictly adhere to resolution 2202
(2015), which endorses the package of measures for the
implementation of the Minsk agreements.
It has been a while since the parties met in the
Normandy format. We believe that the holding of
the Normandy quartet could facilitate important
discussions on the implementation of the Minsk
agreements and help tackle outstanding issues in that
regard. We note the bilateral meetings held recently by
the Russian Federation with France and with Germany
at the highest level. We hope they will pave the way for
the convening of the Normandy quartet soon.
Finally, on the issue of Malaysia Airlines Flight
MH-17, the continued cooperation of all States
and actors in the region in bringing the matter to a
conclusion remains extremely important, in line with
resolution 2166 (2014), which the Council adopted
unanimously. Let me end by saying that knowingly

18-1623319/28

S/PV.8270

Ukraine

downing a civilian aircraft is totally incomprehensible
to us and is a truly terrible crime.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I have listened attentively to my colleagues,
and now I would like to ask them to listen to me and
be patient. It has been some time since we discussed
Ukraine and I am therefore doubly grateful to the Polish
presidency for taking this initiative. I would also like to
thank Ms. DiCarlo, Ms. Mueller and Mr. Apakan for
their briefings.
Immediately after my statement we will hear the
following: in February 2014, a revolution of honour took
place in Ukraine. Let me point out, parenthetically, that
one synonym for “revolution” is “coup d’état”. Does
that mean that in Kyiv they do in fact admit that what
happened in Ukraine was a coup and a power grab? The
statement will go on to say that Russia could not be
reconciled to this and launched a war on Ukraine. Its
troops are in Donbas. It has occupied Crimea. For all
intents and purposes Russia is waging a third world war
using hybrid methods. This is a battle of civilizations.
A world of serfdom has challenged a world of freedom.
Ukraine is on the front lines of this struggle between
Muscovite barbarity and the civilized world. I could go
on listing these pathetic propositions, but I will leave
Mr. Klimkin the opportunity to expand on them.
The problem is that we are dealing with sellers
of air. But to give it its due, the Kyiv propaganda
machine has succeeded in painting a picture of an
unfortunate, freedom-loving, peace-loving Ukraine,
desperately fighting a perfidious, hating and hated
Mordor. However, it has not done it on its own. It has
been helped by its patrons in the West — who are all
sitting here in this Chamber to my left and right. It is
true, however, that they have recently begun to realize
that there is something wrong with this picture, which
is a painfully surreal one. Ukraine has declared that it
is in a state of war with Russia, although who in the
circumstances is the aggressor is not clear, considering
that we are at war with no one. And yet no war footing
has been declared, our embassies are functioning, a
no-visa regime is in effect and millions of citizens of
both countries mingle across our borders. They visit
relatives, take trips to Russia for work, vacation in socalled occupied Crimea, conduct trade, do business
and do not in any way experience hostility either from
the so-called aggressor or the people who are its socalled victims.
20/28

29/05/2018

The so-called revolution of honour — or rather
coup — came about in order to overthrow the hated and
corrupt Yanukovych regime. So where are we now? Are
Ukrainians better off today? Kyiv’s Western patrons
are well aware of the horrifying level of corruption in
Ukraine and the country’s dire economic condition. But
there is a panacea for that. Just blame Russia for all of
Ukraine’s ills, which is what is happening and usually in
caricatured form. To take one example, before the UEFA
Champions League final in Kyiv, a group of Ukrainian
fans beat up some English supporters. Regrettably, that
happens. There followed an explanation distinguished
by its simplicity. It was a provocation by the Russian
Federal Security Service, and the fans were Russians.
Whatever happens in Ukraine, the universal theory is
that it all leads to Russia.
My dear friends here are in deep, self-imposed
isolation where information about what is going on in
Ukraine is concerned. They consume the shibboleths
and clichés dished up by the Western media and the
doctrines of their Ukrainian clients. Have many of
them done in-depth analyses of the social and political
situation and the moral and psychological climate
in Ukraine? Do they know the buckets of swill and
loathing the Kyiv authorities shower on Russia, the
lies they permit themselves and the malice they spew?
But it is not just them. Does anyone here have an idea
of the nonsense and fables that some Ukrainian media
outlets disseminate about the situation in Crimea,
the construction of the Crimean Bridge, the situation
in Donbas, about Russia’s motives and so-called
intentions? No, they have no idea. But we certainly do.
Those media outlets that are willing to make up
their own minds and hold undesirable world views,
even if they are not pro-Russian or hostile, but simply in
opposition, are steamrollered and shut down. On what
pretext? Right. Because they are agents of the Kremlin.
Independent and opposition journalists are killed and
the crimes go uninvestigated. Literally just today the
journalist and Russian citizen Arkady Babchenko was
killed in Kyiv. It happened only a few hours ago. We
can assume that the Ukrainian authorities will blame
Russia for it, as they have done before more than once.
Other journalists are fleeing the country to avoid
persecution, and if they do not, they are arrested,
like Kirill Vyshinsky, a Ukrainian citizen and head
of RIA Novosti Ukraine. What was he accused of?
High treason.
18-16233

29/05/2018

Ukraine

The level of schizophrenia in Ukraine is off the
charts. Let me point out that schizophrenia is not
an insult. It is a psychiatric condition in which the
personality is split in two. Thanks to the efforts of
its current leaders, Ukraine is living in two parallel
universes, its fictional state of so-called hybrid war
with Russia and the real world, where there is no
Russian invasion. And it is essential to be able to strictly
control the information space in order to ensure that
reality cannot contradict or cross paths with the virtual
world that the Ukrainian authorities have created.
This schizophrenia now extends to their ideology. The
authorities in Kyiv are creating a pantheon of new
Ukrainian heroes, warriors for its independence. For
lack of any others, they have exalted Stepan Bandera
and Roman Shukhevych, leaders of the Organization of
Ukrainian Nationalists (OUN), which cooperated with
the Nazis. No matter that as far as half the population of
Ukraine is concerned they are not heroes but criminals
and collaborators. The important thing is to have
heroes who are anti-Russian. Our Polish presidency of
the Council knows perfectly well what sort of people
Bandera and Shukhevych were. Poles have their own
scores to settle with these men. And they know the kind
of organization OUN is — one that annihilated Jews,
Poles and Russians during the war. Except that today
they did not say anything about that. It is strictly for
Poland’s internal consumption. Talking about that kind
of thing in this Chamber is simply inappropriate.
A state of lawlessness exists right now in Ukraine
that would not be tolerated in any law-abiding State.
But there it can be. And one can close one’s eyes to
it. The authorities in Kyiv are conducting an assault
on basic human rights and freedoms, suppressing
dissidents, using police-State methods, indulging the
rise of extremist and neo-Nazist attitudes and working
for the forced Ukrainization of the country.
In September 2017 a law on education came into
effect aimed at eradicating the entire Russian-language
education system, in contravention of Ukraine’s
obligations under the Minsk agreements. The law
granting the right to use Russian at the regional level
was repealed, ignoring the Venice Commission’s
recommendations on making adjustments to ensure the
rights of national minorities. Kyiv’s measures constitute
linguistic cleansing, although it is a real stretch to call
Russian a minority language in Ukraine. All of this goes
against Ukraine’s own Constitution and its international
legal obligations, both universal and regional. I would

S/PV. 8270

like to point out that the language issue has been one of
the most basic motives of events in Ukraine. But Kyiv
is not about to learn from its mistakes.
The uncontrolled growth of nationalist and
chauvinist sentiment in Ukraine is very worrying.
Bandera’s birthday is being observed with torchlight
parades on a virtually State-wide scale. The victims
of the nationalists’ attacks include representatives of
the media, television station offices and their owners’
homes. On 9 May radicals attempted to burn down
the INTER TV offices for broadcasting a concert in
honour of Victory Day. Nationalist attacks continue
on Ukrainian Orthodox churches and journalists. Here
at United Nations Headquarters, on 9 May, after a
seminar conducted by the Ukrainian Mission, which
it attempted to pass off as an official Committee on
Information event, Ukrainian participants in the socalled anti-terrorist operation, including so-called
snipers, tried to physically threaten a Russian diplomat.
An official representative of the Ukrainian Ministry of
Foreign Affairs brought in the snipers, presented them
as friends and later tried to depict the whole thing as
Russian slander, lies and propaganda.
To this day there has been no investigation of the
tragedy that took place in Odessa on 2 May 2014, when
radicals burned more than 50 people alive in the House
of Trade Unions. But today the leader of OUN speaks
of it with pride. That is just a taste of the examples
I could give. The whole thing is really much sadder.
That is why the residents of Crimea decided that they
no longer wished to live under such conditions and left
this Ukraine. The inhabitants of Donbas have been less
lucky. A different scenario unrolled there. And yet they
did not ask for much. They wanted to have autonomy
within a united Ukraine, to speak their native language
and honour their own heroes rather than those imposed
on them by Kyiv. What is absurd about that? Why is it
possible somewhere in Belgium, where Walloons and
Flemings live peacefully together, but not in Ukraine?
God forbid that Belgium should endure such a scenario.
I wish it all the best and continued peace and joy.
Has no one ever wondered why there have never
been any protests in Donbas, large or small, against the
local authorities, which Kyiv has labelled terrorists?
And that is despite the fact that the people’s life there is
not at all easy, thanks to the Kyiv authorities, who have
shown their generous concern and hypocrisy vis-à-vis
their own population by imposing a trade and economic
blockade on them. For some reason we hear nothing

18-1623321/28

S/PV.8270

Ukraine

about human rights violations in those areas or any
demands for a speedy return to Kyiv’s control. Maybe
the answer is simply that those people do not want to
live in that kind of Ukraine either. The Council either
does not know whom it is dealing with or is deliberately
turning a blind eye, because, unfortunately, some of
its members have no need whatever of a settlement
of the conflict in Ukraine. All they want is a hotbed
of instability on Russia’s borders and the satisfaction
of schadenfreude at the tensions between two brother
countries and peoples. But they are wrong if they
imagine that this will last forever.
Many speakers today have rightly talked about the
fact that the package of measures for the implementation
of the Minsk agreements, as affirmed in resolution
2202 (2015), represents the only possible foundation
for a settlement. The phrase “Russia must fulfil the
Minsk agreements” is now commonplace. But are
many of those present in this Chamber familiar with
the provisions of the Minsk agreements? Have they
read them at all? Do they know by whom, how and in
what sequence they should be implemented? If I may, I
would like to remind them. There are 13 paragraphs in
the package of measures.
Paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 concern the comprehensive
ceasefire and withdrawal of heavy weapons. Kyiv has not
managed to achieve a durable ceasefire for three years
and has ignored the truces declared by the Trilateral
Contact Group. The Ukrainian forces’ equipment is
regularly missing from its storage areas and is used
for shelling civilian targets in Donbas. Incidentally, I
would like to tell my British colleague that the workers
from the Donetsk filtration station, like the filtration
station itself, were shelled from the Ukrainian side, not
the militias’. According to data from the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe’s Special
Monitoring Mission to Ukraine, since the beginning of
this year five civilians have been killed and 33 injured
in militia-controlled areas, whereas there has been one
civilian injury on Government-controlled territories.
Kyiv has undermined and continues to sabotage
the implementation of the framework agreement of
21 September 2016 on the disengagement of forces and
hardware, despite the fact that the militias have regularly
affirmed their willingness to abide by it. Ukrainian
forces have regularly seized residential areas in the
so-called grey zone, where such action is prohibited.
The demining process has been obstructed and military
preparations are fully under way. The Ukrainians are
22/28

29/05/2018

now conducting a military operation in Donbas with
the so-called United Forces. Today, for some reason,
exercises involving aviation support were conducted
over Donbas. And a number of countries, instead of
demanding that Kyiv fulfil its obligations, have begun
supplying it with more arms. What kind of contribution
to the implementation of the Minsk agreements is that?
Paragraph 4 concerns the dialogue on the modalities
of local elections. Kyiv has no intention of getting into
any kind of dialogue, ignoring the signatures of the
Donetsk and Luhansk representatives on the Minsk
agreements. Listening to Ukrainian politicians, one
would think there are no people there at all, only
terrorists. And yet there are 4 million Ukrainian
citizens living in Donbas.
Paragraphs 5 and 6 concern pardons, amnesties
and the release and exchange of all prisoners. In
violation of the agreements, Kyiv has refused to enact
through the Verkhovna Rada bills for amnesties for
militias, although a similar procedure for participants
in the Maidan riots in the winter of 2013 and 2014 was
implemented. The militias have consistently declared
their willingness to exchange prisoners on an all-forall basis in accordance with the Minsk agreements, but
Kyiv has persistently objected.
Paragraph 7 concerns safe humanitarian access.
The problems that have accumulated in that regard, as
Ms. Mueller mentioned, must be resolved within the
framework of the regular meetings of the Trilateral
Contact Group in Minsk. The main problem is Kyiv’s
unwillingness to hold a dialogue with the representatives
of Donetsk and Luhansk. The result, essentially, is that
today the residents of those regions can rely only on
supplies from Russia, which is something else that we
have been criticized for.
Paragraph 8 concerns the restoration of
socioeconomic ties. Kyiv has imposed a full economic,
transport and food blockade of Donbas, which is
evidently how the Kyiv authorities are trying to ensure
that the ordinary residents of south-eastern Ukraine
return to their fold.
Paragraph 9 concerns the reinstatement of full
control of the border. This is the point at which Kyiv
and Washington start reading the package of measures.
It states in black and white that this must take place
“starting on day one after the local elections.... provided
that paragraph 11 has been implemented”. That concerns
18-16233

29/05/2018

Ukraine

“carrying out constitutional reform”, which has so far
not happened.
Only after that does paragraph 10 provide for the
disarmament and withdrawal of illegal armed groups,
by which Kyiv means militias and those mythical
Russian troops, whose presence it asserts using various
fakes. Let me once again disappoint some of those
here today — there are no Russian troops in Donbas.
Incidentally, the representative of the United States
took a highly original approach today, lecturing us
about Russia’s violations of international law through
its invasion of other countries. Those were the words of
the representative of the United States, a country with
a long and renowned history of invasions of sovereign
States, including in very recent times.
The constitutional reform envisaged by paragraph
11 was supposed to be completed by the end of 2015.
Its key elements call for decentralization and enacting
legislation granting Donetsk and Luhansk special
status. The Minsk provisions include residents’ right
to linguistic self-determination, broad self-governance
and support for cross-border cooperation with
Russia. Not only has none of this been implemented,
it has essentially been erased by the law on the socalled reintegration of Donbas, which came into
effect on 24 February and does not even mention the
Minsk agreements.
Paragraph 12 concerns the holding of local elections
in coordination with representatives of Luhansk and
Donetsk. Needless to say, since Kyiv has rejected any
dialogue, it is not being implemented either.
Paragraph 13 concerns the establishment of working
groups on the implementation of relevant aspects of the
Minsk agreements. Who should comply with the Minsk
agreements, in the Council’s opinion? Which of these
paragraphs has to do with Moscow’s obligations?
The Ukrainian leadership has stubbornly avoided
meeting its obligations under the Minsk agreements
on the political front. It has not ensured the adoption
of permanent legislation on the special order for local
self-government in Donbas and is sabotaging the
implementation of the Steinmeier formula for its special
status. The reason for Kyiv’s sabotage of the Minsk
agreements is simple. It does not want a settlement.
Nor does it need Donbas. Why would it want several
million anti-Government citizens on the eve of the 2019
presidential elections? The bankrupt Kiev authorities’
ratings are at rock bottom. If they truly want a

S/PV. 8270

settlement, they have to negotiate with Donbas. That
means that they will have to admit that this is an internal
Ukrainian conflict and a fratricidal war. That is the
naked truth. And that would be domestic and foreign
policy suicide. Kiev does not possess the political will
to implement the Minsk agreements and cannot afford
to destroy the convenient paradigm it has created of
Russian aggression and Russian-supported terrorists,
which is so handy for hiding behind and getting support
from the West. Because of that, we will continue to see
Kyiv politicians enact their imitations of heated activity,
theatrical performances and bombastic statements.
In 2015, the Security Council attempted to provide
Ukraine with genuine international assistance to
Ukraine. Resolution 2202 (2015) enshrined the Minsk
package of measures as the international legal basis for
a settlement that today still remains the only effective
mechanism for a political way out of the situation. No
one should be under the illusion that any decision can
be viable without taking the will of the population of
Donbas into account. It was to support the agreements
between Kyiv, Donetsk and Luhansk that we proposed
considering the establishment of a peacekeeping
operation. Unfortunately, instead of that we are seeing
attempts to create some kind of alternative settlement
format under United Nations auspices to replace the
efforts of the Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine
and the Normandy format and turn the Minsk package
of measures on its head.
Nevertheless, the support that we have heard
today for the Minsk agreements, which need only to
be read correctly and implemented consistently, gives
us hope that we will eventually succeed in achieving
a settlement in this conflict-torn country, where those
who suffer the most are ordinary Ukrainian citizens.
Russia has a greater interest in seeing that succeed than
anyone. That is why we would like to propose that the
Council adopt a very short presidential statement. I will
read it now, if I may.
“The
Security
Council
reaffirms
unconditionally its resolution 2202 (2015),
which endorses the package of measures for the
implementation of the Minsk agreements, adopted
and signed in Minsk on 12 February 2015.
“The Security Council calls for ensuring the
full, comprehensive and sequential implementation
of the package of measures, including a
comprehensive ceasefire, as provided for therein.

18-1623323/28

S/PV.8270

Ukraine

“The Security Council calls strongly for
refraining from any steps or rhetoric that contradict
the letter and spirit of resolution 2202 (2015).”
We hope that the Council will unanimously reaffirm
its commitment to a peaceful settlement in Ukraine on
the basis of the Minsk agreements.
I cannot avoid discussing a very important and
sensitive issue. Many speakers today have mentioned
the downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17 over
eastern Ukraine in July 2014. We were very saddened by
the incident and, like everyone else, have been hoping
for an independent and impartial investigation. We did
not intend to bring up the subject today, since it has
no direct relation to the political settlement in Ukraine.
But as long as the Joint Investigation Team has rushed
through the latest portion of its comments, evidently to
be in time for today’s meeting, and some delegations in
this Chamber, in their ignorance, have launched a new
wave of anti-Russian sentiment, we have this to say.
Our attitude to the tragedy of four years ago has not
changed in any way. Naturally we are outraged by this
dreadful incident, mourn the victims and sympathize
with their loved ones. We insist on the conduct of a
credible investigation. The true perpetrators of the
tragedy must be determined on the basis of reliable
evidence and brought to justice. I would like to remind
the Council that immediately following the tragedy,
Russia spearheaded the adoption of resolution 2166
(2014), which demanded an international investigation
and defined very clear criteria for it. Since the disaster,
we have regularly provided the Dutch with all possible
assistance and have unfailingly called for ensuring the
investigation’s transparency. The Office of Russia’s
Prosecutor General has always responded promptly and
fully to appeals for the provision of legal assistance.
We have declassified and passed on to the investigation
the design data for the BUK missile system, and have
provided the results of experiments conducted for this
type of missile by Almaz-Antey, its manufacturer.
We also did what no one else has done. In October
2016, we passed on primary radar data, which is
critically important to the investigation, since it cannot
be forged. In particular, it completely excludes the
possibility that the missile that hit the Boeing 777 came
from militia-controlled territory, as the investigation
insists. And yet the data was not even included in the
results and I am asking why. How are we to understand
the refusal of the Netherlands to give an assessment of
24/28

29/05/2018

the key circumstances of the tragedy, such as the fact
that the Ukrainian authorities did not close the airspace
over the zone of conflict to civil aviation or why nothing
is said about Kyiv’s radar data or information from the
Ukrainian air traffic controllers?
I would like to remind the Council that so far the
United States has not provided any satellite images,
whose existence it announced immediately after
the disaster. Instead of taking due account of the
concrete, undeniable facts, the Joint Investigation
Team is manipulating social network data whose
authenticity cannot be verified. Moreover, even before
the completion of the investigation, the Team launched
a chain reaction of accusations about Russia in the
spirit of Britain’s “highly likely” phrase. The European
investigators have continued to discredit themselves
by making accusations before the investigation is
complete. All of this testifies to an unwillingness to
seriously engage in the investigation and confirms the
ideological and political motives behind the search
for the perpetrators. Instead of that, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands informed us about
the flat-out demand by the Netherlands and Australia
that Russia to acknowledge its guilt. I will refrain from
commenting on the letter’s content, and especially its
tone, because I do not want to offend Holland’s Foreign
Minister. But I would like to once again remind the
Council, in case anyone has forgotten, that nobody is
permitted to use ultimatums when speaking to Russia.
We reaffirm our readiness to extend all possible
assistance to a truly transparent and independent
investigation. We cannot accept the groundless
conclusions of the Joint Investigation Team. Considering
the dirty tricks that some States are employing
nowadays, we can trust only investigations in which
Russia is a full participant.
The President: The representative of the
Netherlands has asked for the floor to make a further
statement.
Mr. Blok (Netherlands): We have heard the
remarks of the representative of the Russian Federation
with regard to Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17, but we
actually heard nothing new. We are aware that Russia’s
spokespersons and State-controlled media routinely try
to discredit details of the investigation, call into question
the independence, professionalism and impartiality of
the Joint Investigation Team and continue to spread
impossible alternative theories about the downing of
18-16233

29/05/2018

Ukraine

Flight MH-17. For the relatives of the victims, that
is extremely painful. It is very disappointing that
even in this Chamber, Russia’s representative has not
acknowledged the hard facts that the Joint Investigation
Team has established based on irrefutable evidence. So
far, the Russian authorities have not shown the slightest
interest in achieving truth, justice and accountability,
as demanded by resolution 2166 (2014).
I would also like to remind the Council that our
efforts to establish an international tribunal through
the Council under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations were blocked by a Russian veto. To us,
that shows how important it is that Russia enter into
bilateral talks with the Netherlands and Australia, since
they are the proper forum in which to discuss Russia’s
responsibility for its part in the downing of Flight MH17. We therefore urge the Russian Federation to accept
our invitation to engage in such talks in relation to
the State’s responsibility for its part in the downing of
Flight MH-17 on 17 July 2014.
Mr. Klimkin (Ukraine): Thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s briefing and for your personal
dedication to countering Russia’s aggression against
my country. My appreciation also goes to the briefers
for their important presentations. And needless to
say, I want to thank other delegations for their strong
expressions of solidarity and their united condemnation
of the Kremlin’s revanchist policies.
As the Russian representative began his statement,
I thought he might have come to understand some
important points, but as he started to reproduce Russian
television’s standard narrative, I realized that normal
service had been resumed. I can therefore now continue
with my statement, because we know all too well how
everything started — with the Russian invasion of
Ukraine. We do not need to repeat those facts.
We all know that it is not only my compatriots
whom the Russian troops on our territory are shooting
and killing. Last week, Russia’s role in the downing of
Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17 was clearly exposed by
the investigators of the Joint Investigation Team. As we
all knew, but for which we now have full proof, a Russian
BUK missile system was brought from a military base
near Kursk. It shot down a passenger airliner and then
returned to Russia. I would like to thank the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands for his important
statement in that regard. As it happens, Russia’s reaction
to the Joint Investigation Team’s announcement did

S/PV. 8270

not surprise me at all. We have seen the same attitude
where the chemical attacks in Syria and Salisbury are
concerned. First Russia denies everything and spreads
dozens of versions that have nothing to do with reality.
Once caught red-handed, it refuses to recognize the
conclusions of investigative bodies under the pretext
that it is not part of the investigations. It also complains
about the fact that none of its weird versions of events
are taken into consideration. Essentially, none of this is
new, and that is a very sad thing.
We have no doubt that the downing of Malaysia
Airlines Flight MH-17 was a terrorist act. By 12 June,
Ukraine will have submitted a memorandum to the
International Court of Justice with additional evidence
of Russia’s violations of the International Convention
for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism. The
perpetrators of this and other crimes will be brought to
account and justice will be assured.
As we speak here today in this Chamber, violence
continues to ravage Donbas. The conflict has left
4.4 million people in a very dire humanitarian situation,
and the humanitarian cost continues to mount.
People lack access to all basic services and goods.
Everything — critical water, electricity and transport
infrastructure — has been destroyed. The same goes for
health facilities and services. Retired people are unable
to receive their pensions, because the Government
of Ukraine cannot reach them directly. They have to
cross into Government-controlled areas of Ukraine to
receive the money they are owed. Daily shellings and
armed hostilities are a reality for more than 600,000
Ukrainians living on both sides of the contact line.
The area, according to the United Nations, has
already become the most mine-contaminated stretch
of land in the world. One of the starkest reminders of
the cost of Russia’s aggression came two weeks ago.
On 18 May, the Russian occupation forces used 152mm
calibre artillery to shell residential areas in the village
of Troitske in the Luhansk region. Two civilians, one of
whom was a child, lost their lives.
With regard to all the ramifications of the Russians’
claim that they are not in Ukraine, I have a very simple
illustration for the Security Council, a picture of Darya
Kazemirova. Three days ago she turned 15, and just
yesterday she was killed in the backyard of her house by
a 122 mm shell, prohibited under the Minsk agreements
and shot by Russian proxies. I would therefore like to
ask the Russian representative if the shell is from the

18-1623325/28

S/PV.8270

Ukraine

so-called latest humanitarian convoy, if the Russian
proxies bought heavy ammunition and weaponry at
the local supermarket, of if they have been able to
manufacture reproductions of all the weaponry coming
into Ukraine. Unfortunately, I am making a rhetorical
point and do not need an answer, especially from the
Russian Federation. That requires feeling some kind
of responsibility.
Ukraine continues to be fully committed to peace
and the Minsk agreements, and we urge the Russian
Federation to do the same and to cease its persistent
denials of its responsibility as a party to the conflict.
We have just heard the Russian Federation’s usual
narrative, which really does have a devastating impact
on the situation on the ground. The Russian shelling has
resulted in many losses among military personnel and
the civilian population. We are talking about hundreds of
tanks, howitzers, and multiple rocket-launched grenades
brought by Russia into the territory of Ukraine. And I
do mean hundreds, most of which remain unaccounted
for. They are often found camouflaged and hidden, kept
ready for further violence.
The activities of the Russian occupation authorities
are already causing an ecological disaster in Donbas.
The shootings carried out by Russia in the vicinity of
the Donetsk water-filtration station have rendered this
critical infrastructure facility totally inoperable. The
occupation administration’s plans to shut off the pumps
at the Yunkom mine, a site of Soviet nuclear tests in
1979, risk radioactive contamination of drinking
water. Russia has even failed to provide the security
guarantees necessary for repairing and maintaining
critical civilian infrastructure along the line of contact.
The Special Monitoring Mission of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
is dealing with severe restrictions on its freedom of
movement by Russia’s military forces and their proxies.
The intimidation of observers is now totally normal and
takes place on an almost daily basis with no reaction
either from Moscow or its occupation administration.
In a nutshell, we can see that Russia and its ongoing
military activity in the occupied territories remain a
fundamental obstacle to any sort of peaceful option.
As soon as Moscow decides to stop the
violence — and so far there has been no such
decision — the conflict will end. I urge Russia to take
that decision. One of the most important steps it can take
is supporting the deployment of a full-fledged United
26/28

29/05/2018

Nations-mandated peacekeeping force throughout the
occupied territory of Donetsk and Luhansk. We are
confident that such an operation could contribute a great
deal to establishing security, creating the conditions
necessary for real progress on the implementation of
the Minsk agreements, taking over responsibility on
the ground and saving people’s lives. That will open the
way for progress in implementing further steps under
the Minsk agreement, and of course in organizing and
holding local elections, which we definitely need. We
have sent this message before, loudly and clearly, and
I would like to reinforce it today, on the International
Day of United Nations Peacekeepers, which was in fact
introduced at the initiative of Ukraine.
We stand for the full integration of the entirety
of our Donbas, and we will welcome our compatriots
back. In December 2017, my Government approved
the State programme for post-conflict recovery in the
country’s eastern regions for the next three years. It
focuses on boosting social and economic development
in the conflict-affected areas, improving well-being
and restoring normal life for the people who have
suffered under the Russian occupation for the past four
years. Naturally, in all this Ukraine is very grateful for
the humanitarian assistance provided by agencies of the
United Nations and bilateral partners. The 2018 United
Nations humanitarian response plan will be even more
instrumental in effectively addressing the needs of
millions of those affected by the conflict in Donbas.
If fully funded, it would help to make a substantial
difference for at least 2.3 million people.
In addition to highlighting the situation in the
occupied territories of Donbas, it is really important
that we maintain a special focus on Russia’s occupation
of Crimea. The Russian Federation’s actions there
constitute the most flagrant breaches of the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations since the Second
World War. They challenge the norms and rules of
international law and create an atmosphere of fear and
hatred. The occupation has resulted in the accelerated
militarization of Crimea. Russia has more than doubled
the strength of its military there and continues to prepare
the Crimean military infrastructure for the deployment
of nuclear weapons, including by refurbishing Sovietera nuclear-warhead storage facilities. Today, in fact,
Crimea is a huge military base that is often used for
Russian interventions in distant lands, including Syria.
The Syrian regime has returned the favour by sending
a delegation to Crimea and by recognizing Georgian
18-16233

29/05/2018

Ukraine

Abkhazia and South Ossetia, occupied by Russia, as
independent republics.
The occupation continues to be characterized by
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law, the total suppression of any opposition
and the systematic persecution of Crimean Tatars
and Ukrainians — anyone who is against the
occupation, basically — along with killings and forced
disappearances, intimidation and attacks on Crimean
Tatars and on Ukrainian identity and culture. Political
prisoners are now a sad reality in Russian-occupied
Crimea, as well as in Russia itself, as a matter of fact.
My courageous compatriots are now fighting for their
lives as well as for freedom and justice. On 14 May,
Oleg Sentsov, a famous film director who has been
thrown behind bars in Russia for opposing the illegal
annexation of Crimea, addressed these very simple
words to the people of Ukraine.
“I, Oleg Sentsov, citizen of Ukraine, illegally
sentenced by a Russian court and currently in
prison in the city of Labytnangi, am declaring an
indefinite hunger strike as of 14 Mary 2018. The
only condition for its termination is the liberation
of all Ukrainian political prisoners in the territory
of the Russian Federation.”
He added that he is ready to die for the freedom of those
of his compatriots who have been illegally detained
and sentenced in Russia. Vladimir Balukh, a political
prisoner in Russian-occupied Crimea, has been on an
indefinite hunger strike since 19 March in protest of
his sentence on fake charges. The real reason for his
prosecution is simply his pro-Ukrainian stance and the
Ukrainian flag he flew in his private yard.
Emir Usein Kuku, Nariman Memediminov, Seyran
Mustafayev, Edem Semedlyaev, Yassir Arbelaev and
many other Crimean Tatars have become special targets
for repression by the occupying authorities. They now
need the support of all those who value freedom and
human rights. I would like to take advantage of this
important opportunity to urge Council members and
the wider United Nations community to join our call
to Russia to free them. Russia continues to ignore the
order that the International Court of Justice issued one
year ago requiring it, among other things, to refrain
from maintaining or imposing limitations on the
ability of the Crimean Tatar community to preserve
its representative institutions, including the Mejlis, as
well as to ensure the availability of education in the

S/PV. 8270

Ukrainian language. Despite the order’s very clear
wording, an entire year has passed in which Russia has
continued its ban on the Mejlis and its disregard for
all of the provisions of the relevant General Assembly
resolutions on Crimea.
This is all about denying access for international
human rights monitoring missions, showing the utmost
contempt for its obligations under international law as
the occupying Power and continuing the practice of
compelling Crimean residents to serve in the armed
forces of the Russian Federation. These are examples
of Russia’s response to the demands of international
community. And the list of violations is practically
endless. Just two weeks ago, on 15 May, Russia opened
a bridge across the Kerch Strait. We strongly condemn
its action and consider it yet another violation of our
sovereignty. Ukraine is grateful to the countries that
have already denounced this attempt to cement the
illegal occupation of Crimea. We urge all other States
and organizations, including the United Nations, to
support that position.
Russia is also trying to change the demographics
of the peninsula. Since the occupation began the
occupying Power has intentionally brought in a huge
number of settlers. It has introduced settlers from a
number of different regions and created intolerable
conditions for the local population in an attempt to force
them to leave. I want to remind the Russian delegation
that this practice is a clear violation of the 1949 Geneva
Convention. Time and again we have urged the Russian
Federation to reverse its illegal occupation of Crimea
and to stop its aggression, including by withdrawing
its armed formations from the temporarily occupied
territories of Ukraine and fully implementing its
commitments under the Minsk agreements. Until that
is done, the issue of Russian aggression should remain
a high priority on the Council’s agenda.
In conclusion, I would like to once again express my
gratitude for the messages of solidarity with Ukraine
expressed during this debate.
There is one more item that I should mention and
that the Russian delegate has also brought up. We have
just received tragic news from Kyiv. Arkady Babchenko,
a Russian journalist and a well-known opponent of the
Russian regime, has been killed near his apartment in
Kyiv. Before arriving in Ukraine, he was compelled
to leave Russia following attacks and threats against
him and his family. He went to Prague and after that

18-1623327/28

S/PV.8270

Ukraine

to Kyiv. He continued to struggle for a democratic
Russia from Ukraine. Of course, Moscow has always
considered him to be an enemy. Our police have already
begun an investigation. It is too early to say who is
behind the attack, but with our knowledge of similar
cases, we have strong reason to believe that Russia is
willing to employ this and other tactics to destabilize
Ukraine through acts of terrorism, subversion and
political assassination.
I would like to thank everyone once again for
their support and solidarity with Ukraine. It pains me
to speak of this issue, which is such a matter of life
and death for many of my fellow Ukrainians. There is
nothing I would have wanted more than to be able to tell
the Council that we reached a resolution to the conflict.
But since an end is unfortunately nowhere near in sight,
we will spare no effort to ensure that justice is served
and that the Russian State bears full responsibility
for its aggression and withdraws from all occupied
territory, both in Donbas and Crimea.
The President: The representative of the
Russian Federation has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I will be very brief. As I said today, the
Ukrainian Foreign Minister has already hinted at the

28/28

29/05/2018

version that it will put out about the murder of the
unfortunate journalist Arkady Babchenko. I believe
that Ukraine’s justice system, whose value we are
familiar with, will no doubt discover a trail leading to
Russia, as we promised the Council today.
Secondly, I mentioned Crimea, or rather the
Minister mentioned Crimea just now. I am touched by
his concern for Crimea and the suffering of the people
there. I have a piece of advice for him. He should not
worry about them; they are quite happy. And today we
are discussing Ukraine, not Crimea. Crimea is part
of Russia. It is time to accept that fact and proceed
accordingly.
I want to say that I grieve for all who have died in
this senseless conflict, including Darya Kazemirova,
whose picture we just saw. I grieve for the soldiers of
the Ukrainian army who have died as cannon fodder in
this senseless conflict. And I grieve for all Ukrainians
who have perished there, including those who have
sadly died in Donbas, victims of Ukrainian weapons.
There are many people who have suffered a fate similar
to Darya Kazemirova’s, as the Minister well knows.
He should not forget to bring their pictures for the
next meeting.
The meeting rose at 6 p.m.

18-16233
