General Assembly-'-Thirteenth Session

36

1330 (XIII). Effects of the European Economic
Community on the development of certain
Non-Self-Governing Territories

The General Assembly,

Ta!?ing int-o account the interest in the offers indicated by the steadily increasing number of applications,
Noting that the major part of the scholarships offered
by Member States remains unutilized,

Referring to its resolution 1153 (XII) of 26 November 1957,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General

1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on offers of study and training facilities under General
Assembly resolution 845 (IX);

on the association of Non-Self-Governing Territories
with the European Economic Community,28

2. Reaffirms its resolution 1154 (XII) of 26 November 1957, and invites the Administering Members
to take all necessary measures consistent with the interests and needs of the Non-Self-Governing Territories
and their peoples to ensure that scholarships and training facilities offered by Member States may be utilized
by inhabitants of those Territories, and to render every
assistance to those persons who have applied for, or
have been granted, scholarships or fellowships, particularly with regard to facilitating their travel formalities;

Noting v.tith concef-n that the Administering Members
have thus far submitted no information on the possible
effects of the association of the Non-Self-Governing
Territories under their administration with the European Economic Community,
Considering that the association of Non-Self-Governing Territories with the European Economic Community may have significant effects on the development of
these Territories towards the objectives of Article 73
of the Charter of the United Nations,
l. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the association of Non-Self-Governing Territories
with the European Economic Community;
2. Invites again the Administering Members concerned to transmit to the Secretary-General information
on the association of the Non-Self-Governing Territories under their administration with the European
Economic Community;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare for the
fourteenth session of the General Assembly a report
on new developments connected with the association
of Non-Self-Governing Territories with the European
Economic Community, taking into account the information to be submitted by the Administering Members
and the studies that may be undertaken in this connexion by the Economic and Social Council, the Economic Commission for Africa, the Economic Commission for Europe, the Economic Commission for Asia
and the Far East, the Economic Commission for Latin
America and other international organs, in so far as
these studies may be relevant to the development of
Non-Self-Governing Territories;

3. Requests the Member States offering scholarships
to take into account the necessity of furnishing complete
information about the scholarships offered, and., whenever possible, the need to provide travel funds to prospective students ;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to give such assistance as is possible, and as may be sought by the
Member States concerned and by the applicants;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to include, in his
future reports, detailed information concerning the actual use of scholarships and training facilities offered by
Member States for the education of the inhabitants of
the Non-Self-Governing Territories.

789th plenary meeting,
12 December 1958.
1332 (XIII). Question of the renewal of the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories

The General Assembly,
Having considered the work of the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories,

4. Resolves to resume consideration of this question
at its fourteenth session.
789th plenary meeting,
12 December 1958.

Recognizing the continued value of the work of the
Committee in the interests of the advancement of the
peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories and the attainment of the objectives set forth in Chapter XI of the
Charter of the United Nations,

1331 (XIIl). Offers by Member States of study
and training facilities for inhabitants of
Non-Self-Governing Territories

1. Decides to continue the Committee on Information
from Non-Self-Governing Territories on the same basis
for a further period of three years ;

The General Assembly,

Noting v.tith satisfaction the further response to resolution 845 (IX) inviting Member States to extend
offers of facilities for study and training to inhabitants
of Non-Self-Governing Territories,

2. Decides that, as provided in General Assembly
resolutions 332 (IV) of 2 December 1949, 646 (VII)
of 10 December 1952 and 933 (X) of 8 November 1955,
the Committee should be. composed of those Members
of the United Nations transmitting information in accordance with Article 73 e of the Charter and of an
equal number of non-Administering Members elected
by the Fourth Committee on behalf of the General Assembly on as wide a geographical basis as possible;

• Jbidy Thirteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 36, docu•
ment A 3916/Rev.l.
• Jb, ., documents A/3917/Rev.I and Add.I.

3. Invit•es the members of the Committee to continue
to attach to their delegations persons specially qualified
in the functional fields within the Committee's purview;

Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
on offers of study and training facilities under General
Assembly resolution 845 (IX) of 22 November 1954,29

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

4. Invites the Administering Members to attach to
their delegations indigenous persons specially qualified
to speak on economic, social and educational policies in
the Non-Self-Governing Territories;
5. Instructs the Committee to examine, in the spirit
of Article 1, paragraphs 3 and 4, and of Article 55 of
the Charter, the summaries and analyses of information
transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter on economic, social and educational conditions in the NonSelf-Governing Territories, including any papers prepared by the specialized agencies and any reports or
information on measures taken in pursuance of the resolutions adopted by the General Assembly concerning
economic, social and educational conditions in the NonSelf-Governing Territories;
6. Instructs the Committee to submit to the General
Assembly at its regular sessions reports containing such
procPdural recommendations as it may deem fit and
such substantive recommendations as it may deem
desirable relating to functional fields generally but not
with respect to individual Territories;
7. Considers that the Committee should, without prejudice to the annual consideration of all the functional
fields enumerated in Article 73 e of the Charter, give
special attention to educational, economic and social
conditions in turn and should consider the information
transmitted in respect of these questions in the light
of the reports approved by the General Assembly on
such conditions in Non-Self-Governing Territories;
8. Decides that, at its sixteenth session, the General

Assembly will reconsider the question of continuing the
Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing
Territories, together with the questions of the composition and terms of reference of this or any such future
committee.
789th plenary meeting,
12 December 1958.

•

•

•

At its 839th meeting, the Fourth Committee, acting in the
name of the General Assembly, in accordance with the terms of
the above resolution, was called upon to fill the four vacancies
in the membership of the Committee on Information from
Non-Self-Governing Territories created by the expiration of
the terms of office of CHINA, INDIA, IRAQ and VENEZUELA.
The following States were elected for a three-year period:
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC, GHANA, INDIA and IRAQ.

1333 (XIII). Verbatim record of the debate on
the report of the Good Offices Committee
on South West Africa

The General Assembly,
Having invited the Good Offices Committee on South
West Africa, by its resolution 1243 (XIII) of 30 October 1958, to renew discussions with the Government
of the Union of South Africa in order to find a basis
for an agreement which would continue to accord to
the Mandated Territory of South West Africa as a
whole an international status, and which would be in
conformity with the purposes and principles of the
United Nations,

37

Having requested the Committee, in the conduct of
its work, to bear fully in mind the discussions held at
the thirteenth session of the General Assembly,
Keeping in view the vital importance of the question
of South West Africa,
Believing that a verbatim record of the debate concerning the report of the Committee will permit a
proper understanding of the position of the United
Nations on this question and will also facilitate. the
implementation of General Assembly resolution 1243
(XIII),
Requests the Secretary-General to have the verbatim
record of the debate concerning the report of the Good
Offices Committee on South West Africa mimeographed
and circulated.
790#i plenary meeting,
13 December 1958.

1345 {XIII). Question of the frontier between
the Trust Territory of Somaliland under
Italian administration and Ethiopia80

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1213 (XII) of 14 December
1957,
Having taken note of the reports transmitted to the
General Assembly by the Governments of Ethiopia81
and Italy 32 in accordance with resolution 1213 (XII),
Noting with satisfact-ion the establishment of an arbitration tribunal to delimit the frontier in accordance
with the recommendation contained in the aforementioned resolution,
Noting with regret that the two Governments have
not so far reached agreement on the terms of reference
for the arbitration or on the appointment of the independent person provided for in resolution 1213 (XII),
Having regard to the urgency of the matter,

1. Reaffirms its resolution 1213 (XII) ;
2. Urges the parties once agai11 to intensify their
efforts to implement the terms of resolution 1213
(XII);
3. Recommends that the two Governments agree on
the choice of an independent person within three months
and, failing such agreement, invite His Majesty the
King of Norway to nominate such independent person;
4. Requests the Governments of Ethiopia and Italy
to report to the General Assembly at its fourteenth session on the measures taken by them to give effect to the
present resolution.

792nd plenary meeting,
13 December 1958.
80
This resolution was submitted directly in plenary meeting
and adopted by the General Assembly after consideration of the
report of the Fourth Committee. For the text of the report,
see Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 41, document A/4073.
01
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 41, documents A/4031 and Add.I.
.. Ibid., document A/4030.
