United Nations

S/PV.3743

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-second Year

3743rd Meeting
Thursday, 27 February 1997, 12.25 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Mahugu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kenya)

Members:

Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Egypt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guinea-Bissau . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Ms. Mackenna
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Berrocal Soto
Mr. Elaraby
Mr. Ladsous
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Konishi
Mr. Matuszewski
Mr. Monteiro
Mr. Park
Mr. Lavrov
Mr. Osvald
Mr. Richmond
Mr. Richardson

Agenda
The situation in Angola
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM III) (S/1997/115)

97-85176 (E)

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be incorporated
in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned,
within one week of the date of publication, to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service,
room C-178.

Security Council
Fifty-second year
The meeting was to called to order at 12.25 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

3743rd meeting
27 February 1997
Mr. Carneiro (Angola) (spoke in Portuguese;
English text furnished by the delegation): Allow me to
begin by congratulating you, Sir, on behalf of my
Government, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month; I also congratulate your
predecessor on his excellent work last month.

The situation in Angola
Progress report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM III) (S/1997/115)
The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Algeria, Angola, Brazil, Cape Verde, Lesotho, Malawi,
Mali, Mozambique, Namibia, the Netherlands, South Africa
and Tunisia, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council’s
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Carneiro
(Angola) took a seat at the Council table; Mr. Baali
(Algeria), Mr. Amorim (Brazil), Mr. Monteiro (Cape
Verde), Mr. Mangoaela (Lesotho), Mr. Rubadiri
(Malawi), Mr. Ouane (Mali), Mr. Dos Santos
(Mozambique), Mr. Andjaba (Namibia), Mr. Cohen
(Netherlands), Mr. Jele (South Africa) and Mr.
Abdellah (Tunisia) took the seats reserved for them at
the side of the Council Chamber.
The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM III), document
S/1997/115. Members also have before them document
S/1997/162, which contains the text of a draft resolution
prepared in the course of the Council’s prior consultations.
The first speaker is the Vice-Minister without Portfolio
of Angola, His Excellency General Higino Carneiro, whom
I welcome and on whom I now call.

2

I would like also to convey our appreciation to the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, who, even in the
short time he has been at the helm of the Organization,
has already shown his personal commitment to a speedy
settlement of the Angolan problem. His coming trip to
Angola will convey the international community’s firm
support for the peace process and will be a gesture of
encouragement to the participants in that process.
The current deliberations on Angola are taking place
at a time of increasing tension in Africa, particularly in
the Great Lakes region. This is mobilizing the attention
and the efforts of the members of the Security Council,
with the goal of ending hostilities and thus preventing a
new escalation of violence on the continent.
Two years ago, when the Security Council adopted
resolution 976 (1995) authorizing the establishment of the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM III), there were many pessimistic voices
predicting that a return to war was only a matter of time,
and saying that this peace operation was doomed to
failure. However, time and events have proved the
opposite, and this leads us to believe that the path to
peace seems irreversible.
Since its signing in 1994, the Lusaka Protocol has
substantially altered the situation in Angola. Angola is
experiencing its longest period without war since it was
established as an independent nation. The advances made
since the beginning of the implementation of the Protocol
are obvious. But obviously, more advances could have
been made, especially as regards national reconciliation,
had UNITA assumed a more constructive attitude
throughout this period of implementation of the Lusaka
Protocol.
The advances in the peace process to date would not
have been possible without action by the international
community and, in particular, by the Security Council,
which has employed various means of pressure, including,
in resolution 864 (1993), enforcement measures against
UNITA; these have proved effective in gaining
compliance with many provisions of the accords.

Security Council
Fifty-second year
Exerting further pressure upon UNITA continues to be
necessary because of the excessive delays in the application
of the Lusaka accord, caused by obstacles systematically
raised by UNITA. An illustration of this situation is that the
establishment of the Government of National Unity and
Reconciliation and the swearing in of UNITA deputies to
the parliament did not occur on the dates agreed upon
solely because UNITA decided not to send its
representatives to Luanda as agreed.
The new elements by which UNITA is now attempting
to place conditions on its participation in the Government
and in the parliament run counter to the spirit and letter of
the Lusaka Protocol; their acceptance would mean the
renegotiation of that accord. We reiterate that the formation
of the Government and the swearing in of members of
parliament should take place unconditionally, without any
linkages, and within the legal framework defined by the
accords and other agreements that are valid for the peace
process.
Another important goal of the process that has yet to
be achieved is the expansion of the State’s central
administration in areas occupied by UNITA. Although there
has been some progress in this regard, the failure to
complete the process is entirely the responsibility of
UNITA. Moreover, UNITA continues to impede free
movement of people and goods in those areas.
Prompt completion of the pending tasks under the
peace accord is crucial. If the accord is not to become
fragile, the peace process cannot be allowed to drag on
indefinitely. It should not be dependent upon wills that are
not those of the Angolan people and not in the nation’s
interests; the Angolan people have always been the war’s
main victims and continue to be the victims of its
consequences.
UNITA must be clear about its intentions. It must
cease raising new obstacles and must show in practical
deeds if it is in fact motivated by good faith and political
will. The systematic way in which UNITA invokes
arguments in order not to honour its commitments leads us
to believe that we are facing delaying tactics aimed at
blocking the country’s normal functioning, creating an
untenable situation for the Government, exhausting the
patience of the international community and provoking the
renegotiation of the Lusaka Protocol.
We have always assumed that participation in Angolan
society by a UNITA that has been transformed into a true
political party is fundamental and healthy for the

3743rd meeting
27 February 1997
functioning of our democracy. So we do not understand
why UNITA should create difficulties that prevent it from
playing its role as a political party in accordance with
Angolan law.
The Government, together with UNAVEM and the
troika of observers, is now undertaking intensive efforts
towards satisfactorily completing all pending military
tasks, towards the swearing in of the deputies and towards
the formation of a Government of National Unity. We
continue to hope that UNITA will cooperate by not
insisting on hampering the achievement of these important
objectives.
Given the prospects for success in the
implementation of the peace accords, the Council should
begin to study the future role to be played by the United
Nations, taking into consideration that some tasks will
remain to be completed and that others, by their nature,
will continue to require the assistance of the personnel
and framework of the United Nations. The extension of
State administration, completion of the formation of the
Angolan Armed Forces, the integration of UNITA
personnel into the National Police, the demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants, and the removal of
mines and other explosive devices are, as of now, some
of the areas which should receive priority. Their
achievement will help guarantee the country’s political
and military stability.
It is also in the light of the prospect of success of
the peace accords that the Government expects the
beginning of a more effective and comprehensive
implementation of the community rehabilitation and
national reconciliation programme. I would like to take
this opportunity to express our thanks to the Governments
and international institutions which are helping this
programme, and to appeal to those that promised to
provide funds during the round table held in Brussels in
1994 to honour their commitments, so that Angola can
enter a new era of economic and social progress.
Allow me to express, on behalf of the Angolan
people and Government, our most profound gratitude, and
to underscore the dedication and spirit of sacrifice of all
UNAVEM personnel, some of whom have lost their lives
or have became incapacitated as they carried out their
noble duties.
We must also highlight the active role played by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Maître
Alioune Blondin Beye, who has been a tireless negotiator

3

Security Council
Fifty-second year
and advocate for the cause of peace in Angola, as well as
the contributions of the countries of the troika — the
United States, Portugal and the Russian Federation — the
Organization of African Unity, the troop-contributing
countries, and all Governments that have continued to offer
their help to restore peace and stability in Angola.
Finally, we wish to thank the Governments, the United
Nations humanitarian agencies and the non-governmental
organizations for their generous assistance to the
populations most affected by the war.
I should like also to take this opportunity to convey,
on behalf of the Angolan Government, our most profound
condolences to the Ambassador of China on the passing of
Mr. Deng Xiaoping, an outstanding Chinese leader and
political figure.
The draft resolution to be adopted today has the
support of my Government, and it is our hope that it will
contribute to speeding the restoration of peace in Angola.
The President: I thank the Vice-Minister without
Portfolio of the Republic of Angola for the kind words he
addressed to me.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. Unless
I hear any objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the
vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I shall first call on those members of the Council who
wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from
Russian): It is with pleasure that I wish to welcome
His Excellency General Higino Carneiro, the Vice-Minister
without Portfolio of the Republic of Angola, and to thank
him for a most instructive statement.
We note also with satisfaction the presence among us
of Mr. Beye, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, who, along with the troika of Observer States, is
working actively for the settlement of the Angolan problem.
The Russian Federation, which is a member of the troika,
is deeply interested in the success and progress of the peace
process and in the rapid restoration of stability and peace in
that country. We are sparing no effort to attain those
objectives.

4

3743rd meeting
27 February 1997
Putting an end to the many years of conflict in
Angola — the last unsettled hotbed of tension in southern
Africa — would be a major blessing for the people of
that country and of the countries of the region, and it
would also represent a substantial success for the
peacemaking activities of the United Nations and of the
international community as a whole.
While we note with satisfaction that Angola, step by
step, has been making its way towards peace, we are
concerned at the fact that this process is proceeding with
difficulty, constantly encountering new obstacles because
of the lack of due cooperation on the part of UNITA. As
a result, in recent months once again the pace of
implementation of military and other tasks has been
slowed down, and twice agreements for a time-table for
the establishment of a Government of National Unity and
Reconciliation have been broken off. This is undermining
the trust so painstakingly established between the Angolan
parties and is complicating the situation in the country as
a whole.
The Russian delegation agrees with the conclusion
of the report of the Secretary-General to the effect that
attempts to link up various aspects of the peace process
and to evade contracted obligations should immediately
be put to an end. It is only on that basis that the
international community can continue effective support
for the peace process in Angola.
We believe that, as the settlement has entered a
decisive and complex phase, we must now send the
Angolan parties, and first and foremost UNITA, a clearcut signal on the inadmissibility of further delays in
resolving military and other issues and in establishing a
Government of National Unity and Reconciliation. This is
of critical importance to the success of the entire peace
process and that of national reconciliation.
On this basis, we support the option proposed in the
report of the Secretary-General to extend the current
mandate of the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission (UNAVEM III) for one month, along with a
clear-cut warning that if, by 31 March, no such
Government has been established because of
procrastination on the part of UNITA, the Security
Council will have to consider taking appropriate and
concrete measures with regard to that organization. We
hope that this extremely clear signal will be correctly
understood by UNITA and that the Angolan parties will
effectively use the additional time given them for a
speedy movement forward of the peace process.

Security Council
Fifty-second year
We believe that the draft resolution submitted for
consideration by the Security Council is adequate to the
task at this current stage of the Angolan settlement. Along
with other members of the Security Council, we will vote
in its favour.
Mr. Konishi (Japan): At the outset, I should like to
welcome the presence of the Vice-Minister without
Portfolio of the Republic of Angola, His Excellency
General Higino Carneiro. I should like also to express my
sincere appreciation to the Special Representative, Mr.
Alioune Blondin Beye, and to the representatives of the
troika countries — Portugal, the Russian Federation and the
United States — for their dedicated efforts to foster and
support the peace process in Angola.
Permit me first of all to state that Japan supports the
draft resolution before us and in particular the decision of
the Security Council to extend the mandate of the United
Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM III) for an
additional month, until 31 March 1997.
At the same time, I must hasten to add that my
Government finds it profoundly regrettable that it was the
failure, once again, of the parties concerned to establish a
Government of National Unity and Reconciliation that has
compelled the Security Council to take this decision. While
Japan recognizes that some progress has been made, it
urgently calls upon UNITA in particular to cooperate in
efforts to advance the peace process without any linkages
or further delay.
We have strong hopes that in the report the
Secretary-General is to submit to the Council on 20 March,
he will be able to confirm that the long-awaited goal of the
formation of the Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation has in fact been achieved.
Other issues of serious concern must be addressed. I
refer in particular to the quartering and demobilization of
UNITA troops and their integration into the joint Angolan
Armed Forces. My delegation also stresses the importance
of guaranteeing the safety of personnel engaged in
humanitarian activities. The peace process cannot be
considered to have been successfully concluded until these
issues are resolved.
As was made clear in the presidential statement of
30 January, it is up to the Angolans themselves to restore
peace in their country. UNAVEM III and an anticipated
follow-on presence can only assist them in their efforts, and
cannot remain in Angola indefinitely. Thus it is imperative

3743rd meeting
27 February 1997
that all parties, especially UNITA, demonstrate a
commitment to the peace process by establishing a
Government of National Unity and Reconciliation without
further delay.
My delegation believes that once this goal has been
achieved and the follow-on Mission is in place, it will
play an important role in promoting reconciliation
throughout the nation. In this regard, we support the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to maintain and
enhance the Political Affairs Division of UNAVEM III as
the transition to the follow-on Mission proceeds. Japan
also hopes that this Mission will be effective in educating
citizens in such areas as the consolidation of peace, the
promotion of national reconciliation and respect for
human rights, and the multi-party system of government
by disseminating the necessary information. It may be
suggested that the Secretary-General report to the Council
on the activities of the follow-on Mission on a regular
basis. Once the details of this Mission — such as its
mandate, modalities and time-frame — are worked out,
Japan, for its part, will be ready to consider how it can
best contribute to the Mission.
Japan has been making various contributions to
expedite the peace process in Angola. Let me cite just
two areas in which it has provided assistance. Deeply
concerned at the proliferation of landmines, whose
victims are most often innocent civilians, Japan has
earmarked for demining activities in Angola $1.4 million
of the $2 million it contributed to the United Nations
Voluntary Trust Fund for Assistance in Mine Clearance.
It has also made a contribution of $1 million through the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees to support the return and resettlement of
Angolan refugees who have sought refuge in
neighbouring countries.
Once it is apparent that peace has taken root
throughout the nation with the establishment of the
Government of National Unity and Reconciliation, Japan
will be in a position to consider making further
contributions, taking into consideration the needs for
reconstruction and development of the country as a whole.
Mr. Richmond (United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland): I would first like to welcome the
leader of the Angolan delegation, General Carneiro, and
also express our appreciation for the untiring efforts of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Beye, and for the efforts of the representatives of the
troika.

5

Security Council
Fifty-second year

3743rd meeting
27 February 1997

At the end of December, when the Council last
extended the mandate of United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM III), a goal of 28 February
1997 was set for the parties in Angola to complete their
peace process commitments. It is very disappointing that,
due largely to a lack of cooperation from UNITA, the date
for the formation of a Government of National Unity and
Reconciliation has still not been set and that a number of
other issues are still outstanding. The people of Angola
deserve better than these repeated delays and unfulfilled
commitments. We urge both parties, but particularly
UNITA, to put an end to brinkmanship, to drop the linkages
and conditions which create an atmosphere of mistrust and
to show the flexibility and commitment which are now
essential to finishing the job.

Reconciliation with the enormous task of reconstruction
and rehabilitation.

It is clear what needs to be done. UNITA must stop its
delaying tactics and send its deputies to the National
Assembly and its nominated members of the future
Government of National Unity and Reconciliation to
Luanda. The Government of National Unity and
Reconciliation must be established by the end of March.
The outstanding political and military aspects of the peace
process, including the selection and incorporation of
UNITA soldiers into the Angolan Armed Forces, must be
completed.

Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
At the outset, I would like to thank the Secretary-General
for the information and observations contained in his
latest report on the situation in Angola (S/1997/115). I
should also like to extend my thanks and appreciation to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Alioune Blondin Beye, for his strenuous and constructive
efforts to achieve peace in Angola. I would like to
welcome General Carneiro, who is participating in this
meeting.

We should also like to see an early meeting between
President Dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi in Angola. That
would be a welcome and visible signal of the commitment
of both leaders to moving the peace process forward.

In its presidential statement three weeks ago, the
Security Council called upon the Angolan Government
and UNITA to implement the commitments they had
undertaken in January: the formation of a Government of
National Unity and Reconciliation; the arrival of 17
UNITA deputies in Luanda to take their seats in
Parliament; and the settlement of the question of the
special status of Mr. Savimbi. We are deeply concerned
that — despite the continued efforts of the United
Nations, Special Representative Mr. Beye, the three troika
countries and the countries of the Southern African
Development Community — these undertakings have
been only partially implemented.

To allow these tasks to be accomplished, we are in
favour of extending the mandate of UNAVEM III until 31
March 1997, as proposed in the draft resolution before us.
But the international community will be watching the
situation closely. In his report, the Secretary-General
suggests that the Security Council might consider
appropriate steps if a new Government has not been formed
by the end of March. We hope that this will not be
necessary, but nobody should be in no doubt that we are
prepared to consider such steps in those circumstances.
We support the Secretary-General’s recommendation
on a follow-on observer mission, including the increased
number of human rights monitors. We agree that a
continued United Nations presence will be necessary to
consolidate the peace process, but we hope that its role will
be complete by the end of 1997. By then, we hope the
international community will be focusing its efforts on
assisting the Government of National Unity and

6

The United Nations and, through it, the wider
international community have made an enormous
investment in bringing peace to Angola since the parties
signed the Lusaka Protocol in November 1994. The
British Government is ready to join the rest of the
international community in continuing to help the people
of Angola so that they can begin to enjoy the economic
prosperity and political stability that only a successful
peace process can bring. But none of this will be possible
unless the parties, and UNITA in particular, honour their
obligations and move quickly to complete the outstanding
tasks. The responsibility is theirs.

The delegation of Egypt, like others, believes that
only UNITA’s determined political will to become a
political party and to abstain from any practice that would
delay the implementation of the peace agreement break
the stalemate in implementing the Lusaka Protocol. We
are convinced that this cannot be achieved without
pressure being exerted by the international community
and the troika countries on the UNITA leadership.
The Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Beye, mentioned yesterday when he met with the

Security Council
Fifty-second year
members of the Security Council that the United Nations
has achieved concrete progress. He referred to the halt to
bloodshed among Angolans and to the quartering of UNITA
forces in camps. I would like to add to the list the success
of the United Nations in training Angolans in demining, as
well as its efforts to repair bridges and roads and rebuild
the infrastructure of the country. These are successes worth
mentioning.
Paragraphs 22 and 50 of the report of the SecretaryGeneral refer to the critical shortfall in the financing
necessary to maintain the 15 quartering areas of UNITA
forces — which have to be kept until the end of next
month — and to the fact that the unpaid assessed
contributions to the Special Account for UNAVEM for the
period since its inception amounted to $150.2 million.
These points deserve the special attention of the members
of the Security Council.
The delegation of Egypt would like to affirm its
support for the Secretary-General’s recommendations in his
report regarding the future of UNAVEM III. In particular,
we support those related to continuing the United Nations
presence in Angola during 1997. We are also in favour of
keeping the Special Representative in Luanda and providing
him with the necessary support personnel. Moreover, we
support increasing the strength of the Mission’s civilian
police and maintaining the logistics staff until next August.
The delegation of Egypt will support the draft
resolution before the Council to extend the mandate of
UNAVEM III for one month, until 31 March.
Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): We note with serious
concern and deep frustration that the progress in the
Angolan peace process during the last few weeks has not
matched our expectations, despite the presidential statement
the Security Council adopted on 30 January. We anxiously
expected positive progress to take place through
consultations in the Joint Commission and through other
facilitating efforts by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the troika of observer countries.
May I also take this opportunity to welcome the ViceMinister without portfolio of the Angolan Government,
General Carneiro, whose statement was greatly appreciated
by my delegation.
We are now once again extending the mandate of the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM III) without that mandate having been
completely fulfilled due to procrastination by the direct

3743rd meeting
27 February 1997
parties to the peace process. Despite this frustration, we
certainly believe that the gains achieved so far in the
Angolan peace process have to be maintained and
strengthened to new levels. The enormous efforts and
resources that the international community has put into
the cause of peace in Angola simply should not be
allowed to end short of a success. The Angolan peace
process stands now at a critical juncture, and we must
make another definitive push to help establish a unified
Government and speed up the consolidation of peace and
national reconciliation.
To achieve this, we believe that the international
community should at this time give a firm and
unequivocal message to the Angolan parties. They must
realize that any further procrastination in the peace
process will not be tolerated. We should make clear once
again that continued international support, including the
presence of UNAVEM III, is linked to progress in the
peace process, and that the Council will consider further
measures on that basis. For this reason, we support the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to extend the
mandate of UNAVEM III for one month, with the clear
indication that the Council is considering the imposition
of stronger measures against those responsible for delays.
The draft resolution before the Council reflects such an
approach and we will vote in its favour.
In the same vein, we also believe that the question
of a post-UNAVEM-III United Nations presence should
be carefully scrutinized in the light of progress in the
Angolan peace process. In this regard, we remind the
Angolan parties once again that the ultimate responsibility
for peace and reconciliation in Angola rests with the
Angolan parties themselves. The future of Angola lies in
no other hands but theirs.
Finally, we would also like to stress the importance
of the expeditious implementation of the many tasks
remaining under the Lusaka Protocol, aside from the
establishment of a unified Government. Peace cannot take
firm root unless such problems as the high number of
deserters from quartering areas, the delay in the formation
of a unified armed forces and the unsatisfactory level of
disarmament of civilians are expeditiously addressed.
Let me conclude by expressing our sincere hope that
we all can soon celebrate the establishment of a
Government of National Unity and Reconciliation and see
all the remaining issues resolved by the time Council
meets again to consider this matter.

7

Security Council
Fifty-second year
Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): Portugal has reason to
believe that the Angolan peace process shows positive
signs. Although there has been slow progress in certain
areas, one cannot speak of stagnation. In fact, the ceasefire
is holding, and the Government of Angola and UNITA are
showing that they remain committed to political dialogue.
However, both parties, and in particular UNITA, must now
also indicate clearly to the international community that
they are willing to abide by the agreements to which they
freely subscribed. This has been essentially a stop-and-go
process. The Security Council, in its presidential statement
of 30 January 1997, reminded UNITA and the Government
of Angola that the international community can only
provide assistance if progress is achieved in the peace
process, and that it is in this context that it will consider a
United Nations presence in Angola after the expiration of
the mandate of the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission (UNAVEM III).
Significant and crucial tasks in both military and
political aspects of the peace process remain unfulfilled and
are behind schedule. In fact, over the last two weeks, since
the publication of the report of the Secretary-General, no
significant moves have been made in the selection and
incorporation of UNITA personnel into the Angolan Armed
Forces, in the closure of quartering areas, in the process of
demobilization and in the extension of State administration
throughout the entire territory of Angola. Recent reports
that the procedures concerning demobilization and the
extension of the administration have been agreed upon by
the Government of Angola and UNITA are, however,
encouraging. On the other hand, and despite the agreement
reached in the Joint Commission, UNITA failed to send to
Luanda by 12 February all of its members with seats in the
National Assembly and all those designated to take part in
the Government of National Unity and Reconciliation. In
fact, UNITA bears a special responsibility to demonstrate
its commitment to the full implementation of the “Acordos
de Paz” and the Lusaka Protocol, without attempting to
establish new conditions or linkages.
The Security Council has before it a draft resolution
extending the mandate of UNAVEM III, this time until 31
March. This gives the parties one month to move the peace
process forward by completing the remaining tasks, no
more, no less.
The complexity of the issues in the Angolan peace
process require some flexibility on the part of the
international community. Today, at a time when UNAVEM
III should be completing its mission, we recognize that the
United Nations must continue its current mandate in support

8

3743rd meeting
27 February 1997
of the peace process. We fully agree with the view
expressed in the most recent report of the SecretaryGeneral that the pace of the planned withdrawal of
formed military units should take into account the
situation on the ground. We must not lose sight of the
fact that the United Nations plays a vital role in bringing
peace to Angola.
The peace process in Angola has reached a
crossroads. This resolution indicates clearly the way to
proceed. The remaining tasks under the “Acordos de Paz”
and the Lusaka Protocol must be completed within the
next month. We appeal to all concerned to take the right
path and lead the weary Angolan people to a brighter
future. Allow me to reaffirm how much we appreciate the
remarkable work of Mr. Beye, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General. We pay tribute to his untiring
efforts on the ground, and we thank him in particular for
travelling to New York to brief the Council. His presence
here has been enlightening and informative. His
commitment to peace in Angola and his faith in the
process make us all more confident that our efforts will
succeed.
This is in accordance with a sentence that the
distinguished representative of the Angolan Government,
General Higino Carneiro, spoke just a few minutes ago:
“the path to peace seems irreversible”. (Supra, p. 2)
We all hope so.
Mr. Osvald (Sweden): My delegation wishes, first
of all, to welcome General Carneiro, Vice-Minister
without Portfolio of Angola, to our debate today. When
the United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM III) was established two years ago, it was
envisaged that the Lusaka Protocol would be fully
implemented by the beginning of 1997. Despite
considerable progress in the peace process, not all
commitments under the Protocol have been fulfilled. A
number of political and military aspects remain to be
implemented. Sweden urges both parties, in particular
UNITA, to fulfil all their obligations under the peace
accords.
The United Nations has played a crucial role in the
Angolan peace process. The Organization has an
important role to play in seeing the peace process through
and in consolidating the gains achieved so far. However,
we must remember that it is the Angolan parties which
bear the ultimate responsibility for restoring peace in

Security Council
Fifty-second year
Angola. The success of the peace process requires strong
determination and efforts to build mutual trust.
Today, the Security Council is sending a clear
message to Angola. The failure of UNITA to implement
fully the conclusions of the meeting of the Joint
Commission on 23 January this year is cause for deep
concern. All UNITA National Assembly members and
officials designated to the Government of National Unity
and Reconciliation must arrive in Luanda and assume their
respective posts. The Government of National Unity and
Reconciliation must be established without further delay.
The completion of the process of selection and
incorporation of the UNITA troops into the Angolan Armed
Forces is another essential component in the process ahead,
as is a successful and orderly demobilization. The
international community must continue to extend its full
support to demobilization efforts, not least the efforts
directed at the demobilization and reintegration of child
soldiers. We have an unequivocal responsibility towards
these children, the most vulnerable victims of conflict: to
recognize their plight, to condemn and prevent the
exploitation of children in conflicts and to do what is in our
power to help provide a future for those already exposed to
the scourge of war.
Sweden is a contributor to UNAVEM III. The pace of
the planned withdrawal of the United Nations formed
military units must, in our view, take into account both the
short extension of the UNAVEM III mandate and the
situation on the ground. Sweden’s long-standing
commitment to the peace process in Angola stands firm.
We have contributed military observers, civilian police and
demining specialists to UNAVEM III and made significant
financial contributions to support Angola’s transition from
a war-torn country. It is our firm hope that the next time
we discuss Angola in the Security Council, it will be on the
basis of definite progress in the peace process. In view of
the fact that the Government has not yet been formed,
Sweden agrees with the Secretary-General that the mandate
of UNAVEM III should be extended by one month. We
will vote in favour of the draft before the Council today.
In conclusion, I should like to express the appreciation
of my Government to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, to the three observer States — Portugal,
the Russian Federation and the United States — and to the
personnel of UNAVEM III for their efforts to assist the
parties in advancing the peace process.

3743rd meeting
27 February 1997
Ms. Mackenna (Chile) (interpretation from
Spanish): At the outset, I should like to welcome the
Vice-Minister without Portfolio of Angola, General
Carneiro.
Tomorrow, it will be two years since the
establishment of the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission (UNAVEM III). On this occasion, the Council
should be considering the follow-up to that United
Nations operation following the implementation of the
Angolan peace accords. Unfortunately, this has not proved
possible, as the Government of National Unity and
Reconciliation has not yet been formed in Angola and the
implementation of the remaining political and military
aspects of the peace process has been delayed. That is
why we have before us a draft resolution renewing the
mandate of UNAVEM III for one month and urging the
parties, in particular UNITA, to establish such a
Government without further delay and to resolve all
outstanding questions, including military issues.
The draft resolution is concise, but it contains a clear
and direct message. My delegation will support it and
hopes that it will be properly received by those to whom
it is directed.
Although this has been a long and difficult process,
there have been positive results. Nevertheless, it is clear
that the problems in Angola have not yet come to an end
and we can foresee difficulties on the political horizon.
The parties, in particular UNITA, must seek to fulfil their
commitments, consolidate peace and lead their people on
the path of development. For all of these reasons, my
delegation, along with the entire international community,
will pay great attention to events in Angola during this
crucial period in its history.
In conclusion, I should like to place on record our
thanks to the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Beye, to the troika of observer States, and
to all of those in the field who have made it possible for
Angola to move off the path of war and embark on the
path of peace.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (interpretation from Chinese):
At the outset, the delegation of China would like to thank
the Vice-Minister without Portfolio of Angola, General
Carneiro, for his condolences on the passing of Mr. Deng
Xiaoping. The delegation of China will convey his
sentiments to the Chinese Government and people and to
the family of Mr. Deng Xiaoping.

9

Security Council
Fifty-second year
The Chinese delegation is deeply concerned about the
series of reversals suffered by the peace process and by the
repeated delays in the formation of the Government of
National Unity and Reconciliation. It may be recalled that
the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol, which was
plagued by outstanding problems in the military area, was
long delayed. After subsequent efforts by the parties, the
military component is finally nearing completion.
Unfortunately, the peace process is now experiencing a
similar stalling and stalemate in the political area. This is
deeply disturbing to the international community.
As the Secretary-General has pointed out numerous
times, the resolution of the question of Angola ultimately
rests with the Angolan people themselves. After years of
strife, Angola has its work cut out. The Angolan people are
in dire need of a tranquil life and a stable environment
conducive to rehabilitation and reconstruction. The Chinese
delegation has appealed on many occasions, and will appeal
here once again, to the two sides in Angola, in particular
UNITA, to take to heart the interests of the nation and the
aspirations of their people, demonstrate the necessary good
faith and positive attitude and resolve their differences
through consultations. We call on them to take effective
action to complete all the tasks outlined in the Lusaka
Protocol and the mutually agreed consolidated timetable so
as successfully to conclude the peace process.
In accordance with Security Council resolution 976
(1995), the United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM III) is due to complete its mission at the end of
this month. Since its establishment, this, the largest
peacekeeping operation ever, has made important
contributions to monitoring the implementation of the
Lusaka Protocol, facilitating the restoration of peace to
Angola and bringing about national reconciliation.
We understood that at this crucial juncture in the
peace process, there is an urgent need for generous
assistance from the international community, including from
the United Nations. Accordingly, the Chinese delegation
supports the extension of the mandate of UNAVEM III to
31 March and will vote in favour of the draft resolution
before us. At the same time, we believe that the success of
the peacekeeping operation hinges on the cooperation and
support of the parties concerned. We hope that both sides
in Angola, particularly UNITA, will seize this opportunity
to cooperate with UNAVEM III with a view to bringing the
peace process in Angola to fruition. We also hope that
other actors, including African countries, will continue to
play a positive role in bringing peace to Angola. China, for
its part, will continue to make its contribution.

10

3743rd meeting
27 February 1997
Finally, I would like to thank the Secretary-General
of the United Nations and his Special Representative,
Maître Beye, as well as the three observer States and the
personnel of UNAVEM for their contribution to the peace
process in Angola.
Mr. Cabral (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from
French): My delegation would like to join in welcoming
the head of the Angolan delegation. I thank him for his
contribution to our debate.
After two years, the mandate for the United Nations
Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM III) is drawing
to an end, at least in legal terms. It is therefore time to
take stock, an exercise that is often instructive but always
difficult to carry out. The Angolan problem is too
complex and requires us to abandon our customary
methods of analysis and understanding — methods that
may nonetheless be useful in other situations.
My delegation is pleased that this concern has served
as a guiding principle in the drafting of the SecretaryGeneral’s report, the speedy delivery and clearsightedness
of which we commend.
In order to be objective, any stock-taking, however
provisional, must be based on a variety of observations
and take into account facts whose importance and nature
cannot be translated into figures, eluding as they do
otherwise valid bookkeeping standards. Some
imponderables are difficult to quantify. Some progress,
linked to the psychological aspect of negotiations, cannot,
unfortunately, be expressed in numbers and calculations.
For us, it is not a question of simply judging, even
if we believe that there is nothing wrong with noting the
difficulties of a process which, however complicated, is
still subject to standard, unavoidable rules. We should not
lose hope, even if there are reasons for dissatisfaction.
The steps we take should be motivational, because it is
our duty to encourage. Our responsibility is to support all
those of good will who have made the unity and national
reconciliation of Angola their prime concern, their
crusade and their reason for hope.
Yes, there have been delays — many delays,
even — in the establishment of structures provided for
under the Lusaka Protocol. Yes, the agreed timetable has
not been respected. But does this mean that no progress
has been made? The truth is that a momentum has been
established, even though it remains characterized by slow,
sometimes hesitant steps where we would prefer to see

Security Council
Fifty-second year
long, vigorous strides. The peace process has advanced and
is still advancing. It is not accelerating, but the progress is
continual. The major obstacles have been or are about to be
eliminated. There is still the crucial issue of restoring the
long-shaken trust between the protagonists. Indeed, we must
solve the psychological problems by promoting a culture of
peace and of national reconciliation, a goal which the
international community has pursued with regularity and
determination.
Therein lies the merit of the United Nations and of all
those who, on our behalf, are working tirelessly to
consolidate peace in Angola. Never has a United Nations
operation mobilized so many human and financial resources
in response to the appeal of a people in distress. We are
therefore deeply beholden to the members of UNAVEM III,
who, sometimes at risk to their lives, are fighting alongside
our Angolan brothers to win the battle for peace. I should
like here to welcome among us of the leader of them all,
Maître Blondin Beye, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in Angola, a skilful and inventive
negotiator, to whom we pay tribute for his dedication,
foresight, determination and unflinching optimism, without
which the road to peace would have been far longer.
The results show the validity of this United Nations
Mission and the exemplary qualities of those who have
agreed to shoulder, on our behalf, the responsibility for
conducting it successfully. We should like here and now to
thank them most warmly.
After so much effort on the part of the international
community, can any outcome to the problem in Angola be
imagined other than the restoration of peace, the
establishment of a Government of National Unity and
Reconciliation? Both of these should constitute cornerstones
in the construction of a new type of relations among
brothers who were enemies only yesterday. This
Government is necessary not just because it will symbolize
the participation of all political parties represented in the
Parliament, but because it establishes an important starting
point for efforts to strengthen still fragile balances and
constitutes a special forum for joint action that can help the
taking of decisions devoted to the common management of
national affairs.
Indeed, it is in the sharing of fully assumed
responsibilities by all the political protagonists in the future
of the Angolan people that will be forged a national
solidarity indispensable to the establishment of well-being
for all and of the Angolan nation in full unity. There is no
better alternative than that leading to a true peace with

3743rd meeting
27 February 1997
honour, a peace of minds and hearts, so necessary to the
monumental work of national reconstruction.
The international community is duty-bound to
contribute to and ensure national harmony in Angola
while creating conditions for a better life for the Angolan
people, a heroic people that has suffered immensely and
deserves finally, and I hope permanently, to enjoy peace.
We must therefore persevere. We must do our
utmost to convince those who still have doubts today —
doubts that are sometimes valid — and work to establish
a climate of mutual trust. All Angolans, whether they
belong to the party in power or to UNITA, must try to
look beyond themselves and take part in the long-awaited
national renewal. The path has been long, the difficulties
enormous, but the dawn of hope is breaking. Let us be
firm without being dogmatic; let us contain our
frustrations and overcome our impatience, however
legitimate. Let us see to it that there are no longer any
unjustifiable delays or destructive disagreement. Let us
urge Angolans to establish trust amongst themselves and
to work together in a pluralistic democracy that respects
the rights of all. We must encourage our Angolan friends
to build their nation and to work for the betterment of
their country and the well-being of their people. Let us
attempt to promote a culture of peace, unity and national
reconciliation, in that country so dear to our hearts whose
destiny is indissolubly linked to the common future of all
Africans.
These are the unfailing intentions of my country,
Guinea-Bissau, whose delegation today will vote in favour
of the draft resolution under consideration, with the
renewed hope that the next report of the SecretaryGeneral will give us all reason to celebrate the victory of
the Angolan people over themselves and the enshrinement
of the immeasurable contribution made by the
international community to the establishment of peace in
Angola and therefore in the rest of the African continent.
Mr. Berrocal Soto (Costa Rica) (interpretation from
Spanish): Allow me at the outset to associate myself with
all of those who have extended a welcome to the
representative of the Government of Angola, General
Carneiro, the Vice-Minister without Portfolio.
My country fully supports the draft resolution that is
under consideration by the Security Council regarding the
situation in Angola based on the “Acordos de Paz para
Angola”, the Lusaka Protocol and prior resolutions of the
Security Council. This is a meaningful and well-balanced

11

Security Council
Fifty-second year
draft that reflects the criticism and concern expressed by
delegations in informal meetings and consultations
regarding the urgent need for the Government of Angola,
and in particular UNITA, to resolve all the remaining
military and other problems and form without further delay
the Government of National Unity and Reconciliation.
In this connection, Costa Rica would like to express
its deep regret at the delays that have hindered and slowed
the formation of that Government of National Unity and
Reconciliation. We also wish to appeal to the highest
leaders of UNITA so that the Ministers, deputies and senior
military and civilian leaders with positions of responsibility
will effectively and without further delay arrive in Luanda,
in accordance with the process agreed to with the
Government of Angola. We believe that this is the crucial
issue. This is the wish of the international community, and
it is the explicit and clear message of the draft resolution
that the Security Council is about to adopt.
On the basis of the work of that Government of
National Unity and Reconciliation, the people of Angola
will embark on the path to a mature and responsible
democracy. War will be left behind, and so must any
unilateral will for domination on the part of any of the
parties. What is urgent now is to create a democratic
culture of peace and of national reconciliation so that soon,
in free elections and without pressure, the Angolan people
will be able freely to express their views and decide on
their future. It is up to the people of Angola alone to
assume that paramount responsibility of voting and
deciding.
What lies ahead for the Government of National Unity
and Reconciliation is therefore a commitment that entails
enormous historical responsibilities. It must enact
fundamental laws and create the necessary political
conditions and infrastructure so that in free elections, the
people of Angola will be able to express themselves
democratically. This is the spirit of the “Acordos de Paz”;
it is the spirit of the Lusaka Protocol. This is also the wish
of the international community, and it is the message that
is contained in this draft resolution of the Security Council.
We fully share these feelings, and for this reason we
associate ourselves with our vote on this draft resolution on
Angola and with the extension of the mandate of the United
Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM III) until
31 March 1997.
Finally, I should like, on behalf of my delegation, to
express my country’s gratitude to the countries of the
troika — the Russian Federation, the United States and

12

3743rd meeting
27 February 1997
Portugal — for their valuable contribution to the peace
process in Angola, We also wish to express our gratitude
to Mr. Beye, the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, who has been a primary protagonist in the quest
for peace in Angola.
Mr. Richardson (United States of America): Let me
begin by noting that this is my first opportunity — and,
accordingly, a distinct honor — to deliver an explanation
of vote on behalf of the United States in the Council.
Again, I thank my other colleagues on the Council for
their very warm welcome.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s report on the
situation in Angola and express our appreciation for the
efforts of the Special Representative. We also welcome
the General and his delegation here this afternoon. We
wish to add our thanks for the contributions of the United
Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM III), and
also to thank the States that provide personnel for
UNAVEM III.
Today, as we consider the extension of the
UNAVEM III mandate, we must confront the reality that
the time-tables agreed to and the actions promised by the
parties in Angola to advance the peace process have not
been fulfilled. The Government of National Unity and
Reconciliation was not formed on 25 January, and the
difficult task of extending central government control over
the entire country has been delayed. In addition, the
camps established as an interim measure in demobilizing
UNITA’s forces are still full, even though the UNAVEM
III forces that protect these camps are scheduled to be
withdrawn.
My Government is dismayed at these delays in the
implementation of the peace process. Because of these
delays, the Security Council draft resolution, in line with
the Secretary- General’s recommendations, provides only
for a one-month extension of UNAVEM III’s mandate.
During this period, UNAVEM III’s remaining personnel
will continue to perform their missions while the
withdrawal continues, and the Security Council will
review its involvement in the Angolan peace process. Our
future course will be determined by the progress made by
the parties in Angola in implementing fully their
commitments under the Lusaka Protocol.
The message for the parties, especially UNITA, is
clear. We are deeply concerned with UNITA’s primary
role in causing the failure of the time-table established by
the Joint Commission for the formation of the unity

Security Council
Fifty-second year

3743rd meeting
27 February 1997

Government. The draft resolution notes the readiness of the
Council to consider the imposition of further measures if
the Government of National Unity and Reconciliation is not
formed by 20 March. We are willing to hold this action in
abeyance for only a short while longer. Too much time has
already been wasted. Too many Angolans continue to
suffer. The benefits of peace must replace the constantly
delayed hopes of the people of Angola. All the Angolan
people seek is an end to death and destruction and a chance
to rebuild their shattered lives.

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Kenya.

We would also warn the parties against any
involvement in the conflict in Zaire. We have reaffirmed
the presidential statement of 7 February 1997, which

Kenya has consistently advocated that, if everything
works according to plan, at the expiration of the current
mandate of the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission (UNAVEM III), there should be some form of
follow-on presence of the United Nations in that country.
It is therefore noteworthy that in his report the SecretaryGeneral has seen the need for such a presence and has
made concrete recommendations for a reconstituted
United Nations presence in the form of an observer
mission, with its various necessary components to be
determined according to the needs of the situation.

“calls upon all States in the region to refrain, in
accordance with their obligations under the Charters of
the United Nations and the Organization of African
Unity, from any act, including cross-border incursions,
which would threaten the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of any State and exacerbate the situation in
the region, including endangering the refugees and
displaced persons.” (S/PRST/1997/5, p. 1)
The United States remains a strong friend of Angola,
and we are proud of the role we have played in the troika
of Observer States. I wish to commend our good friend the
Ambassador of Portugal for his successful efforts and the
Ambassador of Russia for his participation in this effort.
We all remain committed to a peaceful and prosperous
future for Angola. The United States provided $104.7
million in humanitarian and development assistance to
Angola in fiscal year 1996, and expects to provide nearly
$92 million this fiscal year.
I have seen firsthand, as many here have, the terrible
devastation and the enormous suffering that this conflict has
inflicted on the people of Angola. I have visited this
country three times. All the Angolan people seek is a
chance for peace, reconciliation and reconstruction, and I
believe that we all feel that they are entitled to that
opportunity. Accordingly, we urge the parties to understand
the message of this draft resolution. The international
community has already played its part in helping the
Government of Angola and UNITA meet their
commitments to peace. Now we are waiting for them to
live up to their promises. They must do so if this
international support is to continue. It is time to clear the
camps of the former unity Government and to get on with
the task of building peace.

Kenya welcomes the report of the Secretary-General,
which deals comprehensively with the main issues on the
situation in Angola. We are grateful to the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative, Maître
Alioune Blondin Beye, for their efforts in that country.
My delegation also appreciates the role that the troika has
played in Angola.

My delegation regretfully notes that despite the
numerous opportunities afforded to the parties to ensure
the successful implementation of the peace accord, they
have failed to fulfil their obligations as expected. As a
result, there has been a serious lack of progress, and the
proposed formation of a Government of National Unity
and Reconciliation has lately been postponed on two
occasions. We are concerned at the wasted opportunity.
My delegation wishes to reiterate the importance it
attaches to the full implementation by the Government of
Angola and UNITA of the peace accords and the relevant
Security Council resolutions, and is disappointed at the
continued postponement of the formation of the
Government of National Unity and Reconciliation. Kenya
believes that formation of a unity Government would be
the culmination of the current efforts in the search for
peace and would mark the beginning of the consolidation
of that peace.
We call upon UNITA to cooperate with the
Government of Angola in the remaining tasks leading to
the formation of the Government of National Unity and
Reconciliation. We also call upon UNITA to cooperate
with the Government of Angola in implementing the
remaining stages of the peace process, including the
military aspects.

13

Security Council
Fifty-second year
My delegation has thoroughly studied the report of the
Secretary-General and his recommendations, and has
concluded that they are appropriate in the current
circumstances. We therefore support the draft resolution.
We hope that the message we shall send by adopting it will
trigger some movement towards progress in the peace
process.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now put to the vote the draft resolution contained in
document S/1997/162.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Chile, China, Costa Rica, Egypt, France, GuineaBissau, Japan, Kenya, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Russian Federation, Sweden, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America
The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
1098 (1997).
I shall now call on those members of the Council who
wish to make statements following the voting.
Mr. Ladsous (France) (interpretation from French):
I would first like to welcome Mr. Carneiro, Vice-Minister
without Portfolio of Angola, and also the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Beye, whom
I would also like to commend for his talent and dedication
through these difficult years.
Two years ago, in February 1995, the Council, by
adopting resolution 976 (1995), requested that the United
Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM III) be
completed in February 1997, that is, at a date when the
objectives of the Lusaka Protocol were to be achieved.
Unfortunately, we must note that this is not the case.
UNITA bears primary responsibility for the many delays
which today compel us once again to extend the mandate
of UNAVEM III.
Of course, a great deal has been done in the last 12
months. Peace in Angola is now at hand. However, UNITA
must make the final efforts necessary to comply with the
obligations it has entered into by signing the Lusaka

14

3743rd meeting
27 February 1997
Protocol. This of course concerns the military aspect of
the agreement, which has not been fully implemented, but
also — and above all — the establishment of the
Government of National Unity and Reconciliation, which
should have been set up this month.
The establishment of this government is in fact a
crucial stage for the Angolan people. It constitutes the
real culmination of the peace process. This government
must now be quickly established. It is also absolutely
necessary that the former belligerents demonstrate close
coordination to enable the future Government of Angola
to establish its authority over the entire territory. Finally,
we hope that the demobilization of soldiers which have
not yet been incorporated into the Angolan Armed Forces
may be carried out promptly and with the continued
support of the international community.
Resolution 1098 (1997) provides that the Council
could consider imposing new measures against UNITA
pursuant to paragraph 26 of resolution 864 (1993) of 15
September 1993, if the Government is not established
within the required time frame. We keenly hope that we
will not have to go to that extreme. It would in fact be
very disappointing to encounter new difficulties now that
we are getting very close to our goals.
The Angolan people legitimately aspires to peace
and security. In the past 10 years southern Africa has
seen considerable development; Angolans deserve — after
all the trials they have endured — to benefit from these
changes, which will allow them to enjoy democracy and
sustainable development.
The President: A number of speakers still remain
on my list. However, given the lateness of the hour, I
now propose, with the consent of the Council, to suspend
the meeting until 3.30 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.50 p.m. and
resumed at 3.55 p.m.
The President: The next speaker is the Permanent
Representative of Malawi. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Rubadiri (Malawi): We extend to you, Sir, our
most sincere congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
February. We congratulate equally your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of Japan, who served as
President for the month of January.

Security Council
Fifty-second year
The Malawi delegation has read with keen interest the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM III), as contained
in document S/1997/115 of 7 February 1997. We have also
monitored developments in that country, which has suffered
for too long, and whose people’s longing for peace and
tranquility cannot be denied any longer.
We are very disappointed that today, on the eve of the
day on which we were supposed to be celebrating the
completion of the mandate of UNAVEM III, we are, alas,
in no mood for joyful ululation. We are most concerned
that UNITA has once again seen fit to delay the formation
of the Government of National Unity and Reconciliation,
contrary to the letter and spirit of the Lusaka Protocol, and
against a whole wave of international public opinion. From
the Southern African Development Community (SADC),
from the rest of Africa, and from the international
community at large come prayers for peace in this
cherished African land that fed foreign explorers and was
a way-station as they journeyed to the Far East.
We are concerned that there are other remaining
political and military aspects of the whole process which,
if delayed further, would bring about a major setback to the
peace process. Questions relating to the selection of UNITA
soldiers and their incorporation into the armed forces, as
well as to general demobilization, need to be addressed
more resolutely.
Once again, we appeal to all the parties concerned,
particularly to UNITA, to exert extra efforts to take the
necessary action that will meaningfully translate into
practical results the aspirations of the Angolan people —
and of all of us here, and everywhere, who believe that
peace and the process of reconstruction and development in
Angola cannot be delayed any longer. The African vision,
during Africa’s tenure of leadership of the United Nations
into the twenty-first century, holds dear the resolution of
this bloody conflict in historic Angola.
The international community will continue, as it has in
the past, to play a critical role in the successful outcome of
developments in Angola. We welcome the useful analysis
and recommendations set out by the Secretary-General in
his report. The international community, however, cannot,
with a clear conscience, abandon Angola now. Many
challenges still lie ahead. We are most gratified that the
Security Council is today ready to meet this challenge. We
support the extension of the mandate of UNAVEM III, as
agreed by the Council this afternoon. We also support the
activation of the relevant provision of resolution 864 (1993)

3743rd meeting
27 February 1997
of 15 September 1993, should UNITA continue its
intransigent ways. We are therefore happy that the
resolution before the Security Council has been
unanimously adopted by all the member countries.
Let me conclude by acknowledging, as we have
done previously, the untiring efforts of the
Secretary-General, his Special Representative, Mr.
Alioune Blondin Beye, and all UNAVEM III personnel
and humanitarian workers, whose work in very difficult
circumstances has made it abundantly clear that the
service for peace is a godly endeavour. We pay particular
tribute to those whose lives have been lost to this noble
cause. For them, and for the concern of us all, we must
send a strong message to the leadership of UNITA that it
is a living Angola that must be born, not the carcass of a
mutilated citizenry of orphaned children, women and old
men.
We pray that the next time the Council meets on this
issue it will be to take on the duty of rebuilding lives and
rebuilding a nation.
The President: I thank the representative of Malawi
for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of
Mozambique. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Dos Santos (Mozambique): I would like to join
others who have spoken before me in congratulating you,
Sir, on the magnificent leadership you have provided this
Council in the month of February. We are particularly
happy to see you preside over our deliberations on the
important agenda item before this body today. My
delegation extends its sincere congratulations to your
predecessor, Ambassador Hisashi Owada, Permanent
Representative of Japan, for the remarkable way in which
he guided the affairs of the Council for the month of
January.
Allow me also to express my delegation’s gratitude
to the Secretary-General for the comprehensive report
before us today and for his efforts in search of real peace
and reconciliation in Angola.
When we last addressed the Council, we expressed
our concern at the slow pace of the implementation of the
“Acordos de Paz” for Angola and of the relevant
resolutions of this body. While we appreciate the
encouraging developments, as presented in the

15

Security Council
Fifty-second year
Secretary-General’s report, we cannot fail to register our
desire to see greater commitment translated into concrete
action, particularly on the part of UNITA.
From the messages we received just prior to the last
debate in the Council, we were led to believe that by this
time we would be celebrating the formation of the
Government of National Unity and Reconciliation and that
there would be free movement of people and goods
throughout Angola.
As we meet today, the implementation of the
remaining and crucial aspects of the Lusaka Protocol,
particularly the incorporation of UNITA troops into the
Angolan Armed Forces, demobilization and the extension
of State administration throughout Angola, have not yet
been completed.
We are constantly faced with new
elements being introduced in order to delay or postpone
actions already agreed upon. This should not be allowed to
continue. We concur with the observations in the SecretaryGeneral’s report that attempts to introduce linkages or
conditions for moving the peace process forward should not
be supported by the international community and must be
abandoned immediately.
In order for the peace process in Angola to make
tangible and desirable progress, UNITA has to take urgent
and decisive steps towards the implementation of all aspects
of the Lusaka Protocol. The UNITA leadership has to
ensure that deputies to the National Assembly, as well as
those who are to take part in the Government of National
Unity and Reconciliation, return to Luanda.
We believe that the Angolan Government has shown
commitment, made efforts to comply with its obligations
and demonstrated the necessary political will to
accommodate UNITA and its leadership so as to bring
about lasting peace and reconciliation in Angola.
The international community, under the aegis of the
United Nations, has played a constructive role in helping
the Angolan people to restore peace in their land and
reconcile.
The Secretary-General’s reports indicates that Angola
continues to face severe economic challenges and that
efforts are being undertaken by the Government and
cooperating partners to address the situation and initiate a
reconstruction programme. These efforts will not succeed
if they are not backed by steady progress in the peace
process, which will build confidence in the economy.

16

3743rd meeting
27 February 1997
The challenges of reintegrating demobilized soldiers
and of demining can be dealt with more adequately in
conditions of stability, with the Government providing the
attention that these programmes require. The support of
the international community in this area remains of
paramount importance. Post-conflict peace-building is a
necessary precondition for lasting peace and stability.
Mozambique is undergoing a similar process. It is a
daunting task, but it certainly pays dividends.
We would also like to register our support for the
Secretary-General’s proposed phased withdrawal of the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM III) and arrangements for a transition period.
We equally support the extension of the UNAVEM III
mandate.
In conclusion, my delegation wishes to reaffirm its
continued unconditional support for and solidarity with
the people and the Government of Angola in their search
for peace. My delegation would also like to seize this
opportunity to reiterate its gratitude to all members of the
Security Council for their active commitment to the
restoration of peace, harmony and national reconciliation
in Angola.
The President: I thank the representative of
Mozambique for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Cape
Verde. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Monteiro (Cape Verde) (interpretation from
French): I congratulate you, Sir, on the highly competent
manner in which you have guided the work of the
Security Council during the month of February. I also
thank your predecessor, Ambassador Owada of Japan, for
his very successful work during the course of the last
month.
I am grateful for the opportunity my delegation has
been given to speak before the Council at this formal
meeting on the question of Angola, which is a topic of
the utmost importance to us.
Looking back, we note the extent to which the
Government and UNITA have progressed in their quest
for peaceful national reconciliation. That path has been an
extremely long and difficult one. Lusaka came about only
after several missed opportunities. Subsequently, the
prevailing lack of confidence became a major,

Security Council
Fifty-second year
multifaceted constraint that led to many uncertainties and
setbacks.
Throughout this entire process, the Angolan conflict
has received extraordinary attention from the United
Nations and the international community, and in particular
from some of its member States. This has provided
consistent and increasingly effective support for the cause
of peace in the country.
We have now reached a stage that can be described
only as a decisive turning-point, a stage at which two must
become one: one Government, one army, one police force,
and, lastly, one country.
The first military units of the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM III) have been withdrawn;
further withdrawals are soon to take place, in keeping with
the agreed time-tables; and the ceasefire continues to be
very broadly respected.
These are positive aspects in the field of military
activities. However, these cannot mask the slowness and
inadequacies in other areas of activity, such as in the
essential area of the selection and integration of soldiers
and officers of UNITA into the Angolan Armed Forces and
the National Police.
However, reconstruction and the demining of roads
seem to be proceeding satisfactorily; they are being carried
out as part of a planned institutional framework. These
activities will have a positive and immediate impact on the
lives of the people and will restore their confidence.
Likewise, we note improvements in certain significant
areas of economic management, such as lower inflation and
a stabilization of the exchange rate, as well as other
measures adopted as regards prices and budgetary activities.
We congratulate the Government on these accomplishments
and express the hope that this initial success will gain
strength and become part of a broader process of reversing
the economic and social situation in Angola.
All eyes are now focused on the completion of the
establishment of the Angolan Parliament and the setting up
of the Government of National Unity and Reconciliation.
This is as it should be. These two issues are indeed the
keystone of the Lusaka accords. To a certain extent, they
represent the final test of confidence — the point of no
return.

3743rd meeting
27 February 1997
The two successive deferrals of the dates agreed for
these events fully justify the prevailing sense of concern
and urgency. My delegation fully endorses the
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General’s
report of 7 February on this matter.
Indeed, given that the establishment of the
Government of National Unity and Reconciliation has
been stalled, it would be unreasonable for us to expect to
be able to implement the upcoming complementary
agreements, or others that the parties might enter into in
the near future, with a view further to hone this common
endeavour.
Quite the contrary: the political will must be
mustered to follow the course that has been charted and
thus build on the accrued capital of goodwill and
understanding. We are confident that this will be the case
and that the Angolan political scene will soon see
decisive action.
In the report I mentioned earlier, the SecretaryGeneral, while issuing recommendations concerning a
United Nations presence throughout 1997, is making a
more immediate proposal to extend UNAVEM’s mandate
for one month, indicating that a closer follow-up of the
commitments that are in abeyance is considered good
policy.
The next report of the Secretary-General, which will
come out before the end of the period in question, will be
reporting to the Council on the expected establishment of
the Government. The Council will be deliberating on this
basis. We hope that the report will note positive
developments and thereby spare the Council the need to
impose measures, including those provided for in
paragraph 26 of resolution 864 (1993) of 15 September
1993. Nonetheless, the Council is prepared to do so if
necessary, as stipulated in resolution 1098 (1997), which
it has just adopted.
In the forthcoming phase of the United Nations
mission in Angola, apart from support for national
reconciliation as such, special emphasis will be placed on
humanitarian issues in view of the way they are
considered in this context. The issues of relief and
rehabilitation, quartering and demobilization will be
included.
Significant resources will be required. The figures
speak for themselves: almost half a million former

17

Security Council
Fifty-second year
combatants and their families, a million displaced persons,
tens of thousands of refugees.
It is essential, if we are to avoid the worst at either the
humanitarian or the security level, that international efforts
to finance scheduled activities be maintained. To that end,
the response to the comprehensive inter-agency appeal that
is being planned must be such as to meet this challenge.
In conclusion, we thank the Secretary-General for his
persistent and consistent efforts, as can be seen in his report
of 7 February, which clearly shows the changes to be made
in the United Nations presence on the ground in Angola
during the next phase, which is one of observation. This
presence will focus more on promoting national
reconciliation and on consolidating the newfound peace.
We join the Government of Angola in once again
expressing our thanks for the untiring efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. We thank also the
three Observer States and the other Member States that
have been contributing to the cause of peace in Angola.
The President: I thank the representative of Cape
Verde for the kind words he addressed to me.

3743rd meeting
27 February 1997
appreciation is also extended to the entire UNAVEM III
staff, the United Nations agencies and non-governmental
organizations for their tireless efforts in carrying out their
respective mandates with determination under difficult
conditions. I would like to assure them of my
Government’s full support.
On 11 December 1996, I made a statement before
this body in which, among other things, I expressed the
grave concern to my Government over certain areas: the
desertion of UNITA troops from the quartering areas; the
delay in implementing all outstanding political and
military issues, especially the agreement on the status of
the leader of UNITA; the establishment of the
Government of National Unity and Reconciliation; the
establishment of state administration in various regions of
the country; and the demobilization and incorporation of
UNITA troops into the Angolan Armed Forces. Despite
the fact that the peace process has witnessed some
encouraging developments in recent months, these
concerns today remain unresolved, owing mainly to the
lack of cooperation by UNITA.

Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): Let me take this opportunity
to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
February. Given your experience and diplomatic skill, we
have no doubt that the Council will be provided with sure
leadership. At the same time, we wish to extend our sincere
congratulations to your predecessor, Ambassador Owada of
Japan, for the remarkable way in which he conducted the
affairs of the Council during the month of January.

The delay by UNITA creates serious doubts in our
minds about whether it is really committed to the
implementation of the letter and spirit of the Lusaka
Protocol. In this regard, we call upon the parties, in
particular UNITA, to consider, first of all, the interests of
the people of Angola, who have seen no peace in their
lifetime. UNITA needs to be reminded in a very clear
message that the people of Angola need peace and that
Angola needs development. This is the primary
responsibility of all the leaders in Angola. They should
therefore come together and form the Government of
National Unity and Reconciliation without further delay.
If they fail to do this, the Security Council must consider
taking appropriate measures, including the imposition of
sanctions against UNITA, in accordance with its relevant
resolutions on Angola.

My delegation would also like to express its
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report on the situation in Angola, contained in document
S/1997/115 of 7 February 1997, and for his efforts to
further the cause of peace in that country. The same
sentiments are extended to his Special Representative, Mr.
Alioune Blondin Beye, whose devotion to bringing peace to
Angola has been exemplary.

Finally, my delegation is pleased with the adoption
this morning of Security Council resolution 1098 (1997),
which, among other things, extends the mandate of
UNAVEM III until 31 March 1997. We fully agree with
the recommendation of the Secretary-General that the
United Nations maintain its presence in Angola until the
end of 1997 in order to ensure that the achievements
made so far are consolidated.

Let me also extend my Government’s gratitude to the
troika — the Governments of Portugal, Russia and the
United States — in their search for peace in Angola. Our

The President: I thank the representative of
Namibia for his kind words addressed to me.

The next speaker is the representative of Namibia. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.

18

Security Council
Fifty-second year
The next speaker on my list is the representative of
Lesotho. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and
to make his statement.
Mr. Mangoaela (Lesotho): I wish to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of February. We are confident that
the Council’s business will profit from your wisdom and
experience. I also wish to extend Lesotho’s warmest
congratulations to your predecessor, Ambassador Hisashi
Owada of Japan, for a job well done last month. Allow me
also to express my gratitude to the Secretary- General, Mr.
Kofi Annan, for his most insightful report on the situation
in Angola and to his Special Representative, Maître Alioune
Blondin Beye, for his tireless efforts and unwavering
commitment to the search for peace in Angola. The troika
of the observers of the peace process and the countries
contributing troops to the Angolan operations also deserve
our commendation.
When the Security Council reviewed the mandate of
the United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM
III) in December 1996, we were keenly aware of the slow
pace in the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol, as a
result of which the peace process continued to run behind
schedule. Our hopes were rekindled, however, by some of
the steps, limited as they were, that both the Government of
Angola and UNITA were taking towards implementing the
Lusaka Protocol. We were particularly pleased that the
quartering of troops was proceeding relatively smoothly.
Having thoroughly considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral, and conscious of the need to keep the momentum
of the peace process going, we reminded the signatories of
the Lusaka Protocol of their obligations towards the
Angolan people and the international community and
supported the extension of the mandate of UNAVEM III,
with the firm expectation that further progress would be
made within a reasonable time frame in order to give new
impetus to the peace process.
The establishment of a Government of National Unity
and Reconciliation, which is the next crucial step towards
an Angola free of the deep divisions that have characterized
that country over the last three decades, remains elusive.
We have been encouraging all parties to work together in
good faith to complete the remaining tasks and form a
Government of National Unity and Reconciliation without
further delay.
Despite a few signs of hope in the implementation of
several tasks which were assigned to the parties, the
Angolan peace process has again been characterized by

3743rd meeting
27 February 1997
difficulties and has been painfully slow and disappointing.
It is regrettable that, as we meet today, the return to
Luanda of UNITA deputies and the formation of the
Government of National Unity and Reconciliation have
once again been delayed, and the obligations of the
Protocol have not been fulfilled. Besides threatening to
unravel the gains made so far, these delays undermine the
fragile peace process.
It is therefore a matter of great disappointment to us
that we once again request this Council to ensure that
UNITA fully complies with its obligations in a timely
fashion and without any conditions or linkages, so as to
bring about the long-awaited peace and stability in
Angola and southern Africa. We believe that peace in
Angola should be given a chance and it is for this reason
that we support the extension of UNAVEM III to 31
March 1997, on the understanding that the situation will
be reviewed on 20 March. If there is further
procrastination, the Council should be at liberty to
consider applying some of the measures within the
framework of Security Council resolution 864 (1993),
which shall oblige UNITA to respect fully and urgently
the deadlines established by the Council.
The completion of the 15 quartering areas, followed
by the quartering of over 70,000 UNITA troops, was a
welcome development which demonstrated the political
will of the Angolan leaders. In his report contained in
document S/1997/115 of 7 February 1997, the SecretaryGeneral informs us that the pace of the implementation of
the remaining military and political tasks has also been
very slow. It is regrettable that a large number of the
quartered troops continue to leave the quartering areas,
thus posing problems and further delays in the
incorporation of UNITA troops into the Angolan Armed
Forces. We again urge the parties to show real political
will and complete the outstanding military tasks in order
to put the process on the right path towards fulfilling the
Lusaka Protocol commitments to the formation of a
national army.
The support of the international community for the
Angolan peace process remains unshaken. This support
has to be matched by commensurate political will
measured through concrete and plausible actions on the
part of the parties. It is therefore urgent and imperative
for both parties, and in particular UNITA, to take decisive
steps towards fulfilling their obligations under the Lusaka
Protocol. This requires the parties to demonstrate the
necessary flexibility and statesmanship in order for a

19

Security Council
Fifty-second year
Government of National Unity and Reconciliation to be
established without further delay.
The crisis in Angola has a negative impact on security
and stability and on the economies within the Southern
African Development Community (SADC) region. It is for
this reason that the SADC countries require the parties to
demonstrate the necessary flexibility to establish a new era
of peace and cooperation in southern Africa.
Finally, we reiterate our call for the international
community to continue to provide material support to the
peace process at this crucial stage in order to facilitate the
establishment of the Government of National Unity and
Reconciliation.
The President: I thank the representative of Lesotho
for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of South Africa.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Jele (South Africa): South Africa adds its voice
to those who have already congratulated you on your skilful
stewardship of the Council’s business during this month.
We also extend our appreciation to Ambassador Owada of
Japan for the most able manner in which he presided over
the Council’s deliberations during the month of January.
The Secretary-General has placed before the Council
a comprehensive report on the present status of the peace
process in Angola, for which we thank him. My delegation
also commends the ongoing efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to engage both
parties in intensive consultations aimed at accelerating the
peace process.

3743rd meeting
27 February 1997
problems, it is therefore important that both parties
strictly observe the ceasefire and refrain from maintaining
illegal checkpoints. We also feel that the dismantling of
UNITA’s four remaining command structures, as well as
the provision of information on the strength and military
equipment of the military detachment of the UNITA
President, are issues which need urgent attention. My
delegation is nevertheless gratified by the induction into
the Angolan Armed Forces of the nine UNITA generals,
which commenced on 20 December 1996, as well as by
the arrival in Luanda of UNITA deputies and some
ministers. We would, however, have had cause for greater
optimism had all UNITA deputies and officials arrived in
Luanda by the deadline of 12 February 1997. This would
have facilitated an earlier installation of the Government
of National Unity and Reconciliation.
We concur with the observation in the
Secretary-General’s report that in order to complete the
implementation of the provisions of the Lusaka Protocol
and to consolidate the gains made so far in the peace
process, a continued, although reduced, presence of the
United Nations in Angola will be required until the end
of 1997. As the peace process enters a new phase, it will
indeed be essential that the United Nations maintains its
presence to ensure the completion of the process.
We would also like to commend the international
donor community for its tireless efforts in assisting the
Angolan people with demining and with the repair of
their war-ravaged infrastructure. More and generous
assistance is needed to promote and sustain peace and
stability.

It is most disappointing that the inauguration on 25
January 1997 of the Government of National Unity and
Reconciliation did not take place as envisaged in the
December 1996 revised timetable of the Joint Commission,
because UNITA withheld the dispatch of its deputies and
officials nominated for the Government of National Unity
and Reconciliation pending the resolution of the issue of the
special status for its leader, Mr. Savimbi.

We would also like to reiterate our previous plea for
President Dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi to meet inside
Angola as a matter of urgency. We believe that such a
meeting is critical and would provide a welcome
opportunity to address the issue of the status of Mr.
Savimbi and other outstanding matters. However, my
delegation believes, like many others, that any attempt in
the course of addressing this issue to introduce linkages
which impact on the implementation of the agreements
should be regarded as unacceptable. We therefore urge
the Council to take a firm and unequivocal stand in this
regard.

Although in general the ceasefire continues to hold
throughout Angola, it is a source of serious concern that
there are still sporadic incidents of violence involving both
parties, as these incidents could lead to an escalation of the
conflict. In order to achieve lasting solutions to these

As the new Government in Angola will not be
formed as envisaged, my delegation supports the
extension of the mandate of the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM III) until 31 March
1997. We urge that the Government of Angola and

20

Security Council
Fifty-second year
UNITA be prevailed upon to expedite the establishment of
the Government of National Unity and Reconciliation, and
we are in full agreement with the request contained in the
resolution just adopted that the Secretary-General report to
the Council on 20 March 1997 on the status of the
formation of the new government.
The Council has repeatedly drawn attention to the
reluctance of UNITA to implement outstanding military and
political aspects of the Lusaka Protocol. We therefore feel
strongly that the time has come for this body to act
decisively and consider the implementation of appropriate
measures against UNITA if it does not comply with its
commitments.
The President: I thank the representative of South
Africa for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Algeria. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Baali (Algeria) (interpretation from French):
Allow me first, Sir, to convey the warm fraternal
congratulations of my delegation on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
February. I am especially pleased that a worthy son of
Africa has the honour of guiding the work of the Security
Council at a time when, more than ever before, it is seized
with questions of great importance for our continent. I am
convinced that the Council will benefit greatly from your
experience and from your wise and enlightened guidance.
Might I also express the gratitude of my delegation to
the Permanent Representative of Japan, who led the Council
with competence and wisdom last month. At the same time
I would like to convey to the Chinese delegation all our
sympathy, our deep feelings and our solidarity in the wake
of the passing of Mr. Deng Xiaoping, who has left his mark
on the history of China and of all the world’s peoples.
Finally, I should like to bid welcome to Vice-Minister
Carneiro of Angola and to tell him how much we
appreciated the important statement he made this morning.
The peace process in Angola is once again
deadlocked. The indications provided by the SecretaryGeneral in his recent report on the situation in Angola do
not, unfortunately, inspire optimism, because of the great
uncertainty for the future for peace in that brotherly
country.

3743rd meeting
27 February 1997
Encouraging progress in the implementation of the
military aspects of the Lusaka accords, rather than
clearing the way for irreversible progress towards national
reconciliation, has, unfortunately, been somewhat eroded,
as is shown by the ever-increasing number of UNITA
soldiers deserting the quartering areas. This is a
disquieting phenomenon, and a source of serious concern
for the international community and for the Angolan
people, who have a legitimate aspiration to live in peace
and stability and to devote their energy to the tasks of
development and nation-building.
The Secretary-General in his latest report to the
Security Council, and the Security Council in its
presidential statement of 30 January, clearly identify
UNITA and its leadership as being responsible for the
difficulties encountered in the process to implement all
aspects of the Lusaka accords. The UNITA leadership is,
without question, responsible before history, before the
international community and before the Angolan people,
for sabotaging the peace process, in which the
international community has invested considerable effort,
and for which it has made enormous sacrifices. In this
context I should like to pay sincere tribute to the work
and devotion of the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission (UNAVEM III), in which my country has the
honour to participate.
The obstructionist attitude and the delaying tactics of
the UNITA leadership have clearly prevented the peace
process from making new progress towards national
reconciliation, in particular with regard to the
establishment of a Government of National Unity and
Reconciliation and the conclusion of an arrangement
relating to the status of the leader of UNITA in keeping
with the conclusions of the Lusaka accords. I should like
here to welcome the positive attitude, open-mindedness
and spirit of national understanding of the Angolan
Government, which have made possible the progress that
we have seen to date.
Recent developments in the peace process in Angola
require the international community to treat the matter
with a greater sense of urgency. The Security Council in
particular must not allow the peace process to become
hostage to the delaying tactics of the UNITA leadership.
It is clear that, rather than merely sending a political
message to the UNITA leaders, the Council must shoulder
its responsibilities by taking the necessary steps to make
them adopt a more constructive attitude and honour the
commitments they undertook in the framework of the
Lusaka accords and the arrangements that they concluded

21

Security Council
Fifty-second year
with the Angolan Government, with the assistance and
backing of UNAVEM.

In renewing the mandate of UNAVEM III for a final
period, the Security Council is counting on the sincerity,
political will and good faith of UNITA. Events have shown
that the UNITA leadership seems to be gambling on
wearing down the international community to make it
disengage, either to shatter the dynamic for peace in the
country or to obtain extravagant advantages with regard to
arrangements already concluded.
At this crucial time for peace in Angola, the
international community and the Security Council are called
on to demonstrate, on the one hand, their solidarity with the
people of Angola, and, on the other, a firm attitude towards
UNITA. The international community cannot and must not
become discouraged. Peace must be given another chance,
because the future of the Angolan people is at stake, and,
indeed, the security and peace of the continent of Africa.
The President: I thank the representative of Algeria
for the kind words he addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Brazil. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Amorim (Brazil): I should like, first of all, to
congratulate you, Ambassador Mahugu, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
February. We are confident that under your wise guidance
the work of the Security Council will be conducted in a
highly effective way. Let me also take this opportunity to
express our appreciation to your predecessor, Ambassador
Hisashi Owada, for the competence with which he presided
over the Council during the month of January.
I should also like to present the condolences of the
people and the Government of Brazil to the people and the
Government of the People’s Republic of China, on the
passing away of the honourable leader, Deng Xiaoping.
Once again, we pay tribute to the Secretary-General’s
Special Representative, Maître Alioune Blondin Beye, for
his active role in bridging differences with a view to
consolidating the peace process. Likewise, the endeavours
of the troika of observer States should be recognized. I
should also like to mention here the important presence of
Mr. Higino Carneiro Vice-Minister without Portfolio of
Angola.

22

3743rd meeting
27 February 1997
The original mandate of the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM III) comes to an end
tomorrow. Since it was first devised, UNAVEM III was
planned to have a very clear “exit policy”. It was
envisaged that the tasks entrusted to it would be
completed by February 1997. The facts, however, show
that some of the tasks have yet to be fulfilled for lack of
appropriate conditions.
The Government of National Unity and
Reconciliation has not yet been formed. The status of
Jonas Savimbi has not been clearly defined. Some of the
military issues remain unresolved. In the quartering areas,
UNITA soldiers still await demobilization. The
incorporation of UNITA soldiers into the new Armed
Forces is still well behind schedule.
The United Nations has continuously striven for a
lasting solution; it cannot be faulted for these delays. The
main responsibility for the restoration of peace in Angola
lies with the Angolans themselves. In particular, it should
be noted that UNITA is required to take urgent and
decisive steps to enable the peace process to be finalized.
In his report contained in document S/1997/115, the
Secretary-General stresses that:
“The pace of implementation of the remaining
military and political tasks, owing mainly to the lack
of cooperation of UNITA, has, once again, been
painfully slow and disappointing”. (S/1997/115,
para. 51)
One is led to recall once more that the international
community has invested a great many resources in Angola
in the past two years. UNAVEM III continues to be the
largest United Nations peacekeeping operation now in
place, and it represents a huge financial involvement for
troop contributors, such as my own country. On the one
hand, it is clear that the international community will not
be able to maintain this level of involvement in Angola
for much longer. On the other hand, the Security Council
must take care not to withdraw UNAVEM III from the
country before the peace process has become irreversible.
The establishment of a Government of National Unity and
Reconciliation is one of the major objectives in this
regard, but other aspects such as the remaining military
issues must be borne in mind.
In examining the present situation, Brazil
understands that an expression of readiness by the
Security Council to consider the imposition of measures,
including those specifically mentioned in paragraph 26 of

Security Council
Fifty-second year
resolution 864 (1993), would be the appropriate way to
proceed at this crucial stage.
The extension of the UNAVEM III mandate for just
one month may not be the ideal solution, but, in view of
the present circumstances, this is a way of exerting
additional pressure, particularly on UNITA, whose lack of
cooperation has continued to cause unjustified delays in the
peace process. Let us hope that the main differences can be
sorted out and that solutions can be reached, so that the
Angolan people may finally attain a long-awaited and well
deserved peace.
The President: I thank the representative of Brazil for
his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of Tunisia. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Abdellah (Tunisia) (interpretation from French):
Allow me first of all to congratulate you, Sir, on your
election to the presidency of the Security Council and to
express our joy at seeing you guide the work of this body
with your characteristic skill and talent. I also congratulate
your predecessor, Ambassador Owada of Japan, for his
excellent work last month. Lastly, I would like to welcome
His Excellency Mr. Higino Carneiro, Vice-Minister without
Portfolio of the Government of Angola, who has come here
especially to participate in this important debate.
The Security Council is considering the situation in
Angola at a time when the peace process in that country
has entered a critical phase in the implementation of the
Lusaka Protocol. While progress has indeed been made in
the quartering of UNITA troops and their incorporation into
the Angolan Armed Forces, delays nonetheless continue to
hinder the completion of this process. This has necessitated
additional expenditures, which could have been earmarked
for other activities, such as the demobilization and
integration of former armed elements into civilian life.
The situation has become even more disturbing
following the increase in the number of deserters from
quartering camps. Moreover, we are sorry to note that the
UNITA members called upon to sit in the Angolan National
Assembly have not yet arrived in Luanda as scheduled and
that the Government of National Unity and Reconciliation
has not yet been established. These delays only serve to
sow doubt and mistrust in people’s minds and threaten to
further delay the peace process after so much sacrifice and
effort.

3743rd meeting
27 February 1997
The Angolan parties must urgently demonstrate the
political will needed to move forward and that they
endeavour, through dialogue and consultation, to
overcome the obstacles to a definitive settlement. A
meeting between President Dos Santos and the leader of
UNITA would be most helpful for the consideration of all
those issues that are still prompting these delays,
including the question of the future status of Mr. Savimbi.
It is essential that UNITA honour its commitments
without further delay, notably that of dispatching its
representatives to Luanda, both to the National Assembly
and to the headquarters of the future Government of
National Unity and Reconciliation. It must also cooperate
fully, with an eye to facilitating the extension of State
administration throughout Angolan territory, so as to
preserve the unity of the country and to ensure that the
entire population enjoys public services. The procedures
and mechanisms approved by the Joint Commission last
month for the extension of State administration to the
entire territory must serve as a basis for this goal.
In this context, my delegation would like to pay a
resounding tribute to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye, who has
made commendable efforts to smooth out difficulties and
reconcile the views of the parties. The good offices of the
three Observer States have also proven to be of great
assistance and deserve to be pursued with the sustained
support of the international community.
My delegation also commends the humanitarian
organizations for their activities, notably their contribution
to demobilization operations despite the security problems
inherent in this type of situation. My delegation must also
express its appreciation for the essential role that the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM III) has unflaggingly played since its
establishment. Thanks to the dedication and courage of its
staff, the United Nations Mission has discharged its
mandate in an exemplary fashion. It is essential that the
two Angolan parties cooperate fully to help UNAVEM III
to carry out its activities and to build on its achievements
at a time when the Secretary-General is considering a
transition plan for the United Nations Mission in the light
of the progress made towards national reconciliation and
peace.
My delegation supports the extension of the mandate
of UNAVEM III until 31 March 1997, as has just been
decided. It is now up to UNITA to comply,
unconditionally and without delay, with all the agreements

23

Security Council
Fifty-second year

3743rd meeting
27 February 1997

that it has entered into under the Lusaka Protocol, failing
which the Security Council would be compelled to consider
appropriate measures.

throughout Angola, is cause for serious concern. The
disarmament of the civilian population as well as the
overall human rights situation remain unsatisfactory.

Lastly, I would highlight the importance of the
international community’s support for efforts aimed at
restoring total peace in Angola. That country, devastated by
a long fratricidal war, today requires the assistance of the
international community for its economic recovery. My
delegation commends all those parties that have contributed
to the task of reconstruction and rehabilitation and
expresses the wish that this commitment be strengthened in
order to enable Angola once again to travel the path of
peace, stability and prosperity.

Further delays and difficulties have recently arisen.
The European Union notes with concern that not all
UNITA National Assembly members and officials
designated for the Government of National Unity and
Reconciliation had arrived in Luanda by the agreed date
of 12 February 1997. As a consequence of the refusal by
UNITA to meet the time-table established by the Joint
Commission in the context of the Lusaka Protocol, the
Government of National Unity and Reconciliation could
not, as envisaged, be formed before the expiration of the
mandate of the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission (UNAVEM III) on 28 February. In this regard,
we wish to stress once again that linkages between the
establishment of the Government of National Unity and
Reconciliation and other outstanding or newly raised
issues are not acceptable.

The President: I thank the representative of Tunisia
for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker is the representative of the
Netherlands. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Berteling (Netherlands): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union. The following
associated countries have aligned themselves with this
statement: Bulgaria, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania and Slovakia.
Iceland and Norway also wish to align themselves with this
statement.
As I understand, Sir, that today is the penultimate day
of your presidency, I should like to voice the appreciation
of the European Union for your able stewardship of the
Council during this month of February.
During recent months, the Angolan peace process has
shown some signs of progress: political contacts between
the parties have taken place in the framework of the Joint
Commission; violations of the ceasefire have diminished;
the incorporation of UNITA troops into the Angolan Armed
Forces has started; most UNITA policemen have been
quartered; and the free movement of persons and goods
throughout the country is improving.
However, the peace process remains far from
completed. UNITA, in particular, has yet to demonstrate its
unequivocal commitment to the terms of the Lusaka
Protocol. The slow pace of implementation of several
crucial aspects of the peace process, in particular the
integration of UNITA soldiers and officers into the Angolan
Armed Forces and the Angolan National Police,
demobilization and the extension of State administration

24

The European Union attaches paramount importance
to preserving the spirit of Lusaka and is firmly committed
to a long and lasting peace in Angola. The ultimate
responsibility for the restoration of peace in Angola,
however, rests with the Angolans themselves. In order to
ensure the continued involvement of the international
community in the peace process, it is imperative for the
parties, in particular UNITA, to take urgent and decisive
steps to fulfil their commitments. The European Union
shares the view of the international community that
continued pressure should be applied until compliance
with the commitments undertaken in the Lusaka Protocol
is assured. We therefore fully endorse the decision of the
Security Council to extend the mandate of UNAVEM III
by only one month, until 31 March 1997, and we support
the readiness of the Council to consider the imposition of
appropriate measures, should the Government of National
Unity and Reconciliation not have been formed by that
date.
The European Union will follow closely the
discussion on the recommendations made by the
Secretary-General on the future role of the United Nations
in Angola. We agree with the Secretary-General that the
pace of the planned withdrawal of United Nations-formed
military units should take into account the state of affairs
on the ground as regards, inter alia, the formation of the
Angolan Armed Forces, demobilization, the closure of
quartering areas and the extension of State administration.

Security Council
Fifty-second year
Over the years, the European Union and its member
States have already provided substantial support — in the
order of several hundreds of millions of U.S. dollars — for
humanitarian, reconstruction and development activities in
Angola. We continue to respond to specific needs. As the
security situation in some regions continues to hamper the
delivery of humanitarian assistance and the carrying out of
reconstruction and development assistance, there is still an
urgent need for security guarantees for international
personnel.
We all are aware of the horrors that anti-personnel
mines can cause to innocent civilians, often children. That
is why the European Union and its member States have
been among those who have provided significant political,
financial, material and personnel support for demining
activities. The United Nations has already cleared 4,500
kilometres of roads, and the training of Angolan demining
brigades is continuing. The planned transfer by 1 March
1997 of the responsibility for support of the national mine
clearance programme from UNAVEM III and the
Humanitarian Assistance Coordination Unit to the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) cannot take
place before the project concerning the development of a
national mine clearance capacity in Angola has been
approved. We therefore call upon the Angolan Government
to do so urgently. The European Union wishes to express
its concern at recent reports about the hampering of mine
clearing activities, and calls on the parties, particularly on
UNITA, to cooperate in this respect.
Finally, I should like to pay tribute to Special
Representative Maître Beye, who is with us today, for his
untiring efforts and unwavering optimism in helping to
bring the peace process forward. We should also like to
express our deep appreciation for the role played by the
three Observer States — Portugal, the United States and the
Russian Federation — and for the important contributions
made by the staff of UNAVEM III, United Nations
agencies and non-governmental organizations in support of
the consolidation of peace and national reconciliation in
Angola.
I should like to conclude by expressing the European
Union’s sincere condolences to the Government and people
of China on the loss of their Paramount Leader, Mr. Deng
Xiaoping, who contributed so much to the economic
development of his country and its opening up to the
international community.
The President: I thank the representative of the
Netherlands for the kind words he addressed to me.

3743rd meeting
27 February 1997
The next speaker is the representative of Mali. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
Mr. Ouane (Mali) (interpretation from French):
Before I make my statement, I am duty-bound to express,
on behalf of my country, Mali, our sentiments of
friendship to the People’s Republic of China. I wish to
convey once again to the representative of China our
heartfelt words of condolence to him on the passing of
Deng Xiaoping. China’s loss is also Mali’s.
Mr. President, the delegation of Mali is pleased to
see the Council meeting under your leadership during this
month of February. Likewise, my delegation associates
itself with previous speakers in congratulating your
predecessor, Ambassador Owada, on the competence and
authority with which he presided over the work of the
Council last month.
My delegation would like to welcome here General
Carneiro, the head of the Angolan delegation. We listened
carefully to his enlightening and constructive statement.
I should like also to associate myself with previous
speakers in conveying our gratitude to the SecretaryGeneral of our Organization, Mr. Kofi Annan, for his
exhaustive, clear and instructive report on this agenda
item.
Finally, might I convey the congratulations of my
delegation to the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral in Angola, our compatriot, Maître Alioune
Blondin Beye, and to the members of the troika, as well
as to entire personnel of the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM III) for their tireless
efforts to advance the peace process in Angola.
Since our last meeting, the situation in Angola has
seen considerable progress, which indicates that the peace
process in that country is at a decisive turning-point. That
is why this meeting is so important, because in the
opinion of my delegation, it must take the peace process
to its final phase. All hopes are now pinned on the full
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol, signed by the
Government of Angola and UNITA on 20 November
1994.
The international community has allocated major
resources in support of these hopes, notably through the
establishment of UNAVEM III. It is imperative that these
efforts bear fruit.

25

Security Council
Fifty-second year

3743rd meeting
27 February 1997

The Government of Angola, which my delegation
warmly congratulates, has made considerable efforts to
discharge its obligations under the Lusaka Protocol.
Unfortunately, this good will has not always been
demonstrated by UNITA, whose delaying tactics my
delegation strongly deplores. In this respect, my delegation
once again appeals to UNITA to implement on a priority
basis the military obligations it undertook to fulfil many
months ago.

clear message sent to UNITA through the threat of
sanctions to convince that movement to stick more
faithfully to the peace process. That attitude alone, in the
view of my delegation, can help the people of Angola to
achieve their desire for peace and to build a better future
geared towards development and democracy.

My delegation sincerely hopes that the aspirations of
the international community will not be disappointed once
again and that UNITA will prove itself in the days to come
on the occasion of the formation of the Government of
National Unity and Reconciliation.

The representative of China has asked for the floor.

With regard to the current situation in Angola, the
delegation of Mali welcomes the extension of the mandate
of UNAVEM III, which remains the guarantor of peace and
stability. My delegation therefore supports the firm,

The President: I thank the representative of Mali for
his kind words addressed to me.

Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (interpretation from Chinese):
On behalf of the Chinese delegation I would like to thank
those delegations which spoke at this afternoon’s
meeting — including Algeria, Brazil, the Netherlands on
behalf of the European Union and its 12 associated
countries, and Mali — for their condolences on the
passing of Mr. Deng Xiaoping. The Chinese delegation
will convey their messages to the Chinese Government
and people, as well as to the family of Mr. Deng. We will
certainly convey these condolences and their sincere
wishes.
The President: There are no further speakers on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda. The
Security Council will remain seized of the matter.
The meeting rose at 5.15 p.m.

26
