General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

80

regional and intergovernmental organizations and the
organizations of the United Nations system;
9. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary resources for an effective programme of financial,
technical and material assistance to the Comoros;
(b)
To ensure that adequate financial and budgetary arrangements are made to continue the mobilization of resources and to co-ordinate the international
programme of assistance to the Comoros;
(c) To arrange for a review of the economic situation in the Comoros in time for the matter to be considered by the Economic and Social Council at its
sixty-fifth session;
( d) To keep the situation in the Comoros under
constant review, to maintain close contact with Member
States, regional and other intergovernmental organizations, the specialized agencies and international financial
institutions, and to report on the question to the General Assembly at its thirty-third session.
IOI st plenary meeting
13 December 1977

32/93.

Assistance to Djibouti

The General Assembly,
Having warmly welcomed the admission of the Republic of Djibouti to the United Nations, 28
Taking note of the statement made by the President
of the Republic of Djibouti in the General Assembly 29
on the economic difficulties confronting his country,
A ware of the fact that Djibouti has to tackle certain
specific tasks deriving from its recent accession to independence,
Aware also of the need for the improvement and
enlargement of the social and economic infrastructure
of Djibouti,
Deeply concerned at the situation prevailing in the
country, aggravated by drought and other factors seriously affecting its economic and social life,
Recalling also the recent surveys carried out by the
United Nations with a view to assessing Djibouti's
short-term and long-term needs,
Further recalling its resolution 3421 (XXX) of 8
December 1975 on the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples, in which it urged the specialized agencies and other organizations within the
United Nations system to extend-assistance to the newly
independent and emerging States,
Recalling recommendation 99 (IV) of 31 May 1976
adopted by the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development at its fourth session, 30 held at Nairobi
from 5 to 31 May 1976,
Noting that Djibouti is not included in the list of the
28 Resolution 32/1.
29

Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Plenary Meetings, 3rd meeting, paras. 122-194.
30
See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.IT.D.10
and corrigendum), part one, sect. A.

least developed countries 81 or in the list of the most
seriously affected countries, 32
1. Strongly appeals to Member States and to the
international institutions concerned-in particular the
United Nations Development Programme, the World
Bank, the United Nations Children's Fund, the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
and the World Food Programme-to give effective and
sustained assistance to the Government of Djibouti so
as to enable it to deal successfully with the critical
situation arising from the drought and the economic
difficulties which that country is experiencing;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to mobilize financial, technical and economic assistance from the
international community, particularly from the developed countries and competent agencies of the United
Nations, in order to meet the short-term and long-term
development needs of this newly independent country;
3. Requests the Committee for Development Planning to treat as a priority matter at its fourteenth session
and to give favourable consideration to the inclusion
of Djibouti in the list of the least developed countries
and to submit its conclusions to the Economic and
Social Council at its sixty-fifth session;
4. Invites in the meantime Member States, particularly the developed countries, and United Nations
agencies to grant Djibouti, in view of its difficult economic situation, the same favourable treatment as is
enjoyed by the least developed among the developing
countries;

5. Strongly recommends that Djibouti should be
included in the list of the most seriously affected countries;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the question under review and to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-third session on the implementation of
the present resolution.
I O1st plenary meeting
13 December 1977
32/94.

Assistance to Ton~a

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2626 (XXV) of 24 October
1970, containing the International Development Strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade, and 2768 (XXVI) of 18 November 1971 on
the identification of the least developed among the
developing countries,
Further recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 1726 (LIII) of 28 July 1972, in which the
Council, inter a/ia, requested the Committee for Development Planning to undertake an examination of
the latest available statistical information on the relevant
economic, social and other variables in respect of the
developing countries, with a view to making recommendations to the Council on any modification that
might appear necessary in the list of the least developed countries on the basis of the criteria used in
drawing up the list,
Bearing in mind its resolution 3487 (XXX) of 12
December 1975 by which certain countries were added
to the list of thl' least developed countries,
:n See resolutions 2768 (XXVI) and 3487 (XXX).
2
:: Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first
Session, SU['[!lemrnt No. 2 J (A/3 l /21), annex IV.

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Requests the Committee for Development Planning
at its fourteenth session to give consideration, as a
matter of priority, to the question of the inclusion of
Tonga in the list of the least developed countries and
to submit its conclusions to the Economic and Social
Council at its sixty-fifth session.
101st plenary meeting
13 December 1977
32/95.

Assistance to Mozambique

The General Assembly,
Recalling the decision of the Government of Mozambique to implement mandatory sanctions against the
illegal regime of Southern Rhodesia in accordance
with Security Council resolution 253 ( 1968) of 29
May 1968,
Conscious of the substantial economic sacrifices
made by Mozambique in the implementation of its
decision to enforce sanctions and to close its borders
with Southern Rhodesia,
Deeply concerned at the continued acts of aggression
committed by the illegal regime of Southern Rhodesia
against Mozambique and the resultant loss of life and
destruction of property,
Recalling Security Council resolution 3 86 (1976) of
17 March 1976, in which the Council appealed to all
States to provide immediate financial, technical and
material assistance to Mozambique and requested the
Secretary-General, in collaboration with the appropriate
organizations of the United Nations system, to organize,
with immediate effect, all forms of financial, technical
and material assistance to enable Mozambique to carry
out its economic development programme normally and
to enhance its capacity to implement fully the United
Nations mandatory sanctions,
Endorsing the provisions of Security Council resolution 411 (1977) of 30 June 1977, in which the
Council, inter alia, condemned the illegal regime of
Southern Rhodesia for its acts of aggression against
Mozambique and requested the international community to provide financial, technical and material assistance to enable Mozambique to overcome the severe
economic loss and destruction of property brought
about by such acts of aggression,

Noting Economic and Social Council resolutions
1987 (LX) of 11 May 1976, 2020 (LXI) of 3 August
1976 and 2094 (LXIII) of 29 July 1977, and recalling
General Assembly resolution 31 / 43 of 1 December 1976,
Noting also the report of the Secretary-General dated
9 June 1977 33 submitting the report of the second review
mission assessing Mozambique's specific food, material
and economic requirements and describing its special
needs resulting from floods and the large influx of
refugees from Southern Rhodesia,
Having examined the note by the Secretary-General
dated 20 October 1977 34 transmitting the report of the
mission to Mozambique, which provided an assessment of the financial, technical and material assistance
33 A/32/96.

;H A/32/268-S/12413.

For the printed text, see Official
Records of the Security Council, Thirty-second Year, Supplement for October, November and December 1977.

81

required for Mozambique to overcome the loss and
destruction caused by Southern Rhodesia's acts of
aggression and which reviewed the over-all economic
situation in Mozambique in the context of Security
Council resolutions 386 (1976) and 411 (1977),

I . Fully endorses the assessment and recommendations of the mission which was dispatched to Mozambique under the terms of Security Council resolution
411 ( l 977), contained in the note by the SecretaryGeneral dated 20 October 1977;
2. Fully supports the provision of assistance to
meet:
(a)
The specific food, material and economic requirements arising from the special economic situation
facing Mozambique;
( h)
The financial and material needs required to
deal with the large influx of refugees from Southern
Rhodesia, as outlined in the report of the SecretaryGenl'ral dated 9 June 1977 and the note by the Secretary-General dated 20 October 1977;
3. Deeply appreciates the measures taken by the
Secretary-General to organize and mobilize an effective
programme of international assistance to Mozambique;

4. Notes with satisfaction the assistance so far
provided to Mozambiqu~ by various States and by various regional and international organizations;

5. Expresses deep concern, however, that the total
assistance received to date to meet the economic sacrifices made by Mozambique in the enforcement of sanctions still falls far short of its requirements to cope
with the situation;
6. Draws the attention of the international community to additional financial, economic and material assistance urgently required by Mozambique to enable it
to overcome the severe economic loss and destruction
of property caused by the acts of aggression that are
detailed in the note by the Secretary-General;
7. Urges all States and all regional, financial and
intergovernmental organizations to provide financial,
material and economic assistance to Mozambique to
enable it to cope with these new economic and social
probkms;
8. Notes with satisfaction the programmes of humanitarian assistance provided by Zimbabwean refugees
in Mozambique by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and urges the international community to provide him speedily with the necessary
means to carry out an extension of these programmes
along the lines recommended in the note by the Secretary-General;
9. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system-in particular
th.: United Nations Children's Fund, the United Nations
Development Programme. the World Food Programme,
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, the World Health Organization and the International Fund for Agricultural Development-to assist
Mozambique in carrying out its planned development
projects without interruption and to co-operate closely
with the Secretary-General in organizing an effective
international programme of assistance;
I 0. Further requests the appropriate organizations
and programmes of the United Nations system to report
