A/62/PV.121

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-second session

121st plenary meeting
Thursday, 11 September 2008, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kerim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia)

The meeting was called to order at 10.40 a.m.
Agenda item 34 (continued)
Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/62/406/Add.1)
The President: If there is no proposal under rule
66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it that the
General Assembly decides not to discuss the report of
the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) that is before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be
limited to explanations of vote. The positions of
delegations regarding the recommendation of the
Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) have been made clear in the
Committee and are reflected in the relevant official
records. May I remind members that, under paragraph
7 of decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is
considered in a Main Committee and in plenary
meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible,
explain its vote only once, i.e., either in the
Committee or in plenary meeting, unless that
delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different
from its vote in the Committee.”

May I also remind delegations that, also in
accordance with General Assembly decision 34/401,
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendation contained in the report of the Special
Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth
Committee), I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take a decision in the same
manner as was done in the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee), unless
notified otherwise in advance.
The General Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) in
paragraph 7 of its report. The Assembly will now take
a decision on the draft resolution. The Special Political
and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
adopted the draft resolution without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/273).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 34?
It was so decided.
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
consideration of all the reports of the Special Political
and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee).

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

08-50341 (E)

*0850341*

A/62/PV.121

Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President: I now invite the attention of the
General Assembly to document A/62/L.41/Rev.1,
circulated under agenda item 56, “Globalization and
interdependence”.
Members will recall that the General Assembly
concluded consideration of agenda item 56 at its
78th plenary meeting, on 19 December 2007. In order
to enable the Assembly to consider draft resolution
A/62/L.41/Rev.1, it will be necessary to reopen
consideration of agenda item 56.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to reopen consideration of agenda item 56?
It was so decided.
The President: Members will recall that at its
3rd plenary meeting, on 21 September 2007, the
General Assembly decided to allocate agenda item 56
to the Second Committee. In order for the General
Assembly to proceed expeditiously with the
consideration of the draft resolution issued as
document A/62/L.41/Rev.1, under that item, may I take
it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to
consider agenda item 56 directly in plenary meeting
under heading B, “Promotion of sustained economic
growth and sustainable development in accordance
with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly
and recent United Nations conferences”?
It was so decided.
The President: May I further take it that the
Assembly agrees to proceed immediately to the
consideration of agenda item 56?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 56 (continued)
Globalization and interdependence
Draft resolution (A/62/L.41/Rev.1)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Azerbaijan to introduce draft
resolution A/62/L.41/Rev.1.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): I have the honour to
introduce, on behalf of the sponsors, including
Sweden, which has joined that group very recently,

2

draft resolution A/62/L.41/Rev.1. The text before us is
the result of an extensive process of informal
consultations reflecting our willingness to attain broad
support for the draft resolution.
The draft resolution primarily focuses on the
issues of transparency and accountability in industries,
recognizing the important role of the international
community, Government and the private sector in that
regard. It also takes note of relevant voluntary
initiatives implemented in this field, in particular the
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI),
which seeks to further strengthen transparency and
accountability in the extractive sector.
Launched in 2003, the Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative is a voluntary initiative open to
all countries looking for better standards of
transparency and accountability in the extractive sector
to the benefit of their peoples. Bringing together
Government, the private sector and civil society, the
EITI enables more transparent and accountable
governance in the extractive sector, while aligning the
interests of all stakeholders.
We believe that the adoption of this draft
resolution will be another important step for countries
to further promote transparency and accountability. We
also believe that this kind of recognition should
facilitate the exchange of lessons learned and the
sharing of knowledge and best practices through
South-South and North-South cooperation, which will
be important in developing the transparency agenda.
We believe that the United Nations system,
through its global reach, country presence and areas of
work, will be an important partner for increasing
knowledge about transparency and for assisting those
countries that want to develop capacities in developing
initiatives such as the EITI. Therefore, we invite all
member States to adopt the draft resolution by
consensus.
In conclusion, I wish to thank all the sponsors of
the draft resolution for their contribution and support,
and also to thank those delegations that participated in
the harmonization of the text.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/62/L.41/Rev.1. I call first on the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
on a point of order.

08-50341

A/62/PV.121

Mrs. Giménez-Jiménez (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation wishes
to point out some differences between the Spanish
version and the English version of draft resolution
A/62/L.41/Rev.1.
The title in Spanish should conform to the
English
text,
“Strengthening
transparency
in
industries”, with the word “industries” in the plural.
The sixth preambular paragraph too should conform to
the English text, which reads “Taking note of all
relevant voluntary initiatives, including the Extractive
Industries Transparency Initiative, aimed at improving
transparency in the extractive industries”.
We also request that footnote 3, which refers to
the website of the Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative, be deleted. It is our understanding that
footnotes are used to refer to official documents of the
United Nations, and the decision to include this
footnote was not a consensus-based decision among
Member States.
Finally, we request that the Spanish text of
paragraph 4 be corrected to conform to the English
text, which reads as follows:
“Notes the efforts of countries that are
participating in all relevant voluntary initiatives
to improve transparency and accountability in
industries, including in the Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative in the extractive sector,
and to share their experience with interested
Member States.”
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of China on a point of order.
Mr. Liu Yuyin (China): I, too, wish to point out
some problems with the Chinese version of draft
resolution A/62/L.41/Rev.1.
First, with regard to the title of the draft
resolution, the Chinese version, when translated back
into English literally, is “Strengthening transparency in
industries and business”. There is a similar problem in
operative paragraph 4. I understand that in Chinese
there is no word corresponding to the word
“industries”, but I trust that the translators have the
wisdom to find a perfect Chinese word for “industries”.
Also in operative paragraph 4, in the Chinese version,
when translated back into English literally, it would
seem that the comma has been omitted after the word
“initiatives”.

08-50341

So, I would ask the Secretariat to pay heed to the
problems with the Chinese version and make the
corresponding corrections.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Russian Federation on a point of
order.
Mr. Kononuchenko (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We, too, would like to draw attention to
the fact that there are some inaccuracies in the Russian
version of draft resolution A/62/L.41/Rev.1, notably in
the title. If translated into English, it would read:
“Strengthening transparency in the extractive
industry”. During the negotiations on the draft
resolution we tried to achieve consensus, and the
consensus was reached with the understanding that the
title of the draft resolution in Russian would not
include the word “extractive”.
I would like my comments to be carefully applied
to the entire Russian text of the draft resolution in
order to eliminate such glaring inaccuracies.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/62/L.41/Rev.1, entitled
“Strengthening transparency in industries”. The
following additional countries have become sponsors
of the draft resolution: Armenia, Israel, Kazakhstan and
Sweden.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/62/L.41/Rev.1, taking into account
the comments made regarding the Chinese, Russian
and Spanish versions?
Draft resolution A/62/L.41/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 62/274).
The President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of vote after the vote, may I
remind delegations that explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Hagen (United States of America): We are
particularly pleased that resolution 62/274 takes note
of the role of voluntary initiatives, such as the
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative, in
strengthening transparency and accountability in
industries. Azerbaijan is one of the pioneers in
implementing the Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative, and we are grateful for its sponsorship of
this resolution. We encourage other emerging

3

A/62/PV.121

economies and their companies to support
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative.

the

With respect to the reference in the fifth
preambular paragraph to full permanent sovereignty
over wealth, natural resources and economic activities,
and the reference in the fourth preambular paragraph to
Assembly resolution 1803 (XVII) of 14 December
1962, the United States wishes to emphasize that State
sovereignty is qualified by rules of international law,
including those concerning expropriation of property.
For example, no State may expropriate or nationalize
foreign investments, either directly or indirectly, except
when four conditions are met. In particular, an
expropriation must be for a public purpose; it must be
non-discriminatory; it must be accompanied by prompt,
adequate and effective compensation; and it must be
carried out in accordance with due process of law.
Mrs. Giménez-Jiménez (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela has joined consensus on draft
resolution A/62/L.41/Rev.1, taking into account the
changes mentioned earlier, and wishes to make the
following comments.
We should like to underscore our concern at the
trend for the Assembly to attempt to give an
intergovernmental stimulus to non-intergovernmental
initiatives. Here, we wish to stress that the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela considers that the Extractive
Industries Transparency Initiative, as indicated in
operative paragraph 4, is voluntary and that it falls
within the context of the Charter of Economic Rights
and Duties of States, adopted by the Assembly as
resolution 3281 (XXIX). That document states that
every State has full permanent sovereignty, including
possession, use and disposal, over all its wealth,
natural resources and economic activities.
Similarly, transparency and/or accountability in
industries is interpreted as being aimed at enhancing
social well-being, inclusion, participation and
accountability to the people, in full conformity with the
national legislation of States. However, in no way can
this transparency and/or accountability mean the
establishment of supranational monitoring mechanisms
that undermine a State’s full permanent sovereignty,
including possession, use and disposal, over all its
wealth, natural resources and economic activities.
With respect to paragraph 3, the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela interprets the role of the

4

international community as solely to strengthen the
sovereignty of the State over its industries and over the
use and disposal of its natural resources. The purpose
is to increase the State’s efforts to attain its
development goals, to include internationally agreed
goals and the Millennium Development Goals.
As regards paragraph 6, it is understood to mean
that transnational corporations should fully comply
with national legislation in the places where their
activities take place and should cooperate with the
development strategies of the States in which their
activities take place.
In conclusion, the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela believes that this resolution will promote
increased transparency in all international industrial,
financial and trade sectors and will be an effective
means of meeting commitments under the United
Nations Convention against Corruption and the
relevant resolutions.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 56?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President: I now invite the attention of the
General Assembly to document A/62/L.47, circulated
under sub-item (b) of agenda item 64, “New
Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress in
implementation and international support: Causes of
conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa”.
Members will recall that the General Assembly
concluded its consideration of agenda item 64 and its
sub-items (a) and (b) at its 85th plenary meeting, on
4 March 2008. In order to enable the General Assembly
to consider draft resolution A/62/L.47, it will be
necessary to reopen consideration of sub-item (b) of
agenda item 64. May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to reopen consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 64?
It was so decided.

08-50341

A/62/PV.121

Agenda item 64 (continued)
New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress
in implementation and international support
(b) Causes of conflict and the promotion of durable
peace and sustainable development in Africa
Draft resolution (A/62/L.47)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Antigua and Barbuda to introduce
draft resolution A/62/L.47.
Mr. Hunte (Antigua and Barbuda): It is my
honour, on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, to
introduce to the General Assembly the draft resolution
on causes of conflict and the promotion of durable
peace and sustainable development in Africa contained
in document A/62/L.47.
Under the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development (NEPAD), African countries continue to
express their determination and commitment to take
control of their own sustainable economic and social
development. Furthermore, in 2005, world leaders
joined with their African counterparts in reaffirming
their commitment to address the special needs of
Africa in the 2005 World Summit Outcome document
(resolution 60/1). They also jointly recognized that
development, peace and security and human rights are
interlinked and mutually reinforcing.
Mr. Soborun (Mauritius), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
African countries have made significant progress
in addressing the causes of conflict and promoting
sustainable peace on the continent, including through
NEPAD, the African Union and other regional and
subregional organizations.
The international community now needs to give
increased support to these positive trends and
advances. In this regard, I am pleased to present this
draft resolution to the General Assembly on behalf of
the Group of 77 and China. It is a very important draft
resolution, which speaks to the importance of conflict
prevention and the consolidation of peace on the
African continent and underscores the need to develop
African human and institutional capacities.

integrated efforts of the United Nations system,
Member States, regional and subregional organizations
and international and regional financial institutions.
The synergy between Africa’s economic and social
development programmes and its peace and security
agenda should also be developed.
The draft resolution also calls upon the United
Nations system to continue to mainstream the special
needs of Africa in all of its normative and operational
activities.
My delegation is pleased, on behalf of the Group
of 77 and China, to recommend this draft resolution to
the General Assembly for adoption. I take this
opportunity to thank all members for their support of
this draft resolution, and to thank as well those
members that have joined the Group in sponsoring it.
We invite other delegations to do so.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/62/L.47. The Assembly will
now take action on draft resolution A/62/L.47, entitled
“Implementation of the recommendations contained in
the report of the Secretary-General on the causes of
conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa”.
I should like to announce that, since the
introduction of the draft resolution, the following
countries have become sponsors of A/62/L.47: Albania,
Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Estonia,
Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, the Netherlands,
Poland, Portugal, Slovenia and the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/62/L.47?
Draft resolution A/62/L.47
(resolution 62/275).

was

adopted

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 64 and
agenda item 64 as a whole?
It was so decided.

Among other things, the draft resolution notes
that conflict prevention and the consolidation of peace
would benefit from the coordinated, sustained and

08-50341

5

A/62/PV.121

Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The Acting President: I now invite the attention
of the General Assembly to document A/62/L.49,
circulated under sub-item (g) of agenda item 98,
“General and complete disarmament: Convening of the
fourth special session of the General Assembly devoted
to disarmament”.
Members will recall that at its 3rd plenary
meeting, on 21 September 2007, the General Assembly
decided to allocate sub-item (g) of agenda item 98 to
the First Committee. In order for the General Assembly
to proceed expeditiously with the consideration of the
draft decision issued as document A/62/L.49 under this
sub-item, may I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to consider sub-item (g) of agenda item 98
directly in the plenary meeting under heading G,
“Disarmament”?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: May I further take it that
the Assembly agrees to proceed immediately to the
consideration of sub-item (g) of agenda item 98?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 98 (continued)
General and complete disarmament
(g) Convening of the fourth special session of the
General Assembly devoted to disarmament
Draft decision (A/62/L.49)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia to introduce draft decision
A/62/L.49.
Mr. Ruddyard (Indonesia): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the States members of the
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM).
In accordance with resolution 62/29, adopted by
the General Assembly on 5 December 2007, the Openended Working Group to Consider the Objectives and
Agenda, including the possible establishment of the
preparatory committee, for the Fourth Special Session
of the General Assembly Devoted to Disarmament
(SSOD IV) was to hold an organizational session in
order to set a date for its substantive session in 2008

6

and to submit a report on its work, including possible
substantive recommendations, before the end of the
sixty-second session of the General Assembly.
However, noting that the Open-ended Working
Group could not be convened within the time
allocated — namely, within the sixty-second session of
the General Assembly — owing to the unavailability of
a Chair for the Group, we deemed it necessary to
propose a procedural decision. Following informal
consultations with delegations, and for the purpose of
reporting to the General Assembly before the end of
the sixty-second session, as requested by the
resolution, we are introducing the draft decision
contained in document A/62/L.49 for consideration and
adoption by the Assembly.
NAM sees SSOD IV as a useful platform for
promoting multilateral negotiations on disarmament
and arms limitation measures. Its convening will also
reaffirm multilateralism as the core principle in
negotiations and strengthen the central role of the
United Nations in disarmament and related issues.
Therefore, I should like to reaffirm NAM’s unwavering
support for the convening of the fourth special session
of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament. At
an appropriate time, NAM will request the convening
of the Open-ended Working Group.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take action on draft decision A/62/L.49. May I take it
that the Assembly decides to adopt the draft decision?
Draft decision A/62/L.49 was adopted.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (g) of agenda item 98 and
agenda item 98 as a whole?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 18 (continued)
Question of Palestine
Letter dated 2 September 2008 from the
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People addressed to the President of the
General Assembly (A/62/951)
The Acting President: By the letter before the
Assembly, the President has been informed of the
interest of the Government of Nicaragua in becoming a

08-50341

A/62/PV.121

member of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.

The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nicaragua.

As delegations are aware, in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 3376 (XXX) of
10 November 1975, members of the Committee are
appointed by the General Assembly. The proposal now
before the Assembly is that Nicaragua be added to the
membership of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People. May I
take it that the General Assembly agrees to enlarge the
membership of that Committee by appointing
Nicaragua as a member of the Committee?

Mr. Castellón Duarte (Nicaragua) (spoke in
Spanish): I wish only to thank the members of the
General Assembly for having approved Nicaragua’s
request to become a member of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People.

It was so decided.

08-50341

The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 18.
The meeting rose at 11.15 a.m.

7
