United Nations

A/RES/70/125

General Assembly

Distr.: General
1 February 2016

Seventieth session
Agenda item 17

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 16 December 2015
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/70/L.33)]

70/125. Outcome document of the high-level meeting
of the General Assembly on the overall review of
the implementation of the outcomes of the
World Summit on the Information Society
The General Assembly
Adopts the following outcome document of the high-level meeting of the
General Assembly on the overall review of the implementation of the outcomes of
the World Summit on the Information Society at its seventieth session:
Outcome document of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the
overall review of the implementation of the outcomes of the World Summit
on the Information Society
We, the Ministers and heads of delegations participating in the high-level
plenary meeting of the General Assembly on the overall review of the
implementation of the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society,
held in New York on 15 and 16 December 2015,
Recalling the request in paragraph 111 of the Tunis Agenda for the Information
Society1 that the General Assembly undertake an overall review of the implementation of
the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society in 2015, and in this
regard reaffirming the role of the Assembly in this process, and reaffirming also that
the Assembly, in its resolution 68/302 of 31 July 2014, decided that the overall
review would be concluded by a two-day high-level meeting of the Assembly,
preceded by an intergovernmental preparatory process that also meaningfully takes
into account inputs from all relevant stakeholders,
Welcoming the constructive and diverse inputs from Governments, the private
sector, civil society, international organizations, the technical and academic
communities and all other relevant stakeholders in taking stock of the progress made
in the implementation of the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information
Society and addressing potential information and communications technology gaps
and areas for continued focus, as well as challenges, including bridging digital
_______________
1

See A/60/687.

15-16879 (E)

*1516879*

Please recycle

Outcome document of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the overall review
of the implementation of the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society

A/RES/70/125

divides and
development,

harnessing

information

and

communications

technology

for

Building on, among other relevant inputs, the 10-year review of the World
Summit on the Information Society conducted by the Commission on Science and
Technology for Development in May 2015, and its outcome document, entitled
“Implementing World Summit on the Information Society outcomes: a 10-year
review”; the multi-stakeholder 10-year review event hosted by the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, entitled “Towards knowledge
societies for peace and sustainable development”, held in February 2013, and its
final statement, entitled “Information and knowledge for all: an expanded vision and
a renewed commitment”; and the multi-stakeholder high-level event for the review
of the World Summit, coordinated and hosted by the International
Telecommunication Union and organized by the International Telecommunication
Union, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and the United Nations
Development Programme in June 2014, and its outcomes, the statement of the
10-year review of the World Summit on the implementation of World Summit
outcomes, and the vision of the 10-year review of the World Summit beyond 2015,
both adopted by consensus,
Reaffirming General Assembly resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled
“Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development”, in which
it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and
transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to
working tirelessly for the full implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition
that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions, including extreme poverty,
is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three
dimensions – economic, social and environmental – in a balanced and integrated
manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium Development
Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also General Assembly resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the
Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for
Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, 2 supports and complements it and helps to contextualize its means of
implementation targets with concrete policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong
political commitment to address the challenge of financing and creating an enabling
environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global
partnership and solidarity,
1.
We reaffirm our common desire and commitment to the World Summit
on the Information Society vision to build a people-centred, inclusive and
development-oriented information society, where everyone can create, access,
utilize and share information and knowledge, enabling individuals, communities and
peoples to achieve their full potential in promoting their sustainable development
and improving their quality of life, premised on the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and respecting fully and upholding the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights. 3

_______________
2
3

2/14

Resolution 70/1.
Resolution 217 A (III).

Outcome document of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the overall review
of the implementation of the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society

A/RES/70/125

2.
We further reaffirm our commitment to the Geneva Declaration of
Principles, 4 the Geneva Plan of Action and its action lines,4 the Tunis Commitment
and the Tunis Agenda for the Information Society,1 and we recognize the need for
Governments, the private sector, civil society, international organizations, the
technical and academic communities and all other relevant stakeholders to continue
to work together to implement the World Summit on the Information Society vision
beyond 2015.
3.
We reaffirm, moreover, the value and principles of multi-stakeholder
cooperation and engagement that have characterized the World Summit on the
Information Society process since its inception, recognizing that effective
participation, partnership and cooperation of Governments, the private sector, civil
society, international organizations, the technical and academic communities and all
other relevant stakeholders, within their respective roles and responsibilities,
especially with balanced representation from developing countries, has been and
continues to be vital in developing the information society.
4.
We welcome the remarkable evolution and diffusion of information and
communications technologies, underpinned by the contributions of both public and
private sectors, which have seen penetration into almost all corners of the globe,
created new opportunities for social interaction, enabled new business models and
contributed to economic growth and development in all other sectors, while noting
the unique and emerging challenges related to their evolution and diffusion.
5.
We recognize that increased connectivity, innovation and access played a
critical role in enabling progress on the Millennium Development Goals, and we
call for close alignment between the World Summit on the Information Society
process and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, 2 highlighting the crosscutting contribution of information and communications technology to the
Sustainable Development Goals and poverty eradication, and noting that access to
information and communications technologies has also become a development
indicator and aspiration in and of itself.
6.
We express concern, however, that there are still significant digital
divides, such as between and within countries and between women and men, which
need to be addressed through, among other actions, strengthened enabling policy
environments and international cooperation to improve affordability, access,
education, capacity-building, multilingualism, cultural preservation, investment and
appropriate financing. Further, we acknowledge that a gender divide exists as part of
the digital divides, and encourage all stakeholders to ensure the full participation of
women in the information society and women’s access to new technologies,
especially information and communications technologies for development.
7.
We acknowledge that particular attention should be paid to address the
unique and emerging information and communications technology challenges facing
all countries, in particular developing countries, including African countries, least
developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing
States and middle-income countries, as well as countries and territories under
foreign occupation, countries in situations of conflict, post-conflict countries and
countries affected by natural disasters. Particular attention should also be paid to
addressing the specific information and communications technology challenges
facing children, youth, persons with disabilities, older persons, indigenous peoples,
_______________
4

See A/C.2/59/3, annex.

3/14

Outcome document of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the overall review
of the implementation of the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society

A/RES/70/125

refugees and internally displaced persons, migrants and remote and rural
communities.
8.
We reaffirm that Internet governance should continue to follow the
provisions set forth in the outcomes of the summits held in Geneva and Tunis.
9.
We reaffirm, moreover, that the same rights that people have offline must
also be protected online. We emphasize that progress towards the vision of the
World Summit on the Information Society should be considered not only as a
function of economic development and the spreading of information and
communications technologies but also as a function of progress with respect to the
realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms.
10. Building confidence and security in the use of information and
communications technologies for sustainable development should also be a priority,
especially given growing challenges, including the abuse of such technologies for
harmful activities from harassment to crime to terrorism.
11. We reiterate our commitments to the positive uses of the Internet and
other information and communications technologies and to taking appropriate
actions and preventive measures, as determined by law, against abusive uses of
those technologies, as mentioned under the ethical dimensions of the information
society in the Geneva Declaration of Principles and the Geneva Plan of Action. We
also recognize the importance of ethics, as set out in action line C10 of the Plan of
Action, in building the information society and strengthening the role of information
and communications technologies as enablers of development.
1.

Information and communications technology for development

12. We commit to harnessing the potential of information and
communications technologies to achieve the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and other internationally agreed development goals, noting that they
can accelerate progress across all 17 Sustainable Development Goals. We
accordingly call upon all Governments, the private sector, civil society, international
organizations, the technical and academic communities and all other relevant
stakeholders to integrate information and communications technologies into their
approaches to implementing the Goals, and request United Nations entities
facilitating the World Summit on the Information Society action lines to review their
reporting and work plans to support implementation of the 2030 Agenda.
13. We recognize with satisfaction that the previous decade’s considerable
increases in connectivity, use, creation and innovation have created new tools to
drive poverty eradication and economic, social and environmental betterment. For
example, fixed and wireless broadband, mobile Internet, smartphones and tablets,
cloud computing, open data, social media and big data were only in their early
stages at the time of the adoption of the Tunis Agenda, and are now understood to be
significant enablers of sustainable development.
14. We reaffirm that the expansion and use of information and
communications technologies must continue to be a core focus and outcome of the
World Summit on the Information Society process. We are highly encouraged that
the number of mobile phone subscriptions is estimated to have risen from 2.2 billion
in 2005 to 7.1 billion in 2015, and that by the end of 2015, 3.2 billion people are
expected to be online, over 43 per cent of the total world population, of which
2 billion are from developing countries. We also note that fixed broadband
subscriptions have reached a penetration rate of almost 10 per cent, as compared
4/14

Outcome document of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the overall review
of the implementation of the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society

A/RES/70/125

with 3.4 per cent in 2005, and that mobile broadband remains the fastest growing
market segment, with continuous double-digit growth rates reaching 47 per cent in
2015, a value that increased 12 times since 2007.
15. We note that the digital economy is an important and growing part of the
global economy, and that connectivity is correlated with increases in gross domestic
product. Information and communications technologies have created a new
generation of businesses, innovators and jobs, while altering and making obsolete
others, and have also generally increased the efficiency, market access and ingenuity
of all sectors. We recognize the critical importance of expanding the participation of
all countries, particularly developing countries, in the digital economy.
16. We also recognize that information and communications technologies are
contributing to higher levels of social benefit and inclusion, providing new channels
among citizens, businesses and Governments to share and augment knowledge, as
well as participate in decisions that affect their lives and work. As envisioned by the
World Summit on the Information Society action lines, we have seen information
and communications technology-enabled breakthroughs in Government, including
in the provision of public services, education, health care and employment, as well
as in business, agriculture and science, with greater numbers of people having
access to services and data that might previously have been out of reach or
unaffordable.
17. We simultaneously recognize that information and communications
technologies are fundamentally altering the way individuals and communities
interact, consume and spend their time, with new and unforeseen health and social
consequences, many of which are positive and some of which raise concerns.
18. We recognize that information and communications technologies have
become important to disaster and humanitarian response, and further reaffirm their
role in enhancing and developing multi-hazard early warning systems, preparedness,
response, recovery, rehabilitation and reconstruction. We also encourage greater
investments in innovation and technology development for long-term, multi-hazard
and solution-driven research in the field of disaster risk management.
19. We recognize that information and communications technologies are also
increasingly a means to support the diversity of cultural expression and the fastgrowing cultural and creative industries, and we affirm that comprehensive,
practical digital strategies are needed for the preservation of cultural heritage and
access to recorded information in the digital environment in all its forms.
20. We further recognize that increasing use of information and
communications technologies both generates certain environmental benefits and
imposes certain environmental costs, which we aim to reduce. We welcome the
opportunity afforded by sustainable energy to potentially decouple the growth of
information and communications technologies from contributions to climate change,
and we also note their catalytic value for the deployment of renewable energy,
energy efficiency, smart and resilient city concepts and Internet-enabled delivery of
services, among other abatement options. However, we recognize that we must
encourage further action to improve the resource efficiency of information and
communications technologies and to reuse, recycle and safely dispose of e-waste.

5/14

Outcome document of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the overall review
of the implementation of the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society

A/RES/70/125

1.1

Bridging digital divides

21. Despite the previous decade’s achievements in information and
communications technology connectivity, we express concern that many forms of
digital divides remain, both between and within countries and between women and
men. We note that divides are often closely linked to education levels and existing
inequalities, and we recognize that further divides can emerge in the future, slowing
sustainable development. We acknowledge that, as of 2015, only around 43 per cent
of people globally had Internet access, only 41 per cent of women had Internet
access and an estimated 80 per cent of online content was available in only one of
10 languages. The poor are the most excluded from the benefits of information and
communications technology.
22. We further express concern that digital divides remain between
developed and developing countries and that many developing countries lack
affordable access to information and communications technologies. As of 2015, only
34 per cent of households in developing countries had Internet access, with
significant variations by country, as compared with more than 80 per cent in
developed countries. This means that two thirds of the households in developing
countries do not have Internet access.
23. We affirm our commitment to bridging digital and knowledge divides,
and we recognize that our approach must be multidimensional and include an
evolving understanding of what constitutes access, emphasizing the quality of that
access. We acknowledge that speed, stability, affordability, language, local content
and accessibility for persons with disabilities are now core elements of quality, and
that high-speed broadband is already an essential enabler of sustainable
development. We acknowledge, moreover, that differences in individuals’
capabilities to both use and create information and communications technologies
represent a knowledge divide that perpetuates inequality. We note, too, the ambition
to move beyond “information societies” to “knowledge societies”, in which
information is not only created and disseminated, but put to the benefit of human
development. We recognize that such divides may change with technological and
service innovation, and we call upon all stakeholders, particularly United Nations
entities that are facilitating the World Summit on the Information Society action
lines, within their mandate and existing resources, to continue working together to
regularly analyse the nature of digital divides, study strategies to bridge them and
make their findings available to the international community.
24. We underscore the need for further development of local content and
services in a variety of languages and formats that are accessible to all people, who
also need the capabilities and capacities, including media, information and digital
literacy skills, to make use of and further develop information and communications
technologies. Accordingly, we recognize the vital importance of the principles of
multilingualism in the information society to ensure the linguistic, cultural and
historical diversity of all nations. We further recognize the value of the variety of
interoperable and affordable information and communications technology solutions,
including such models as proprietary, open-source, and free software.
25. We call, moreover, for a significant increase in access to information and
communications technologies, and encourage all stakeholders to strive to provide
universal and affordable access to the Internet for all. We welcome the efforts of all
stakeholders in pursuit of these goals, including efforts being undertaken in the
Connect 2020 Agenda for Global Telecommunication/ICT Development, adopted by

6/14

Outcome document of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the overall review
of the implementation of the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society

A/RES/70/125

the Plenipotentiary Conference of the International Telecommunication Union in
2014.
26. We also recognize digital divides in digital uses and literacy and the need
to bridge them.
27. We emphasize our concern that only 41 per cent of women have Internet
access, and draw attention to the gender digital divide, which persists in women’s
access to and use of information and communications technologies, including in
education, employment and other areas of economic and social development. We
recognize that ending the gender digital divide and the achievement of Sustainable
Development Goal 5 on gender are mutually reinforcing efforts, and we commit to
mainstreaming gender in the World Summit on the Information Society process,
including through a new emphasis on gender in the implementation and monitoring
of the action lines, with the support of relevant United Nations entities, including
the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN-Women). We call for immediate measures to achieve gender equality in
Internet users by 2020, especially by significantly enhancing women’s and girls’
education and participation in information and communications technologies, as
users, content creators, employees, entrepreneurs, innovators and leaders. We
reaffirm our commitment to ensure women’s full participation in decision-making
processes related to information and communications technologies.
1.2

Enabling environment

28. We recognize that certain policies have substantially contributed to
bridging digital divides and the value of information and communications
technologies for sustainable development, and we commit to continuing to identify
and implement best and emerging practices for the establishment and functioning of
education, innovation and investment frameworks for information and
communications technologies.
29. We recognize the importance of the free flow of information and
knowledge, as the amount of information distributed worldwide grows and the role
of communication becomes all the more important. We acknowledge that the
mainstreaming of information and communications technologies in school curricula,
open access to data, the fostering of competition, the creation of transparent,
predictable, independent and non-discriminatory regulatory and legal systems,
proportionate taxation and licensing fees, access to finance, facilitation of publicprivate partnerships, multi-stakeholder cooperation, national and regional broadband
strategies, efficient allocation of the radio frequency spectrum, infrastructuresharing models, community-based approaches and public access facilities have in
many countries facilitated significant gains in connectivity and sustainable
development.
30. We recognize that a lack of access to affordable and reliable technologies
and services remains a critical challenge in many developing countries, particularly
African countries, least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and
small island developing States and middle-income countries, as well as countries in
situations of conflict, post-conflict countries and countries affected by natural
disasters. All efforts should be deployed to reduce the price of information and
communications technologies and broadband access, bearing in mind that deliberate
interventions, including through research and development and technology transfer
on mutually agreed terms, may be necessary to spur lower-cost connectivity options.

7/14

Outcome document of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the overall review
of the implementation of the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society

A/RES/70/125

31. In building the information society, States are strongly urged to take
steps with a view to the avoidance of, and refrain from, any unilateral measure not
in accordance with international law and the Charter of the United Nations that
impedes the full achievement of economic and social development and hinders the
well-being of the people of the affected countries.
32. We recognize that the radio frequency spectrum should be managed in
the public interest and in accordance with legal principles, with full observance of
national laws and regulations as well as relevant international agreements.
33. We call for a special focus on actions that improve the enabling
environment for information and communications technologies and expand related
education and capacity-building opportunities. We also request the Commission on
Science and Technology for Development, within its mandate related to the follow-up
to the World Summit on the Information Society, and all action line facilitators,
within their respective mandates and existing resources, to work with all
stakeholders to regularly identify and promote specific, detailed actions to support
the enabling environment for information and communications technologies and
development and provide the demand-driven policy advice, technical assistance and
capacity-building, as appropriate, to realize them.
1.3

Financial mechanisms

34. We welcome the fact that total public and private spending on
information and communications technologies has increased substantially in the last
decade, now reaching trillions of dollars annually, and that it has been
complemented by a proliferation of new financing mechanisms, both results
marking progress on paragraphs 23 and 27 of the Tunis Agenda.
35. We recognize, however, that harnessing information and communications
technology for development and bridging digital divides will require greater and
sustainable investment in infrastructure and services, capacity-building, promotion
of joint research and development and transfer of technology on mutually agreed
terms. These mechanisms remain a primary focus for all countries and people,
particularly developing countries.
36. We commit to efficient public resource allocation to deployment and
development of information and communications technology, recognizing the need
for budgeting for information and communications technology across all sectors,
especially education. We stress that capacity is a major barrier to closing digital
divides, and we recommend that capacity development, including for innovation, be
emphasized to empower local experts and local communities to benefit fully from
and contribute to information and communications technology applications for
development. We recognize the potential to improve connectivity, especially in
remote and rural areas, through universal service funds and publicly funded network
infrastructure, among other tools, particularly in areas where market conditions
make investment difficult.
37. We note the commitments made in the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the
Third International Conference on Financing for Development, 5 and recognize that
official development assistance and other concessional financial flows for
information and communications technology can make significant contributions to

_______________
5

8/14

Resolution 69/313, annex.

Outcome document of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the overall review
of the implementation of the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society

A/RES/70/125

development outcomes, in particular where they can reduce the risk of public and
private investment, and increase the use of information and communications
technology to strengthen good governance and tax collection.
38. We recognize the critical importance of private sector investment in
information and communications technology infrastructure, content and services,
and we encourage Governments to create legal and regulatory frameworks
conducive to increased investment and innovation. We also recognize the
importance of public-private partnerships, universal access strategies and other
approaches to this end.
39. We encourage a prominent profile for information and communications
technologies in the new Technology Facilitation Mechanism established in the Addis
Ababa Action Agenda, and consideration of how it can contribute to implementation
of the World Summit on the Information Society action lines.
40. We note with concern the challenges in implementing the Digital
Solidarity Fund, which was welcomed in the Tunis Agenda as an innovative
financial mechanism of a voluntary nature. We call for an ongoing evaluation of
innovative financing options in the annual review of the outcomes of the World
Summit on the Information Society.
2.

Human rights in the information society

41. We reaffirm the commitment set out in the Geneva Declaration of
Principles and the Tunis Commitment to the universality, indivisibility,
interdependence and interrelation of all human rights and fundamental freedoms,
including the right to development, as enshrined in the Vienna Declaration and
Programme of Action of the World Conference on Human Rights. 6 We also reaffirm
that democracy, sustainable development and respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms, as well as good governance at all levels, are interdependent
and mutually reinforcing. We resolve to strengthen respect for the rule of law in
international, as in national, affairs.
42. We recognize that human rights have been central to the vision of the
World Summit on the Information Society and that information and communications
technologies have shown their potential to strengthen the exercise of human rights,
enabling access to information, freedom of expression and freedom of assembly and
association.
43. We reaffirm, moreover, as an essential foundation of the information
society and as recognized in Human Rights Council resolution 26/13 of 26 June
2014 7 and General Assembly resolution 69/166 of 18 December 2014, that the same
rights that people have offline must also be protected online.
44. We note with concern, however, that there are serious threats to freedom
of expression and plurality of information, and we call for the protection of
journalists, media workers and civil society space. We call upon States to take all
appropriate measures necessary to ensure the right to freedom of opinion and
expression, the right to peaceful assembly and association and the right not to be

_______________
6

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/69/53),
chap. V, sect. A.
7

9/14

Outcome document of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the overall review
of the implementation of the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society

A/RES/70/125

subjected to arbitrary or unlawful interference with privacy, in accordance with their
human rights obligations.
45. We reaffirm our commitment to article 19 of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, in which it is stated that everyone has the right to freedom of
opinion and expression, and that this right includes freedom to hold opinions
without interference and to seek, receive and impart information and ideas through
any media and regardless of frontiers. We also recall the commitments made under
article 19 by States that are party to the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights. 8 We underscore the need to respect the independence of media. We
believe that communication is a fundamental social process, a basic human need and
the foundation of all social organization, and is therefore central to the information
society. Everyone, everywhere should have the opportunity to participate, and no
one should be excluded from the benefits that the information society offers.
46. We recall General Assembly resolution 69/166 and, in this context,
emphasize that no person shall be subjected to arbitrary or unlawful interference
with his or her privacy, family, home or correspondence, consistent with countries’
obligations under international human rights law. Accordingly, we call upon all
States to review their procedures, practices and legislation regarding the
surveillance of communications, as well as their interception and collection of
personal data, including mass surveillance, with a view to upholding the right to
privacy as set out in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights for States that are party to the
Covenant, by ensuring the full and effective implementation of all their obligations
under international human rights law.
47. We reaffirm our commitment to the provisions in article 29 of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights that everyone has duties to the community
in which alone the free and full development of his or her personality is possible
and that, in the exercise of his or her rights and freedoms, everyone shall be subject
only to such limitations as are determined by law solely for the purpose of securing
due recognition and respect for the rights and freedoms of others and of meeting the
just requirements of morality, public order and the general welfare in a democratic
society. These rights and freedoms may in no case be exercised contrary to the
purposes and principles of the United Nations. In this way, we shall promote an
information society in which human dignity is respected.
3.

Building confidence and security in the use of information and
communications technologies

48. We affirm that strengthening confidence and security in the use of
information and communications technologies for the development of information
societies and the success of such technologies is a driver for economic and social
innovation.
49. We welcome the significant efforts by Governments, the private sector,
civil society, the technical community and academia to build confidence and
security in the use of information and communications technologies, including by
the International Telecommunication Union, the Commission on Crime Prevention
and Criminal Justice, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the openended intergovernmental expert group to conduct a comprehensive study of the
_______________
8

10/14

See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

Outcome document of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the overall review
of the implementation of the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society

A/RES/70/125

problem of cybercrime and the Group of Governmental Experts on Developments in
the Field of Information and Telecommunications in the Context of International
Security, among other international, regional and national efforts.
50. We recognize the leading role for Governments in cybersecurity matters
relating to national security. We further recognize the important roles and
contributions of all stakeholders, in their respective roles and responsibilities. We
reaffirm that building confidence and security in the use of information and
communications technologies should be consistent with human rights.
51. We recognize the important role of international law, especially the
Charter of the United Nations, in building confidence and security in the use of
information and communications technologies by States, and welcome the 2013 and
2015 reports of the Group of Governmental Experts on Developments in the Field of
Information and Telecommunications in the Context of International Security. 9
52. We are concerned, however, about certain growing uses of information
and communications technologies that threaten security and development benefits,
including the use of such technologies for terrorist purposes and cybercrime. We
express the need for existing legal and enforcement frameworks to keep up with the
speed of technological change and its application. Furthermore, we note concerns
that attacks against States, institutions, companies, other entities and individuals are
now being undertaken through digital means. We reiterate our belief that a global
culture of cybersecurity needs to be promoted and developed and that cybersecurity
measures should be implemented in cooperation with all stakeholders and
international expert bodies in order to foster trust and security in the information
society.
53. We call upon Member States to intensify efforts to build robust domestic
security in information and communications technologies and the use thereof,
consistent with their international obligations and domestic law. We further call
upon Member States to cooperate on transnational issues of information and
communications technologies and the use thereof, including capacity-building and
cooperation in combating the criminal misuse of the technologies and preventing the
use of technology, communications and resources for criminal or terrorist purposes.
54. We recognize the challenges that States, in particular developing
countries, face in building confidence and security in the use of information and
communications technologies. We call for renewed focus on capacity-building,
education, knowledge-sharing and regulatory practice, as well as promoting multistakeholder cooperation at all levels and raising awareness among users of
information and communications technologies, particularly among the poorest and
most vulnerable.
4.

Internet governance

55. We reaffirm paragraph 55 of the Tunis Agenda, and in this regard we
recognize that the existing arrangements have worked effectively to make the
Internet the highly robust, dynamic and geographically diverse medium that it is
today, with the private sector taking the lead in day-to-day operations and with
innovation and value creation at the edges. However, almost 4 billion people,

_______________
9

A/68/98 and A/70/174.

11/14

Outcome document of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the overall review
of the implementation of the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society

A/RES/70/125

representing approximately two thirds of the people residing in developing
countries, remain offline.
56. We recognize that there are many cross-cutting international public
policy issues that require attention and have not been adequately addressed.
57. We take note of paragraph 29 of the Tunis Agenda, and recognize that the
management of the Internet as a global facility includes multilateral, transparent,
democratic and multi-stakeholder processes, with the full involvement of
Governments, the private sector, civil society, international organizations, technical
and academic communities and all other relevant stakeholders in accordance with
their respective roles and responsibilities.
58. We reiterate the working definition of Internet governance, set out in
paragraph 34 of the Tunis Agenda, as the development and application by
Governments, the private sector and civil society, in their respective roles, of shared
principles, norms, rules, decision-making procedures and programmes that shape the
evolution and use of the Internet.
59. We reaffirm the principle agreed in the Geneva Declaration of Principles
that the management of the Internet encompasses both technical and public policy
issues and should involve all stakeholders and relevant intergovernmental and
international organizations, within their respective roles and responsibilities, as set
out in paragraph 35 of the Tunis Agenda.
60. We take note of the hosting by the Government of Brazil of the
NETMundial Global Multi-stakeholder Meeting on the Future of Internet
Governance, in São Paulo, on 23 and 24 April 2014.
61. We recognize that there is a need to promote greater participation and
engagement in the Internet governance discussions of Governments, the private
sector, civil society, international organizations, the technical and academic
communities and all other relevant stakeholders from developing countries,
particularly African countries, least developed countries, landlocked developing
countries and small island developing States and middle-income countries, as well
as countries in situations of conflict, post-conflict countries and countries affected
by natural disasters. We call for strengthened, stable, transparent and voluntary
funding mechanisms to this end.
62. We note the important regulatory and legislative processes in some
Member States on the open Internet in the context of the information society and the
underlying drivers for it, and call for further information-sharing at the international
level on the opportunities and challenges.
63. We acknowledge the role of the Internet Governance Forum as a
multi-stakeholder platform for discussion of Internet governance issues. We support
the recommendations in the report of the Working Group on Improvements to the
Internet Governance Forum of the Commission on Science and Technology for
Development, 10 which the General Assembly took note of in its resolution 68/198 of
20 December 2013, and we call for their accelerated implementation. We extend for
another 10 years the existing mandate of the Internet Governance Forum as set out
in paragraphs 72 to 78 of the Tunis Agenda. We recognize that during that period,
the Forum should continue to show progress on working modalities and the

_______________
10

12/14

A/67/65-E/2012/48 and Corr.1.

Outcome document of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the overall review
of the implementation of the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society

A/RES/70/125

participation of relevant stakeholders from developing countries. We call upon the
Commission, within its regular reporting, to give due consideration to fulfilment of
the recommendations in the report of its Working Group.
4.1. Enhanced cooperation
64. We acknowledge that various initiatives have been implemented and
some progress has been made in relation to the process towards enhanced
cooperation detailed in paragraphs 69 to 71 of the Tunis Agenda.
65. We note, however, the divergent views held by Member States with
respect to the process towards implementation of enhanced cooperation as
envisioned in the Tunis Agenda. We call for continued dialogue and work on the
implementation of enhanced cooperation. We accordingly request the Chair of the
Commission on Science and Technology for Development, through the Economic
and Social Council, to establish a working group to develop recommendations on
how to further implement enhanced cooperation as envisioned in the Tunis Agenda,
taking into consideration the work that has been done on this matter thus far. The
group, which shall be constituted no later than July 2016, will decide at the outset
on its methods of work, including modalities, and will ensure the full involvement
of all relevant stakeholders, taking into account all their diverse views and
expertise. The group will submit a report to the Commission on Science and
Technology for Development at its twenty-first session for inclusion in the annual
report of the Commission to the Council. The report will also serve as an input to
the regular reporting of the Secretary-General on implementation of the outcomes of
the World Summit on the Information Society.
5.

Follow-up and review

66. We reaffirm that the ongoing implementation of the outcomes of the
World Summit on the Information Society will require the continued commitment
and action of all stakeholders, including Governments, the private sector, civil
society, international organizations and the technical and academic communities,
and that regular review of progress of the full set of Summit action lines will be
essential to achieving the vision of the Summit.
67. We call for the continuation of annual reports on the implementation of
outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society, through the Commission
on Science and Technology for Development, to the Economic and Social Council,
taking into account the follow-up and review of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, and in this regard invite the high-level political forum on sustainable
development to consider the annual reports of the Commission on Science and
Technology for Development. We encourage the members of the United Nations
Group on the Information Society to contribute to the reports.
68. We also call for the continuation of the work of the United Nations
Group on the Information Society in coordinating the work of United Nations
agencies, according to their mandates and competencies, and we invite the regional
commissions to continue their work in implementation of the World Summit on the
Information Society action lines and their contribution to the reviews thereof,
including through regional reviews.
69. We recognize that the World Summit on the Information Society Forum
has been a platform for discussion and sharing of best practices in the
implementation of the World Summit outcomes by all stakeholders, and it should
continue to be held annually.
13/14

A/RES/70/125

Outcome document of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the overall review
of the implementation of the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society

70. We acknowledge the importance of data and statistics to support
information and communications technology for development, and call for further
quantitative data to support evidence-based decision-making, as well as for the
inclusion of information and communications technology statistics in national
strategies for the development of statistics and in regional statistical work
programmes, and for strengthening local statistical capacity and targeted training by
Governments and all other relevant stakeholders. The activities of the Partnership on
Measuring Information and Communications Technology for Development have
made a valuable contribution to data gathering and dissemination and should be
continued.
71. We recognize that, in the preparation of this review, a number of
challenges and opportunities have been identified, requiring longer-term
consultations to determine appropriate responses, and that the pace of the
development of information and communications technologies necessitates higherlevel consideration of progress achieved and future action. We accordingly request
the General Assembly to hold a high-level meeting on the overall review of the
implementation of the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information Society in
2025, involving the input and participation of all stakeholders, including in the
preparatory process, to take stock of progress on the outcomes of the World Summit
and identify both areas of continued focus and challenges. We recommend that the
outcome of the high-level meeting be an input into the review process for the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development.
79th plenary meeting
16 December 2015

14/14
