89

Resolutions adopted on the report11 of the Third Committee

lution submitted to the Third Committee for consideration during the current session,24
Considering that there was not sufficient time during
its twenty-sixth session to conclude the study of this
item,
l. Decides to give consideration to this item at its
twenty-eighth session;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
the General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session the
documentation pertaining to the study of this question.
2025th plenary meeting,
18 December 1971.
2842 (XXVI). Question of the elderly and the
aged

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2599 (XXIV) of 16 December 1969 and its decision of 15 December 1970
recommending that a high priority be given to the
question of the elderly and the aged,
Taking note with appreciation of the preliminary report of the Secretary-General,25 which reviews the majar
socio-economic problems of the elderly and the aged and
the impact of technological and scientific advances on
their well-being,
Bearing in mind the principies embodied in the
Charter of the United Nations and in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, with reference to respect
for the dignity and worth of the human person,
Recalling the Declaration on Social Progress and
Development, which emphasizes the protection of the
rights and the assuring of the welfare of the aged,
Bearing in mind that demographic projections and
anticipated social change indicate that the position of
the elderly and the aged in society is expected to deteriorate in many industrialized as well as in many
developing countries unless appropriate policies are
initiated to deal with their needs and to ensure opportunities for their participation in national life and their
contribution to the development of their communities,
Considering that the interaction of social, cultural,
economic and technological factors affecting the elderly
and the aged calls for integrated policies and appropriate programmes at the country level,
Noting that an exploratory cross-national survey is
being conducted by the Secretary-General, in cooperation with several countries, to analyse the changing socio-economic role and status of old people,
Bearing in mind the importance for the elderly and
the aged to be informed of the interest and concem of
the United Nations about their welfare and needs,
l. Requests the Secretary-General to continue the
study of the changing socio-economic and cultural role
and status of the aged in countries of different Ievels
of development and to prepare, within existing resources
and in co-operation with the Intemational Labour
Organisation, the World Health Organization and other
24 See

Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentysixth Session, Annexes, agenda ítem 61, document A/8594,
paras. 5 and 6.
26 A/8364.

interested specialized agencies, a report suggesting guidelines for national policies and international action
related to the needs and the role of the elderly and the
aged in society in the context of over-all development,
particularly in countries where the socio-economic
problems of the aged are marked;
2. Requests Governments to disseminate, in the best
way they deem appropriate, the information contained
in the present resolution for the benefit of the elderly
and the aged;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit
a report on this subject to the Economic and Social
Council in 1973, through the Commission for Social
Development, and to report to the General Assembly at
its twenty-eighth session on the action taken on the
present resolution.
2025th plenary meeting,
18 December 1971.
2843 (XXVI). Criminality and social change

The General Assembly,
Recalling the responsibility assumed by the United
N ations in the field of crime prevention and control
under General Assembly resolution 415 (V) of 1 Dece~ber 1950 and the leading role in this area assigned
to 1t by the Economic and Social Council in resolution 155 C (VII) of 13 August 1948, which the
Council reaffirmed in its resolutions 731 F (XXVIII)
of 30 July 1959, 830 D (XXXII) of 2 August 1961
and 1086 B (XXXIX) of 30 July 1965,
Taking account of the note by the Secretary-General
on criminality and social change, 26
Recognizing the importance of the Declaration unanimously adopted by the Fourth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of
Offenders, held at Kyoto, Japan, from 17 to 26 August
1970,27 which underscored the seriousness of the crime
problem in many countries and called attention to the
~rgent ~eed to give 1:riority to the strengthening of
mternat10nal co-operat10n for crime prevention,
. Conscious of the serious threat that criminality in its
d1verse forms and new dimensions presents to economic
and social development and the quality of life,
. Aware. of the limited time available at its twentys1xth sess10n for the General Assembly to consider the
matter adequately,
1. W elcomes Economic and Social Council resoIution 1584 (L) of 21 May 1971 on criminality and
social change and the action taken to implement the
conclusions of the Fourth United Nations Congress on
the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders;
2. Decides to consider the question of crime prevention and control in depth at its twenty-seventh session.
2025th plenary meeting,
18 December 1971.
26 A/8372.
27 The text of

the Declaration is contained in the annex to
Economic and Social Council resolution 1584 (L). See also the
report entitled Fourth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders (United Nations
publication, Sales No.: E.71.IV.8).
