A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/51/193
10 February 1997

Fifty-first session
Agenda item 11
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/51/L.64)]
51/193.

Report of the Security Council

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 47/233 of 17 August 1993 and 48/264 of
29 July 1994 on the revitalization of the work of the General Assembly,
Reiterating the importance of the objectives and principles relevant to
the revitalization of the work of the General Assembly as set out in
resolutions 47/233 and 48/264,
Reaffirming the need to improve the reporting procedures of the Security
Council,
Bearing in mind the ongoing work of the Open-ended High-level Working
Group on the Strengthening of the United Nations System and the Open-ended
Working Group on the Question of Equitable Representation on and Increase in
the Membership of the Security Council and Other Matters Related to the
Security Council,
Taking note of the ongoing efforts of the Security Council to enhance
the transparency of its working methods,
1.
Stresses the importance of enhanced interaction and an effective
relationship between the General Assembly and other principal organs, in
particular the Security Council, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter of the United Nations;

97-76621

/...

A/RES/51/193
Page 2

2.
Takes note of the report of the Security Council to the General
General Assembly at its fifty-first session,1 as well as the views expressed
thereon in the course of the consideration of the report by the Assembly;
3.
Encourages the Security Council, in the submission of its reports
to the General Assembly, to provide in a timely manner a substantive,
analytical and material account of its work;
4.
Calls upon the Security Council to adopt the following measures,
inter alia, in connection with the content of its future reports to the
General Assembly:
(a)
To include, as appropriate, information on the consultations of
the whole undertaken prior to action or deliberation by the Council on issues
within its mandate and on the process leading to such action;
(b)
To include the decisions, recommendations or progress of work of
the subsidiary organs of the Council, in particular the sanctions committees;
(c)
To highlight the extent to which resolutions of the General
Assembly on issues falling within the scope of the General Assembly and the
Security Council have been taken into account by the Council in its decisionmaking;
(d)
To strengthen further the section in the report on the steps taken
by the Council to improve its working methods;
(e)
To include information on requests received under Article 50 of
the Charter and actions taken by the Council thereon;
5.
Encourages the Security Council to provide special reports in
accordance with Articles 15 and 24 of the Charter;
6.
Requests that the annual report of the Security Council be made
available before the beginning of the general debate of the General Assembly;
7.
Requests the President of the General Assembly to raise with the
President of the Security Council during their monthly informal meetings and,
when deemed appropriate, the matters covered by the present resolution and to
report to the Assembly on the steps taken by the Council in this regard;
8.
Invites the Security Council, through an appropriate procedure or
mechanism, to update the General Assembly on a regular basis on the steps it
has taken or is contemplating with respect to improving its reporting to the
Assembly.
87th plenary meeting
17 December 1996

1

A/51/2; see Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-first
Session, Supplement No. 2.
