UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIRST

YEAR

1921”’

MEETING:

NEW YORK
r

20 MAY ,1976.
:

I

.

.

~.

CONTENTS,
..

‘,

. ,.

..’
:
&w

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l921).

.‘: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .l. . .‘. . . . .I:,. . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 3 May 1976 from the Permanent Representative of Egypt
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12066) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . -. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV. 1921

-NOTE

-a
-.

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to. a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally pubiished in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which infoimation about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security .Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date;

1921st MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 20 May 1976, at 3 p.m.
President:

Mr. Louis de GUIRINGAUD

how happy I am to see the Security Council guided
by the representative of a country which has made
an invaluable contribution to the treasure of the
spiritual civilization of mankind. If I speak of this in the
Council it is in order to recall that we are supposed to
be working here in this forum for peace among nations,
using the weapons of intellect and reason. The
satisfaction of my delegation at seeing you presiding
over our work is particularly understandable because
your great country and my own have long maintained
strong ties of friendship, which my President recently
described as “a model for relations between two
independent countries which are masters of their
own destinies”. I wish you every success in the
discharge of your important functions.

(France).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America.
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l921)

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 3 May 1976 from the Permanent
Representative of Egypt to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/12066)
The meeting

3. Permit me also to add my thanks to those which
you addressed on behalf of the Council to Mr. Huang
Hua, representative of China, who presided so
effectively over our proceedings in April.

was called to order at 3.25 p.m.
Adoption

4. I should also like to take this opportunity to bid a
cordial welcome to Ambassador Abe, the new
Permanent Representative of Japan, and to offer him
our best wishes for success in his important task.
Finally, I should like to say how happy I am to see
Ambassador Malik resume his seat after such a long
absence caused by an accident of which he and his
wife were the victims.

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 3 May 1976 from the Permanent
Representative of Egypt to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12066)
1. The PRESIDENT

(interpretation

from

5. The Security Council has in fact resumed the
debate it began last March on the situation in the Arab
territories occupied by Israel. Since the Council had
a full debate at that time, including a vote on a draft
resolution, on the situation in the occupied territories,
doubts have been expressed as to the timeliness and
usefulness of this debate, which, it is claimed, might
be an impediment to negotiation and peace efforts.
We cannot agree with this attitude. Romania, which
is now a member of the Council, takes a positive and
active view of the Council’s role in a solution of the
Middle East problem.

French):

In accordance with the decisions taken-earlier [1916th
to 1918th and 1920th meetings], I invite the representatives of Egypt, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait, Qatar,
Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic
and Yemen, as well as the representative of the
Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), to participate
in the debate without the right to vote.
At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Herzog
(Israel) and Mr. Terzi (Palestine Liberation
Organization) took places at the Council tabfe and Mr. Abdel
Meguid (Egypt), Mr. Sharaf (Jordan), Mr. Bishara
(Kuwait), Mr. Jamal (Qatar), Mr. Baroody (Saudi
Arabia), Mr. Hussen (Somalia), Mr. Medani (Sudan),
Mr. Allqf (Syrian Arab Republic) and Mr. Sallam
(Yemen) took the places reserved for them at the side
of the Council chamber.

6. The greatest obstacle to peace in the Middle
East is the refusal to recognize the principle of the
inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force
and the corresponding obligation to evacuate all
territories thus occupied. The resumption of multilateral negotiations for peace in the Middle East is
being held up by the refusal to accept the Palestinian
people as a party to these negotiations and also by the
denial of the right of that people to be represented by
the Palestine Liberation Organization.

2. Mr. DATCU (Romania) (interpretation
from
Mr. President, permit me first of all to say

French):

I

7. The problem which we examined in March still
exists and has become worse. The tragic events which
have multiplied in occupied territories, and which are
the direct consequence of the occupation, underline
the urgency of getting peace negotiations
started,
because as time passes the situation becomes more
complicated and deteriorates further.

measures aimed at chanzinz’the status of the occueied
territories, and we believe-that no one, neither I.&ael
nor any other State, has the right to change by force
the situation in those territories. The Israeli authorities
must respect the United Nations resolutions according
to which it is inadmissible to change the demographic
characteristics of the city of Jerusalem.

8. As long as there is military occupation, injustice
persists and legitimate and natural opposition to foreign
domination
increases. All this constitutes a cause of
profound concern for all peoples, including
the
Romanian people, because the persistence of tension
in the Middle East is fraught, as we know, with the
most serious dangers to general peace.

13. To judge by press reports, the Government
of
Israel intends to pursue its :policy of demographic
change in the occupied Arab territories by authorizing
the establishment
of new Israeli settlements there.
In this regard, I believe that ,members of the Council
should be unanimous in characterizing such measures
as contraventions
of the norms of international
law.
We therefore believe that the Council should have no
difficulty in calling upon the Israeli authorities
to
rescind the measures designed to change the physical,
demographic and cultural characteristics and the status
of the occupied territories or to modify their status.

9. We are taking part in this debate as a member of
the Council because we believe it is our duty to present
our own point of view, and to repeat it if necessary,
on a problem which is of the greatest concern to the
Romanian people and Government.
We believe that
the Council cannot remain indifferent to a situation
which constitutes a constant source of the most
serious threats to international
peace and security.
The Council cannot turn a deaf ear when the Palestinian
people gives clear and unambiguous signs that it firmly
and resolutely rejects foreign occupation and that it
wants to have a land of its own, free and independent.

14. We hope for the adoption of such recommendations because we are firmly convinced ‘that it is only
in this way that it is possible to preserve the chances
for a political settlement of the Middle East problem.
We are aware that a complete solution of the situation
we are discussing now can come about only as a result
of a political settlement of all the problems which
afflict the region.

10. It would be a serious mistake to attempt to
minimize the struggle of peoples to defend their dignity
and their right to .freedom and independence and to
affirm their national identity. The ideal of life of the
peoples of the world today is not to live under occupation or foreign trusteeship and domination.
That is
why Romania has disapproved of and will always
condemn the occupation of foreign territories. That
is also why we have always maintained and why we
continue to stress that Israel must demonstrate realism
and come to realize that as long as the occupation of
Arab territories goes on and the legitimate aspirations
and rights of the Palestinian people are disregarded,
there will be no guarantee of peace in the Middle East.

15. For vears the Romanian
Government
has
constantly stressed, officially as well as in its contacts
with the interested parties, that the achievement of
a just and lasting settlement in the Middle East is
possible if it is based on three essential requirements:
the withdrawal of Israel from all the Arab territories
occupied during the 1967 war; the recognition of the
lawful rights of the Palestinian
people to selfdetermination,
including the right to establish its own
independent State; and the recognition of and respect
for the right to existence, territorial integrity and free
and independent development of all the States in the
area.
--_---- _...-__
_. _
16. Romania strongly favours .‘the solution of controversial problems by peaceful means and favours
the elimination of all sources of tension and the settlement of disputes between States’by means of negotiation. On the basis of this position of principle, my
country considers that it is imperative to intensify the
concerted action of Member States and of the United
Nations in an attempt to find a political settlement for
ail the problems of the Middle ,East, in accordance
with the interests of all the peoples of that area and
the requirements of international-peace
and security.
ji’.
17. It is clear that a lasting peace in that area cannot.
be brought about without the settlement
of the
Palestinian problem, which is the very essence of the
conflict. That is why we believe’ that the representative of the Palestinian
people;: the PLO, should
participate
in all the peace efforts on the Middle
East, including the Geneva Conference.

11. We believe that as long as Israel continues to
occupy foreign territories acquired as a result of the
1967 war, it has the obligation to respect the rules
of international
law as laid down in the international
conventions relating to the administration
of territories
by occupation authorities. In this regard, the Romanian
delegation supported the draft resolution submitted to
the Council by the non-aligned countries last March
[S/12022]. That draft resolution,
which won the
approval of 14 members of the Council, reflected
profound concern about the grave situation resulting
from the perpetuation of occupation and reaffirmed
the inadmissibility
of the acquisiton of territory by
force.
12. My Government has condemned the repressive
actions and policy directed against the Palestinian
people. My country disapproves of the acts and
2

have corroborated
the facts in dispatches from
reporters on the scene and in photographs which
show graphically
the essential ugliness of foreign
occupation.

18. At the end of the debate in March the Council
was not in a position to adopt recommendations;
although the statements made at that time by all the
Council members suggested certain identical or very
similar elements in their assessments of the obligations incumbent
upon Israel as the administering
Power in the Arab territories occupied in 1967. We
believe that this time all avenues must be explored
and all possibilities
considered to find the common
denominator
of the -views expressed by Council
members in order to I incorporate it in a generally
acceptable decision. For this we believe that the
members of the Council must all act in a constructive
spirit, and look towards the future rather than to the
past. .It is only in thisr,way that the Council’s action
can respond to the legitimate and justified aspirations
of the Palestinian people, to the requirements for the
establishment
of a just and lasting peace and to the
interests of all the peoples of the area.

24. On the other hand, the representative of Israel,
in a statement here on 5 May, dismissed the serious
situation in the occupied territories as “sporadic stonethrowing in the West Bank” [ibid., paru. 661. The
newspapers yesterday reported that an Israeli Member
of Parliament
said: “The solution is, our soldiers
should not be stoned”. One could suggest a more
fundamental solution: let the Israeli forces go home and
then nobody would be throwing stones at them.
25. Israeli representatives try to divert attention from
the West Bank by referring to the tragic situation in
Lebanon and by exulting in their own perception of
inter-Arab politics. The situation in Lebanon, for all
its tragic and senseless violence, does not in the
slightest degree extenuate what is happening in the
West Bank under Israel’s military occupation. That
the violence is greater in Lebanon does not lessen the
horror of a 17-year-old girl being cut down by the bullets
of an Israeli soldier, the storming of schools, the
beating of teachers, arrests, curfews and deportations.

19. The Romanian delegation remains ready to give
its support to any initiative aimed at promoting such
a conclusion to our work. In this connexion we will
be happy to support any action which the President
might consider taking. ’
20. Mr. AKHUND
(Pakistan): Mr. President, since
this is the first time I’have spoken here this month,
may I express my delegation’s gratification at seeing
you, and in your person your country, with which
mine has had long and close relations of friendship,
presiding over the Security Council while it considers
a problem connected with one of the most, if not the
most, critical issues on the world body’s political
agenda. Your personal qualities of equanimity
and
understanding
and your skill and experience as a
diplomatist are guarantees of the smooth and successful conduct of our meetings.

26. What is going on in the West Bank is not
“sporadic
stone-throwing”
but a determined
and
unflinching resistance to Israel’s presence there. The
riots and strikes, the demonstrations and defiance, the
willingness to sacrifice limb and liberty and life: these
reflect the spontaneous expressions of a population
which says “No” to alien rule, which seeks recognition and implementation
of its right, too long denied,
to be rid of foreign occupation.
27. Regrettably,
the Israeli Government
refuses to
face the facts. It persists instead in its totally discredited propaganda about the West Bank and other
occupied territories.
As if in direct response to the
decision of the Palestinians against foreign occupation,
20,000 Zionists were allowed to stage a two-day
march to proclaim their right to settle in foreign
territories occupied by force of arms and thus signal
their intention never to end that occupation. An already
tense situation was thereby rendered more explosive.
Violence erupted again, and despite daily killings and
intensified oppression, it goes on. According to press
reports, the riots are indeed growing progressively
worse and more difficult to control. The latest flareup took place as recently as 15 May in several West
Bank towns, coinciding
with the twenty-eighth
anniversary of the establishment of Israel.

21. I would request you, Sir, to convey to your
predecessor, Ambassador Huang Hua of China, my
delegation’s gratitude and admiration for the ability,
the impartiality
and the distinction
with which he
presided over the Council’s proceedings last month.
22. Not having hadthe occasion at previous meetings
to welcome back in our midst our colleague and friend
Ambassador Malik,, I would say how pleased and
thankful we are to.s.ee him here with us again, looking,
if anything, more fit for the experience and certainly
with his vigour and @tellectual alertness undimmed.
23. The Council has been called upon to consider
the situation in the’ occupied Arab territories within
six weeks of having done so before. The reason is
that Arab resistanrze in the West Bank continues and,
indeed, has become, more widespread. The Israeli
occupation authorities have responded, as all such
must do, with repression and brutality. The representative of the Palestine, Wberation Organization described
the situation when he. spoke on 5 May [1917rh meeting].
The news media inthe host country and elsewhere

28. The municipal elections held in April and May
in the occupied territories were a clear demonstration
of the will of the people of the West Bank. The
Israeli authorities
can no longer assert, with any
hope of being believed, that the people of the occupied
territories desire anything other than to be rid of
Israeli occupation.
Before the elections were held,
3

Israel had hoped and declared that the elections would
demonstrate that real opinion in the occupied West
Bank was at a variance with what the representatives
of the Palestinian people as a whole, the PLO,
advocate and demand. Israel wanted the fact of
elections being held in a territory under military
occupation to serve as a demonstration of the
enlightened nature, of that occupation. The elections
have in fact conclusively disproved the first assertion;
the reaction of, the occupation authorities to the
results of those elections has laid to rest the latter
claim and made clear its absurdity. It is plain that the
Palestinians in the’ occupied territories have neither
been won over by the alleged benefits of Israeli rule
nor are likely to bei cowed by a show of force.
29. Occupation by force of other peoples’ territories
constitutes a clear+iolation of the Charter of the United
Nations. The administration of the West Bank and
Gaza is in fact totally contrary to the letter and spirit
of the fourth Geneva Convention’ and thus further
compounds. the wrong.

first, to bring peace to the odCupied territories and,
secondly, to resolve the situation on a permanent
basis. It would be a pity if the Council’s current
debate followed the pattern of its debate in March and
resulted in no decision or action. My delegation
hopes and expects that the higher interests of peace
and the concern for justice will prevail and that the
Council will be able to take meaningful and effective
action speedily.
35. Mr. RIOS (Panama) (int&refation
from Spanish): Mr. President, first of all I should like to state

30. The establishment of Israeli settlements in the
occupied territories and declarations by Israeli
authorities that this policy will continue stand in the
way of.peace and raise a serious question regarding
Israeli intentions. If the policy of establishing
settlements is to continue, then it will be difficult to
convince the Arab States and peoples concerned, and
reasonable opinion anywhere, that a peaceful solution
of the Middle East conflict is still possible.

37. I should also like to avail myself of this opportunity to extend a warm welcome to the new representative of Japan, Ambassador Abe. We are certain that
we shall have the same cordial and fruitful relations
with him which are already traditional between the
delegations of Japan and Panama.

how pleased the delegation of Panama is to see you,
an illustrious son of immortal France, presiding over
the work of the Council. ‘,Your experience and
outstanding diplomatic skills guarantee the best results
in these delicate deliberations’,,
36. My delegation also wishes’ to express its warm
appreciation for the devotion and efforts of the representative of China, Ambassador Huang Hua, during
April. We warmly appreciate the intelligent and
effective manner in which he guided our work during
that month.

38. We are also pleased to see among+us,once again
Ambassador Malik, who, fortunately, is completely
recovered and full of vigour after the serious accident
he suffered together with his distinguished wife.
I
39. I turn now to the item before us. We are meeting
once again to find an adequate formula for solving the
difficult and complicated problems of the Middle
East. At the request of Egypt we have undertaken this
new series of meetings on the situation in the occupied
Arab territories.
I
40. Everyone knows the sincereconcern of Panama
over the tragic situation in the Middle East. Since the
very inception of the United Nations, when the conflict
arose, Panama has consistently followed the development of events with particular interest, and whenever
we had an opportunity to co-operate concretely we
have done so. Indeed, from November 1973 until
December 1974 a Panamanian expeditionary force
joined in observing the cease-fire
lines in the Sinai
..
;.*:i-.
peninsula.
. f
41. For us the inalienable rights&f the Palestinian
people and the existence of the’State of Israel are
not incompatible. These are two’ realities that cannot
be obscured by political passions’ or prejudice, nor
even by the atrocities being committed in the region.
The imperative requirement is to,.a%hievepeace. That
part of the world desperately needs to enjoy the

31. In my delegation’s view, it is the Council’s duty
to take cognizance of the situation in the occupied
Arab territories and to initiate such action as would
remedy it and revive the hope for a peace based on
justice in that troubled part of the world.
32. There can surely be no real disagreement that
acts of oppression such as are daily being committed
in the West Bank should be condemned. Nor should
there be disagreement on the need to call for the
rescinding of measures and halting of attempts by
Israel to change the physical, cultural, demographic
and religious character of the occupied territories.
Above all, the policy of establishing settlements in
occupied territories must be halted at once and
reversed.
33. With regard to the larger question of peace in
the Middle East, it is evident that a just and pacific
settlement of the Middle East dispute is not being
brought nearer by the current handling of the situation
of the West Bank by Israel. It is therefore my delegation’s hope that the Council will not be impeded in
its resolve to help defuse the situation by peripheral
issues over which there may be differences of opinion
or different approaches.
34. I have suggested the essential components of
action which the Council can initiate and take in order,
4

invaluable benefits of peace, and no effort should be
spared to that end.

47. The delegation of Panama endorses that moving
appeal, made almost 28 years ago, now that we are
faced with a situation which today threatens a
catastrophe of incalculable dimensions, and not only
-mark my words-for the peoples of the region. The
whole of the Middle East is virtually a powder-keg
about to explode, and the waves of its explosion
might bring down the edifice of world peace.

42. We feel genuine sorrow over the tragedy which
afflicts Lebanon. With its people we weep with pain
at having to be mute witnesses to the fratricidal
bloodshed, as brothers make the supreme sacrifice
for the sake of ideals which each defends with blind
passion.

48. We all know that the arms accumulated there are
of the highest quality as regards their effectiveness and
capability of bringing death and destruction. Apocalyptic prophecies pale before the destructive power
of that equipment. If that is so, if ,the parties concerned are aware of this obvious reality and if the
major arms suppliers and the Co-Chairmen of the
Geneva Peace Conference know that the highly
dangerous situation is deteriorating from day to day,
then why wait so long? Why the senseless delays?
Why not come to a truly realistic solution?

43. In recent days the,re has been a resurgence of
violence in the territories occupied by Israel in the
1967 war, and death is taking its toll of victims while
no way has been found to halt that disaster. This
Council is now in the midst of an important debate on
the deplorable events in the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip. Obviously, the ‘confrontations between the
indigenous population of those lands and the forces of
occupation have various causes which it is not appropriate to analyse now but which undoubtedly have a
bearing on the human rights which the civilian population should enjoy.

49. In past weeks it seemsthat the ideaofreconvening*
the Geneva Peace Conference-f
which the Soviet
Union and the United States are co-Chairmen-has
been gaining-ground. Panama agrees with that idea.
In this respect, we recall that our then representative
to the Security Council, Ambassador Aquilino Boyd,
who is now Minister for External Relations, stated on
19 January, in this very chamber:

44. My country views ‘with the utmost concern any
violation of the rights of the people of those territories,
the character of which should not be altered either by
artificial changes in their demographic composition
or by the establishment of alien settlements in their
populated areas, since action of this kind constitutes a
provocation to violence, as was pointed out only
yesterday in an editorial in The New York Times.

“Our primary concern for the immediate future
is to contribute to having the Council’s decisions
serve to bring about the resumption of negotiations
in the Geneva Conference, as it is known, with
the participation of all the parties concerned.”

45. The growing deterioration of this situation is
far from being in accord with the principles of the
Charter and the resolutions of the Security Council
and other United Nations bodies. Hence States members of the Council must voice their concern for the
rights of people in the occupied territories and attach
due importance to the most scrupulous respect for the
provisions of the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War,’ which
without any doubt is binding in the area of conflict.

[1876th meeting,

para. 36.1

He then added:
“From everything that we have heard, the wisest
thing, we believe, would be to support the formulation encouraging the convening of the Geneva Peace
Conference, on the understanding that the role to be
played there by the Secretary-General on a dayto-day basis will be more important and that the
Security Council will be kept abreast of progress
made there.” [Ibid., pam. 38.1

46. In view of the endless suffering of those peoples
whose lands form part of the cradle of Western
civilization, the words uttered by Robert Schuman at
the 184th meeting ofthe General Assembly, held in the
Palais de Chaillot .on 11 December 1948, become
dramatically valid. .‘In his statement that eminent
French statesman said that
.I
“Such a situation, which was a disgrace to
mankind, must be brought to a close. That was all
the more essential since those events were taking
place in a land where, twenty centuries ago, a great
message of peace and brotherhood had first been
propagated and where.for the first time in the history
of the world, charity and respect for humanity had
been preached. It was essential that that land which
had so many memories and which was holy ground
not only for Christians, but for Jews and Mohammedans also, should cease to be the scene of strife
and hatred.“2
r
$2:”

50. As we approach the second half of 1976, faced
with the impossibility of even dimly perceiving an
acceptable solution of the conflict in the Middle East,
the Geneva Conference acquires a special significance.
From what we hear, the parties directly affected would
agree to its reconvening. However, a critical point of
disagreement appears to have arisen, namely, the
question of the participation of the representatives of
the Palestinian people.
51. The delegation of Panama considers that the
Geneva Conference, with the, assistance of the
Secretary-General, is the body that is competent to
arrive at the peace agreements which the Middle East
5

so urgently and desperately needs. The influence
which the two super-Powers can exercise on the
parties in conflict guarantees the best solution, ‘once
partisan interests are set aside and work is begun,
honestly and in good faith, towards a peace in which
the territorial integrity of the States in the region
would be respected and the legitimate rights of the
Palestinian people taken into account.
52. Why is it that Panama considers that the Palestinian people should take part in the Geneva Conference? For a very simple reason: because what we
want for our Arab and Jewish friends is a definitive,
just and lasting peace.
53. No one can guarantee that the Palestinians
would accept the Geneva agreements if they had not
participated in their adoption. We Panamanians have
reason to doubt that type of decision. .The Isthmian
Canal Convention, which claimed to mortgage in
perpetuity the future of Panama, was negotiated
without the participation of Panamanians, and that is
precisely one of the reasons why there has been no
harmonious understanding between Panama and the
United States from 1903 to the present. ’
54. In the case of the Middle East we must be
sternly realistic if we really wish to avoid the worst.
There must be concessions on all sides. Anyone who
adheres to rigid positions, who adopts a posture of
blind intransigence, must be compelled by the international community to see reason. Likewise, the
Security Council or the Geneva Conference must act
in accordance with the most scrupulous justice and
equity.
55. The delegation of Panama repeats what it has
already firmly stated on several occasions when
referring to the Middle East. We can conceive of
peace in that zone only on the following basis: first,
withdrawal from all the territories occupied in the
1967 war, as no country has the right to occupy the
land of others on any pretext; secondly, the cessation
of the state of belligerence in the region--each country
will do its part to live in peace with its neighbours
and would renounce the use of force in the settlement
of any disputes that may arise; thirdly, recognition
of the rights of the Palestinian people; and fourthly,
every State in the area will, as is stated in Security
Council resolution 242 (1967) have the “right to live
in peace within secure and recognized boundaries
free from threats or acts of force”.
56. For the reasons I have stated, the delegation of
Panama believes that this debate should be concluded
not in a fruitless manner but with positive action
that will reflect the concerns I have just stated and
which will contribute towards creating conditions
propitious for a peaceful settlement of the conflict.
In this case we believe that a resolution might be
adopted, or, if it is preferred, a statement of consensus
might be made by the President of the Council.

57. The PRESIDENT(interpp~tation from French):
The next speaker is the representative of Egypt, whom
I invite to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.
58. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID (Egypt): I have asked to
be allowed to speak to keep the Council informed
about recent developments in the occupied territories
since it last met. It is now evident that the situation
in ‘the occupied territories isl‘deteriorating rapidly,
going from bad to worse ‘because of the terrorist
measures used by the Israehauthorities against the
Palestinian people in those territories.
,‘I
59. Every day that passes now provides more ample
proof that the Israeli Government is determined on
contempt for the Security Council and for the world
community at large. Nazi tactics and measures seem to
be the order of the day for the-Israeli army-shooting
at random at young people, children and women;
erecting iron gates between ,different parts of Palestinian cities in order to establish a new type of
ghetto; evicting persons by force from their homes;
deporting political leaders without any notice; closing
down Arab newspapers, and censoring others; and
forcibly entering schools, even those belonging to the
United Nations.
60. One could go on for hours, referring to such
Israeli measures. This grim record of which the Israeli
army is very proud shows only that the words of peace
and negotiation which the Israeli Government and its
representative here repeat every day only mean more
killing of Arabs so that the Israeli version of peace
will prevail in the end. The same “salami-tactics”
were used by the Nazis in the areas they occupied
during the Second World War to proceed slowly but
surely in exterminating the inhabitants of those
occupied territories, never hesitating to kill, never
bothering about moral ethics, human rights, or what
others might say.
61. How can these authorities justify brutal daily
killings of schoolchildren and adults? How can they
face the world with their hands covered with blood,
the blood of Miss Lena Nabulsi,’ who was killed in
cold blood by Israeli soldiers in thesecond floor of the
home that she was visiting? The Israeli Military
Governor of course.tried to justify this killing by saying
that the girl was dem.onstrating. It was a lie, which the
mayor of Nablus was quick to refute, as the killing
happened half an hour after the,d:@monstrationended.
A Iocal merchant, Mr. Said AH Nasri, told foreign correspondents that when he protested to the soldier
involved in the killing he was thre-atened with being
choked “ifI did not shut up”. Eve,n&heGovernment’s
newspaper found it difficult to swallow the justification
of the Israeli Military Governor. The Jerusalem Post
stated that witnesses said that the’girl was shot at the
doorstep of a friend’s apartment by a soldier. And as
usual, the Israeli Government, true toits traditions and
practices, prevented television, %nd radio correspondents from entering Nablus after that incident,
6 ‘,

but that measure came too late, because the grim
truth was already known to the whole world.
62. Another foolish attempt to deceive world opinion
was made when the Israeli military
sources told
correspondents
and published as an offtciai Israeli
announcement
that the young girl was killed when a
soldier tripped and discharged his rifle by accident.
In my statement to the ,Council on 4 May I stated
that the Israeli authorities tried to use the same silly
excuse for killing an Arab boy at that time, saying that
he “was killed by a bullet from a soldier’s rifle which
went off accidentally”
[1916th meeting, para. 211.
I added, “But it seems that many Israeli rifles have
gone off accidentally many times in the last few weeks,
especially against Arab youngsters”
[ibid.].
It is
evident now that the .Israeli Government
is faithful
to its tradition in thisfield,
a tradition on which it
seems Israel has a monopoly.
63. The very next day after the cowardly killing of
Miss Nabulsi, another young Palestinian
man was
killed by an Israeli soldier. On the third day yet
another one, in Jerusalem, and this besides the scores
who were wounded, some of them seriously. This is
State terrorism in its clearest and ugliest form. The
Washington Post of 19 May correctly observed that
the shooting of the third Palestinian killed in Jerusalem
occurred at an intersection only a few steps from the
entrance to the Church of the Holy Sepulchre,
traditionally considered the burial site of Jesus Christ.
64. Another barbaric tactic used by the Israeli army
was revealed by the Israeli newspaper Yediot Aharonot
on 12 May, when it said, “A number of West Bank
leaders were being detained in gaol until next week
to prevent their participation ‘in. possible demonstrations”. It is well known that the Israeli authorities
arrest people at random and keep them in prison
without any trial. Israel calls them “administrative
detainees”. They are people whom the Israeli Govemment believes that it could, by arresting without any
reason, prevent from acting against it. On 14 May it
arrested about 30 people for what was called “preventive detention”.
The Israeli army went on an
orgy, rampaging against merchants who closed their
shops in protest against the brutal and barbaric
measures used .by the Israeli authorities
against
innocent people in the cities of Nablus, Kalkilia and
Tulkarm. Israeli troops forced those merchants to open
their shops, breaking locks and doors and confiscating
goods. Besides these measures, it imposed curfews on
many cities, villages and refugee camps, sometimes
for 24 hours a day:.
65. I should like?0 read out part of a telegram sent
on 16 May to theSecretary-General
by Mr. Bassam
Shaka’a, Mayor o{ Nablus:
“We, the residents of Nablus, denounce the
occupation and the humiliation
of our people. We
ask the United,‘.Nations
to send a commission of
inquiry and to take measures to protect our property
and our lives.“,

The telegram also stated that the latest Israeli actions
in the occupied territories were “in breach of The
Hague and the Geneva Conventions”.
66. Israel as usual is trying to hide the difficulties it
is facing in another part of the occupied territories,
in the Gaza strip. After the 1967 aggression, it clamped
an iron curtain around Gaza to prevent the’ world
from knowing about the resistance of the people of
Gaza to the Israeli occupation. Needless to say, the
truth always becomes known, no matter what the
Israeli authorities may try to do. .Only recently the
Mayor of Gaza, Mr. Rashad Al-Shawa resigned with
the whole City Council to protest against Israeli
repressive .measures. The Christian Science Monitor
of 14 May stated that those resignations in Gaza,
where eight new Israeli
settlements
have been
established, would mean a return to the direct rule of
an Israeli military
officer, something
“which the
Military Governor is threatening’* to bring about. The
Christian Science Monitor
went on to report that
22 boys of the Falastine School in Gaza and seven
girls of the high school in nearby Khan Yunis were
held when they tried to demonstrate solidarity with the
general strike being observed in the occupied territories to protest against new land seizures by the
Israeli authorities. Mr. Al-Shawa told the newspaper:
“The censorship and news blackout here prevented all news of this from getting out. Not a
word about the fact that the City Council and
administration
went on strike appeared even in the
Israeli press.”
67. That is only part of the picture of what is
happening in Gaza, given in answer to the claims of the
Israeli representative
here in the Council about the
benevolent occupation of the area by his Government.
The Israeli authorities are proceeding to implement the
Nazi doctrine of Lebensraum
by evicting the Palestinian people from their land and establishing Israeli
settlements there. No one was more eloquent and
precise in describing this policy .of expansion than’ a
former Israeli Major General, who stated, according
to Newsweek of 24 May, “The whole concept of the
settlements is absurd”. But it seems that the Israeli
Government, as usual, does not listen to those voices
but prefers to listen to, and apply what is preached by,
the advocates of expansion.
68. It is our strong conviction that whatever the
Israeli Government is trying to do to weaken the will
of the Palestinian people, the resistance of that heroic
people will grow day by day until it regains its
inalienable national rights.
The meeting

rose at 4.40 p.m.
Notes

I United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, p. 287.
2 OjJkiul Records uf the Gene& Assembly, Third
Pm-t One, Plenary Meetings, p. 946.

Session,

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United Nations
world. Consult
COMMENT

UMTED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

publications
may be obtained from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UMES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences dCpositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous
auprb de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
KAK

NOJIYYElTh

Msna~m

SUHLX
BanreM
HaswA.

Opranuaanwu
O~Z~AHH~HHJA~
Haqak
~ornrio
rcynrx~b
B IHH.~KHLI~
Saraw ~~‘BHTCTBPX BO acex pakouax
Mupa.
H~BOAUT~
cnpaarcu
06 nartarrmrx
B
KHII~HOM
Maraarrrre
WITH ~UIUHT~ no anpecy:
Oprarrnaauua
O~%~AHH~HHMX
Ce~uwst no nponaxe
ua~anwii,
Hero-Rope
HI~R Xenesa.

H3AAHEISl

OPTAHEI

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

3Al4HM

OKLEAMHEHHhIX

DE LAS NACIONES

HAIKHH

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas esdn en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes de1 mundo. Cons&e a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unida~Seccibn
de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Lirho

in United

Nations,

New

York

00300

83-60801-Seprember

1984-2.200
