S/2021/98

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 January 2021
Original: English

Twelfth report of the Secretary-General on the threat posed
by ISIL (Da’esh) to international peace and security and the
range of United Nations efforts in support of Member States
in countering the threat
I. Introduction
1.
In adopting its resolution 2253 (2015), the Security Council expressed its
determination to address the threat posed to international peace and security by
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant 1 (ISIL, also known as Da’esh) and associated
individuals and groups and requested that I provide an initial strategic -level report on
the threat, followed by updates every four months. In its resolution 2368 (2017), the
Council requested that I continue to provide, every six months, strategic -level reports
that reflect the gravity of the threat posed by ISIL to international peace and security
and the range of United Nations efforts in support of Member States in countering the
threat.
2.
This is the twelfth such report. 2 It was prepared by the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team 3 and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate in close collaboration with the Office of Counter-Terrorism and other
United Nations entities and international organizations.
3.
During the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) crisis, the threat posed by ISIL has
increased and may rise further in the coming months, in conflict zones as the longerterm fallout of the pandemic risks benefiting emboldened regional affiliates of ISIL,
and in non-conflict zones in the form of inspired attacks as a result of a surge in online
propaganda during the pandemic. Moreover, ISIL could regain the capacity to
orchestrate international attacks over the coming year. Addressing the protracted issue
of ISIL fighters, including foreign terrorist fighters, and their family members in Iraq
and the Syrian Arab Republic remains an urgent, strategic imperative for international
peace and security.

__________________

Listed as Al-Qaida in Iraq (QDe.115).
See S/2016/92, S/2016/501, S/2016/830, S/2017/97, S/2017/467, S/2018/80, S/2018/770,
S/2019/103, S/2019/612, S/2020/95 and S/2020/774.
3
The Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team pursuant to resolutions 1526 (2004) and
2253 (2015) concerning ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals and
entities.
1
2

21-00560 (E)

020221

*2100560*

S/2021/98

II. Threat assessment
A.

Overview of threat
4.
The COVID-19 pandemic continued to influence terrorism trends in the second
half of 2020. Despite the territorial defeat of ISIL in 2019, its sizable remnants were
still of concern to Member States, with foreign terrorist fighters assessed as a major,
long-term and global threat. Precarious holding arrangements in Iraq and the Syrian
Arab Republic for individuals with a suspected or perceived association with
terrorism, still including many foreign terrorist fighters and their family members,
have yet to be systematically addressed by the international community. Several
Member States assess that allowing the problem to go unresolved could ultimately
increase the threat.
5.
Some Member States observed a subtle change in the response of ISIL to the
pandemic as the established narrative in the group’s propaganda materials portraying
the virus as “divine punishment of arrogance and unbelief” grew harder to sustain in
the light of its universal impact. ISIL continued to call for attacks on its enemies while
they were distracted and their counter-terrorism defences presumably impaired.
However, the idea of weaponizing the virus, first discussed within ISIL in March,
does not appear to have materialized as a practical plan. 4 Generally, Member States
assess that ISIL has been unable to flesh out a purposeful strategy to take advantage
of the pandemic, while its messaging remains aspirational and lacking in practical
focus.
6.
Outside conflict zones, restrictions on movement and meetings in order to
contain the spread of the virus have continued to make it difficult for ISIL fighters
and other terrorists to travel, gather or raise revenue. Access to potential targets has
been reduced depending on the kinds and levels of restrictions, with public targets
remaining largely unavailable where a full lockdown is in force. ISIL still lacks an
external operations capability and the pandemic further reduces opportunities to
mount high-impact attacks. Inspired attacks will be the main risk over the next year
outside conflict zones and frequent low-casualty attacks could have a high cumulative
psychological impact.
7.
As people spend more time at home and online, individuals susceptible to ISIL
propaganda and incitement risk greater exposure. The socioeconomic toll and
political fallout of the pandemic, meanwhile, could further aggravate the longer-term
threat by exacerbating drivers of terrorist radicalization. These factors could lead to
a “bottle up and release” effect or a sudden rash of attacks when pandemic -related
restrictions are eased in various locations.
8.
In conflict zones, terrorists have maintained the same ability to move and
operate despite the pandemic. ISIL was particularly active in a number of States in
Africa affected by conflict in the second half of 2020. Despite setbacks in
Afghanistan, Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan (ISIL-K) (QDe.161) has
continued to exploit difficulties in the Afghan peace process. ISIL continues to pin its
main hopes for resurgence on the ongoing insecurity in its core areas of operation in
Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic.
9.
Amir Muhammad Sa’id Abdal-Rahman al-Mawla (QDi.426) is not assessed to
have changed the strategic direction of ISIL since becoming its leader in late 2019.
Member State counter-terrorism operations have inhibited his command and control
abilities, which in turn has led to the ISIL core giving further autonomy to regional
affiliates and has strengthened the role of the group’s so -called general directorate of

__________________
4

2/17

Information provided by a Member State.
21-00560

S/2021/98

provinces. This branch could prove key to reviving the external operations capability
of ISIL, which Member States expect may occur during 2021 and will depend partly
on the efficiency and interoperability of the regional affiliates. As ISIL entrenches
itself in various conflict zones and destabilizes them further, exploiting local
fragilities, it will have more capabilities and options available to project an external
threat to non-conflict zones.
10. The leader of ISIL has maintained a policy of avoiding direct communication.
While this preserves his personal safety, some Member States assess that he runs the
risk of losing interest from supporters worldwide. His spokesperson, Abu Hamzah
al-Qurayshi (not listed), has released four audio broadcasts in the past year but this is
considered a poor substitute. On 18 October, the spokesperson betrayed frustration in
his injunction that supporters spend less time online and more time mounting attacks,
jailbreaks and other operations. He specified Al-Qaida, the Taliban and Member
States as the key targets for high-impact attacks.
1.

ISIL fighters and their family members in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic
11. The potential threat from ISIL fighters, including foreign terrorist fighters, and
risks to their family members in displacement camps in I raq and the north-east of the
Syrian Arab Republic are assessed by Member States as growing more serious with
neglect. This includes possible escapes from the holding facilities, which could be
compounded by disorder and rioting in the wake of COVID-19 outbreaks. Several
Member States expect this situation to have a long-term security impact globally, in
particular in other conflict zones, and continue to urge repatriation for prosecution,
rehabilitation and reintegration, as appropriate in each case.
12. Member States assess that ISIL would struggle to replicate the “Breaking the
Walls” campaign that was instrumental in the resurgence of Al-Qaida in Iraq because
it cannot easily secure and absorb large numbers of fugitives. Still, the ISIL
spokesperson, in a statement on 18 October, underscored the group’s policy in 2019
of prioritizing this approach. Hence, ISIL is expected to refocus in the year ahead on
increasing its capability to orchestrate jailbreaks and assist escapees, encouraged by
the propaganda and disruption impact of the prison break fomented in August 2020
by ISIL-K in Jalalabad, Afghanistan. ISIL is also aware of the propaganda resonance
of any potential outbreak of COVID-19 and associated unrest in holding facilities.
13. According to Member States, a terrorist threat may be incubating in
displacement camps and detention facilities housing ISIL fighters, their family
members and other individuals with a suspected or perceived affiliation with ISIL,
especially in the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic. Many instances of
radicalization, fundraising, training and incitement of external operations have been
reported in the Hawl camp, where some 65,000 people remain, far above its intended
capacity. ISIL supporters have described the camp as “the final remnant of the
caliphate”. Since late 2019, the de facto local authorities have found it harder to
maintain security in the camps and facilities, especially in Hawl. The number of
guards, meanwhile, fell from 1,500 in mid-2019 to 400 in late 2020. 5 There are still
approximately 27,500 foreign children held in camps in the north -east of the Syrian
Arab Republic, including an estimated 8,000 non-Iraqi children, 90 per cent of whom
are under 12 years of age. The Hawl camp annex for non-Iraqi foreigners houses over
7,000 children, some reportedly being groomed as future ISIL operatives. 6
14. In November, one Member State reported that there were some 11,000 male ISIL
fighters held in the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic. These comprise some

__________________
5
6

21-00560

Information provided by a Member State.
Information provided by a Member State.
3/17

S/2021/98

5,000 Syrians, 1,600 Iraqis, 1,700 foreign terrorist fighters of known nationality and
around 2,500 of unknown nationality. The improvised and converted facilities in
which they are held are often unsuitable from humanitarian and security perspectives,
and it remains unclear how they will be judicially processed. The Huri camp
reportedly hosts 100 male children. Member States are concerned that the several riots
that took place in 2020 in Hasakah prison could easily recur in that facility or
elsewhere.
15. An extension of the Roj facility for internally displaced persons was finished in
July, doubling its capacity to 4,000. Some foreign women have been transferred there
from the Hawl annex, reportedly with reluctance in many cases. Security at the
facility is more effective than at others, with one Member State reporting that the cost
of obtaining assistance in escaping to a safe destination is around $14,000, compared
with $3,000 to escape from the Hawl camp.
2.

ISIL finances
16. ISIL cells operating in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic continue to fund their
operations through a combination of extortion of the local population or similar
criminal activity, remittances from abroad and cash reserves believed to remain under
the control of the group’s leadership. The location and value of such reserves are
difficult to assess now that the group no longer controls territory. ISIL was previously
estimated to have approximately $100 million in reserve.
17. Member States consistently report that funds flow to ISIL family members
housed in displacement camps through a range of methods. Most involve remittances
to financial institutions or money service businesses in neighbouring States, which
are subsequently couriered into the Syrian Arab Republic or remitte d through
informal financial networks.
18. The reported use of cryptocurrency in the Syrian Arab Republic has increased
in recent months. There are ongoing reports of terrorist fighters or their family
members seeking to raise funds via cryptocurrency wallet addresses. The pandemic
has also been exploited by those seeking to profit from the sale of personal protective
equipment. One State brought charges against a reported ISIL facilitator for operating
a website purporting to sell N95 face masks.

B.

Regional developments

1.

Middle East
19. Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic remain the primary focus of the objectives of
ISIL. The group maintains clandestine cells pursuing a protracted insurgency. The
cells are given a significant degree of tactical autonomy by the central leadership.
ISIL is able to sustain attacks in rural and desert areas, with a lower rate in urban
areas, in particular in the Iraqi-Syrian border region and in the Governorates of
Diyala, Kirkuk and Salah al-Din along the Hamrin mountain range. Likewise, ISIL
fighters operate freely on the Syrian side of the border in and around Dayr al -Zawr.
Member States report that ISIL engages with smugglers operating across the border
between the two countries.
20. An estimated 10,000 ISIL fighters are believed to remain active in Iraq and the
Syrian Arab Republic, the majority of whom are based in Iraq. However, as the
capability of the Iraqi security forces grows, it is expected that the trajectory of ISIL
operational activity will be pushed downwards in the country. Foreign terrorist
fighters numbering in the low thousands remain active within this ISIL core conflict
zone. Member States assess that these elements have been assimilated through family

4/17

21-00560

S/2021/98

and other ties within their new environment, observing that very few are now
choosing to leave the region. With regard to fighters in detention, there are continuing
concerns about the possibility of their being released from holding facilities and
rejoining ISIL or leaving the region.
21. While the Idlib region in the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic is
dominated by a rival group, Hay’at Tahrir al-Sham, 7 it remains an important
facilitation and transit point for ISIL. Member States report that some ISIL leaders
and their families continue to shelter in the region, which also offers the safest access
point to Turkey for ISIL members seeking to leave the Syrian Arab Republic.
22. In July and August, counter-terrorism operations against Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant – Yemen (ISIL-Yemen) (QDe.166) caused the death of several of its
leaders, including its overall leader, Abu al-Walid al-Adani, and its explosives expert,
Abu Sulayman al-Adani. As a result, ISIL-Yemen is now going through a period of
tactical recovery.
2.

Africa
23. In Libya, there have been positive developments in the intra-Libyan dialogue
process facilitated by the United Nations, including the adoption on 23 October of a
ceasefire agreement between the parties. Further stabilization would reduce the risk
of future resurgence of terrorist groups in the country. Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant – Libya (ISIL-Libya) (QDe.165) has continued to decline, in particular with
the confirmation by Member States of the death of its leader, Abu Abdullah al -Libi
(also known as Abu Mu’az al-Tikriti, or Abdulqadir al-Najdi), in Sabha on
15 September. However, a contingent of ISIL-Libya fighters remains present in the
south of the country, and the group reportedly continues to maintain sleeper cells in
some northern coastal towns.
24. Having pledged allegiance to ISIL in 2014, Ansar Bayt al-Maqdis, with a
contingent estimated to number between 500 and 1,200 fighters, maintains an active
presence in north-east Sinai, despite the growing military pressure of Egyptian
security forces. The group has committed sporadic attacks on checkpoints, military
installations and critical infrastructure, mainly using improvised explosive devices.
Egypt assesses it to be a local group with no financial, operational or organizational
links with the ISIL core or other affiliates.
25. In Morocco, cells inspired by ISIL have been disrupted in several towns,
including Tangier and Tétouan. On 27 October, a leader of one such cell held in
custody murdered a prison guard in Tiflet prison. The cells w ere composed of
“frustrated travellers” who had been unable to join ISIL in the core conflict zone and
instead pledged allegiance to ISIL and planned local attacks using improvised
explosive devices.
26. ISIL affiliates in West Africa operate primarily through Islamic State in the
Greater Sahara (ISGS) (QDe.163), Islamic State West Africa Province (ISWAP)
(QDe.162) and Jama’atu Ahlis Sunna Lidda’Awati Wal-Jihad (commonly known as
Boko Haram) (QDe.138). In the Sahel, ISGS experienced significant attrition o f its
forces following battles with Al-Qaida-affiliated Jama’a Nusrat ul-Islam wa
al-Muslimin (JNIM) (QDe.159) and as a result of robust counter-terrorism operations,
though its command and control structure is believed to remain intact. Numerous
attacks by these groups against the military and civilians at the end of 2020 in the
Liptako-Gourma region demonstrate their resilience and adaptability. In the Lake
Chad Basin area, both ISWAP and Boko Haram have maintained their level of

__________________
7

21-00560

Listed as Al-Nusrah Front for the People of the Levant (QDe.137).
5/17

S/2021/98

operations. ISWAP is assessed as benefiting from strong ties with the ISIL leadership
in the core conflict zone, which is reflected in the group’s media and propaganda.
27. In the latter part of 2020, Islamic State Central Africa Province (ISCAP)
affiliates in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Mozambique enhanced their
operations. ISCAP is emerging as a strong ISIL affiliate, with sophisticated tactics
and capabilities, emboldened by recent operational successes. Member States
reported increased recruitment, seizures of towns, destruction of property and
multiple civilian casualties. ISCAP intensified and coordinated high -impact
conventional attacks, sometimes on targets simultaneously, including two attacks in
Mozambique concurrently with its first cross-border incursion into the United
Republic of Tanzania on 14 October.
28. Member States assess that there has been probable coordination and skills
transfer among ISCAP affiliates given that recent attacks revealed discernible
similarities in the modus operandi. One Member State indicated that the ISIL core is
controlling and directing ISCAP attacks as well as remitting funds. For instance, in
September, financial support was channelled from the ISIL core through ISIL
networks and sympathizers in Somalia and some East African countries. 8
29. The ISIL affiliate in Somalia sustained recruitment and training and conducted
low-scale attacks alongside other activities. Some Member States assess that ISIL in
Somalia continues to serve as the logistical centre for ISCAP affiliates (see
S/2020/717, para. 48). During the reporting period, the group focused on training
recruits and providing ideological guidance to and directing ISCAP affiliates.
Member States observed that back-up trainers and tactical operatives were sent to
bolster operations in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Mozambique.
30. In Mozambique, non-State armed groups identifying with ISCAP presented an
increasingly cohesive and capable threat, conducting indiscri minate and retaliatory
attacks in the northern Province of Cabo Delgado. They expanded operations to more
districts and provinces under the banner of ISCAP, demonstrating a strategic intention
to capture more localities and enhanced operational capabilitie s, including the capture
and continued holding of the port of Mocimboa da Praia in spite of sustained military
operations by government forces.
31. ISCAP in the Democratic Republic of Congo continued to deploy advanced
capabilities during several attacks in Beni and other locations in North Kivu and Ituri
Provinces. ISCAP bolstered operations by carrying out, with modest success, attacks
on hard military targets during which it confiscated weaponry and armaments from
the Congolese military. The group sought to occupy more locations and establish new
bases. Member States observed a new trend as ISCAP used conventional weaponry
and improvised explosive devices. In October, it launched an onslaught on the
Kangbayi central prison in Beni to release its operativ es. Over 1,000 prisoners
reportedly escaped, including about 200 ISCAP operatives and enablers.
3.

Europe
32. In Europe, an endogenous threat persists from lone attackers inspired by ISIL.
A spate of attacks in several Western European countries in the latter half of 2020 is
assessed to have been partly inspired by ISIL, while in some cases investigations also
identified Al-Qaida as a key motivator. The attacks included a knife attack near the
former offices of the Charlie Hebdo magazine in Paris on 25 September; a suspected
stabbing in Dresden, Germany, on 4 October; the beheading of a middle schoolteacher
outside Paris on 16 October; a stabbing at a church in Nice, France, on 29 October; a

__________________
8

6/17

Information provided by a Member State.
21-00560

S/2021/98

shooting in Vienna on 2 November that killed four people; and another stabbing attack
in Lugano, Switzerland, on 24 November.
33. None of the attackers in France were previously known to law enforcement
authorities. The shooting in Austria was carried out by a man who had served a prison
sentence for attempting to travel to the Syrian Arab Republic to join ISIL and had
been enrolled in a rehabilitation programme. Taken together, the attacks highlight a
number of concerning trends, including evidence of significant advance planning
despite an unsophisticated modus operandi. In most cases they involved young men
with no previous signs of violent behaviour, but who acted with extrem e cruelty, in
particular in the case of the killing of the schoolteacher in France. The attacks have
revived debates in Europe about the challenges of terrorist radicalization in prison,
the effectiveness of rehabilitation and reintegration programmes, and the monitoring
of terrorism offenders upon release from prison.
4.

Asia
34. ISIL-K continued to demonstrate resilience in Afghanistan notwithstanding its
degraded military capabilities, including in Nangarhar and Kunar Provinces. Although
the group faces challenges in its ability to seize and hold significant territory in those
provinces, it has claimed responsibility for a number of recent high -profile attacks,
including the devastating attack on a maternity hospital in Kabul in May, the assault
on Jalalabad city prison on 2 August, an attack on Kabul University on 2 November
and the killing of a female Afghan journalist in Nangarhar Province on 10 December.
35. ISIL-K is currently assessed to have between 1,000 and 2,200 fighters in
Afghanistan spread across several provinces 9 and is expected to continue to target
Kabul and provincial capitals in future attacks. Shihab al -Muhajir, announced as the
group’s new leader in June 2020, reportedly heads ISIL operations in Afghanistan,
Bangladesh, India, Maldives, Pakistan, Sri Lanka and States in Central Asia. He is
said to have had an earlier affiliation with and to maintain familial ties to the Haqqani
Network.
36. Online recruitment and radicalization of ISIL sympathizers in South Asia
continues to be a concern, in particular through propaganda publications targeting
followers, including in Maldives and Sri Lanka.
37. ISIL also remains resilient in South-East Asia with a number of factions, in
particular in the southern Philippines. This gives special urgency to initiatives
developed by authorities in the region, including the promotion of narratives to
counter violent extremism online. Although counter-terrorism forces reported
successes in disrupting some cells and averting imminent attacks, the regio n
continued to experience violence initiated or inspired by ISIL.
38. The prominence of women involved with ISIL, including in carrying out suicide
bombings, continues to be a trend in South-East Asia. Two such attacks occurred in
the Philippines on 24 August, both involving women believed to be widows of Abu
Sayyaf Group fighters. In October, officials in the Philippines arrested a woman
allegedly preparing for an attack.

__________________
9

21-00560

Information provided by a Member State.
7/17

S/2021/98

III. Updates on responses to the evolving threat
A.

Overview
39. Since my previous report, the pandemic has continued to pose significant
strategic and practical challenges for Member States’ efforts to prevent and counter
terrorism and the underlying spread of violent extremism, in full compliance with
international law. Member States and United Nations experts have also raised the
concern that terrorists may be seeking to exploit new vulnerabilities resulting from
the ongoing global health crisis, including by forging opportunistic alliances with
organized criminal groups (see S/2020/754). In the longer term, the economic
downturn and the diversion of government resources in the wake of the pandemic
could weaken national counter-terrorism efforts and international cooperation and
assistance.
40. On 23 November, the Chairs of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism, the Security
Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities and the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) emphasized in a joint briefing to the
Council that counter-terrorism must remain high on the international peace and
security agenda despite the challenges caused by the pandemic and numerous
competing priorities.
41. Relevant United Nations entities continued to ensure business continuity in their
support for Member States’ counter-terrorism efforts by using remote assessment
procedures, delivering online or blended virtual and in-person training, supporting
States’ efforts to use innovative information technology solutions an d organizing
virtual events. They also carried out research and analysis to identify new counter terrorism trends and developments and set up several additional guidance tools to
address pressing challenges and promote existing good practices. At a virtual open
briefing in August, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
presented its updated technical guide to the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1373 (2001) and other relevant resolutions.
42. The entities of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination
Compact held 42 inter-agency working group meetings virtually from July to
December and continued to deliver joint capacity-building initiatives on a range of
priority and emerging counter-terrorism issues. The Coordination Committee of the
Compact held its fifth meeting in August 2020 to reinforce joint action in supporting
balanced implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
during the pandemic.

B.

Suspected ISIL fighters and their family members in conflict zones

1.

Current situation
43. The dire and unsustainable situation faced by individuals, mostly children and
women, with suspected links to United Nations-designated terrorist groups, who
remain stranded in holding facilities in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic, remains of
grave concern. They continue to face considerable challenges relating to their basic
human rights, including protection, health, shelter, water, sanitation, hygiene and
education. The pandemic has further restricted their access to humanitarian assistance
and caused the suspension of some protection and support services, while the United
Nations is facing 44 per cent and 53.4 per cent funding shortfalls, resp ectively, for

8/17

21-00560

S/2021/98

the Syria Humanitarian Assistance Response Plan and the COVID -19 response plan
for the country.
44. Member States’ efforts to repatriate their nationals from Iraq and the Syrian
Arab Republic have continued to be limited and hampered by pand emic-related travel
restrictions, public reluctance in countries of nationality, a lack of diplomatic relations
or adequate consular access, and logistical challenges in arranging transportation.
Uzbekistan repatriated 25 women and 73 children from the Haw l and Roj camps in
the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic in December, while other States carried
out repatriations of a limited number of individuals.
45. In September, humanitarian actors were allowed to assess needs in several
facilities that are de facto under the control of the Syrian Democratic Forces and house
children believed to be victims of ISIL exploitation or with family ties to the group.
In October, the Syrian Democratic Forces announced that they would begin the large scale release of many of the Syrian women and children held in camps under their
control, although only several hundred are reported to have been released so far. A
process to address the situation of the many camp residents whose identity documents
have been lost, destroyed or confiscated is yet to be established. In Iraq, the
Government had by mid-December closed all but three camps under its administration
hosting people displaced since 2014. 10
46. Many camp residents and returnees are survivors of conflict -related sexual
violence or children born of conflict-related sexual violence. Their perceived
affiliation with ISIL may expose them to new vulnerabilities after leaving the camps,
including security risks at checkpoints, retaliation, stigmatization and alienation.
Receiving communities may also face security risks and challenges in reintegrating
returnees. The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees continues to monitor
the situation of returnees and strongly recommends that the return of internally
displaced persons and refugees should be voluntary, safe, dignified and informed by
conditions in areas of origin conducive to a sustainable return.
2.

United Nations support
47. Leveraging the framework of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Coordination Compact, the United Nations system continued to actively encourage
and offer support to Member States for human rights-based and age- and genderresponsive protection, voluntary repatriation, prosecution, rehabilitation and
reintegration of individuals with suspected links to United Nations -designated
terrorist groups, with the consent of relevant Governments for activities undertaken
in territories under their control and in line with the key principles that I set out in
April 2019 (see A/74/677, annex V). This support was highlighted in September 2020
during a high-level virtual event organized by the Office of Counter-Terrorism and
the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia on the
theme “Central Asian experience with individuals returned from Syria and Iraq:
successes, challenges and lessons learned”.
48. A new global framework was launched in August to coordinate support among
15 United Nations entities for requesting States with regard to individuals returned
from or remaining in displacement camps in Iraq and the north -east of the Syrian Arab
Republic. The framework, jointly led by the Office of Counter-Terrorism and the
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), conforms to the requirements of relevant
Security Council resolutions as well as the guiding principles issued in 2015 on
foreign terrorist fighters (see S/2015/939, annex II) and the addendum of 2018 thereto

__________________
10

21-00560

Jad’ah 5, Salamiyah and Amiriyat al-Fallujah remained open as at December 2020.
9/17

S/2021/98

(see S/2018/1177, annex). United Nations entities have developed a number of field driven project proposals to implement the global framework in Iraq and Central Asia.
49. The United Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes
Committed by Da’esh/ISIL (UNITAD) continued to support Iraq in its efforts to
prosecute ISIL members for war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide.
UNITAD provided training for investigative judges, supported the digitalization and
archiving of documentary materials for use as evidence and resumed its support for
the excavation of two mass grave sites. In December 2020, UNITAD engaged with
Yazidi community members on returning Yazidi remains exhumed during mass grave
excavations in 2019. It has developed guidance documents and training to assist
investigators in engaging with vulnerable witnesses, including the establishment of a
witness protection unit, and has also developed Shuhud, a digital platform that enables
witnesses and survivors to submit information remotely, securely and confidentially.
50. UNICEF and its partners continued to deliver critical humanitarian assistance
to help children and caregivers in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic. In Mosul, Iraq,
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) continued its support to
strengthen legal proceedings and the representation of children, improve their
treatment in detention and support their reintegration. UNICEF and other United
Nations entities also continued to support other requesting States in repatriating and
reintegrating children safely. In November, UNODC organized a three -day capacitybuilding workshop for Indonesia on rehabilitation and reintegration strategies for
children associated with terrorist and violent extremist groups.

C.

Criminal justice and international legal cooperation
51. Bringing terrorists to justice and ensuring full accountability for i nternational
crimes in compliance with international law continued to present significant
challenges compounded by the pandemic. In several States, the pandemic has led to
delayed hearings or extended proceedings, case backlogs, prolonged pretrial
detention and the suspension of early release programmes, and has hampered victims’
access to proceedings.
52. United Nations entities worked to factor these challenges into their support for
Member States. In September, UNODC delivered a workshop on using new
technologies in criminal proceedings in Nigeria, where the pandemic has prevented
in-person hearings. In November, together with the International Institute for Justice
and the Rule of Law, UNODC organized a second international expert meeting to
review a draft good practices document on remote access to judicial proceedings in
terrorism cases. The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali supported Malian judicial authorities in providing overseas victims
with access to live broadcasts of the trial of the alleged perpetrators of the terrorist
attacks in Bamako in 2015.
53. United Nations entities continued to support efforts by States to develop and
implement comprehensive and tailored prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegrat ion
strategies. A global programme was launched to that effect in September by the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre within the Office of Counter-Terrorism, in close
cooperation with the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and
UNODC. The three entities also developed two projects to provide related assistance
to States in the Lake Chad Basin Region and, if requested, Mozambique. United
Nations entities also continued to work in partnership with the African Union to
support the implementation of the Lake Chad Basin Commission Regional
Stabilization, Recovery and Resilience Strategy for Areas Affected by Boko -Haram
in the Lake Chad Basin Region.

10/17

21-00560

S/2021/98

54. Prosecuting terrorists for gender-based crimes, especially crimes of sexual
violence, remains particularly challenging, including with respect to finding,
protecting and supporting victims and witnesses willing to testify. An analytical brief
issued by the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate in July on the
prosecution of women associated with ISIL found that States had encountered a range
of gender-specific challenges in investigations, charging and sentencing practices,
rehabilitation and reintegration.
55. Working with practitioners and regional organizations to address challenge s
relating to the collection, use and sharing of evidence to bring terrorists to justice
remained another key priority. Between August and October, the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre delivered virtual workshops on online terrorism -related
investigations for Bangladesh, Malaysia and States in Central Asia. UNODC
delivered two workshops in October for law enforcement officials in Lebanon on
collecting admissible evidence in terrorism-related cases while complying with
international human rights standards, especially when interviewing women and
children. In November, the Counter-Terrorism Committee held a virtual open briefing
on the role of judges, prosecutors and defence counsel in bringing terrorists to justice,
including the effective use of evidence collected on the battlefield or by the military.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, UNODC and the
International Association of Prosecutors also held an expert group meeting to revise
the Practical Guide for Requesting Electronic Evidence Across Borders, issued in
February 2019.
56. The Office of Counter-Terrorism, UNODC and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate provided support to Kazakhstan, Tunisia and
Uganda within the framework of a joint programme on the manageme nt of violent
extremist prisoners. In November, UNODC and the Eastern Africa Police Chiefs
Cooperation Organization jointly organized training courses in Kenya, Rwanda and
Uganda to strengthen cooperation between police and prison authorities on preventing
and countering violent extremism. UNODC finalized a new regional programme for
Arab States to support prison management and foster the rehabilitation and
reintegration of offenders.
57. The Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs are preparing a study on the interrelationship
between counter-terrorism frameworks and international humanitarian law. The
Executive Committee continued to implement a project on strengthening
understanding of the implementation of counter-terrorism measures in compliance
with international humanitarian law, which is aimed at identifying existing practices,
challenges and policy options. In November, UNODC delivered a global online
training course on counter-terrorism and international humanitarian law.

D.

Supporting victims of ISIL
58. United Nations entities continued to advance the rights of victims of terrorism,
including by encouraging States to include actions to uphold the rights of victims in
their national counter-terrorism strategies. On 21 August, I attended the third
commemoration of International Day of Remembrance of and Tribute to the Victims
of Terrorism, organized by the Office of Counter-Terrorism, which was followed in
September by the second ministerial meeting of the Group of Friends of Victims of
Terrorism. These events provided opportunities to honour and reaffirm solidarity with
victims of terrorism while vital services for them, such as criminal justice processes
and psychological support, have been interrupted or delayed during the pandemic.

21-00560

11/17

S/2021/98

59. On 8 December, the Coalition for Just Reparations 11 of Iraq and the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq held a virtual conference on the theme
“Reparations for survivors of conflict-related sexual violence in Iraq: the way
forward”. Reflecting on the second reading of the draft Yazidi Survivors Bill by the
national parliament of Iraq on 11 November, participants agreed that all survivors
should benefit from the forthcoming legislation and that reparative measures should
go beyond compensation to include services such as symbolic recognition and
guarantees of non-recurrence.
60. The Office of Counter-Terrorism, UNODC and the Inter-Parliamentary Union
collaborated to develop model legislative provisions to support and protect the rights
and needs of victims of terrorism, on the basis of a series of virtual expert
consultations with Member States, members of parliament, parliamentary
organizations, civil society and academic institutions. The model provisions will
address specific thematic areas, including the right to compensation, access to justice,
recognition and remembrance of victims of terrorism and the role of victims
associations. They are to be presented at the first Global Congress of Victims of
Terrorism, in June 2021.

E.

Countering the financing of terrorism
61. The pandemic has compounded persistent difficulties faced by Member States
in countering the financing of terrorism, bringing new challenges relating to, inte r
alia, increased reliance on online transactions and reduced direct contact with
customers. Member States remain concerned about the use of the Internet and social
media by terrorists to raise and move funds. A number of States have announced law
enforcement actions targeting the financing of terrorism through cryptocurrencies.
Financial disruptions caused by the pandemic appear to have increased terrorist
groups’ reliance on criminal activities, including electronic fraud and cybercrime.
International travel restrictions could also give rise to new trafficking and cash
smuggling routes. 12
62. The COVID-19 crisis has fuelled a debate on the impact of legislation and
measures to counter the financing of terrorism, including targeted financial sanctions,
on emergency humanitarian responses (see S/2020/493, annex) and civil society. The
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate has launched an initiative within
the framework of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination
Compact to produce guidance for States on countering the financing of terrorism in
full compliance with international human rights law, and invited stakeholders, in
particular civil society actors, to provide inputs for analy sis. In October, the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre, together with Morocco and the Netherlands,
launched a joint initiative under the umbrella of the Global Counterterrorism Forum
to identify and disseminate good practices for countering the finan cing of terrorism
while safeguarding civic space, and held an initial expert meeting in December.
63. In response to Security Council resolutions 2462 (2019) and 2482 (2019), the
United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre continued to implement a global, integrated
capacity-building programme on countering the financing of terrorism. In August, the
Office of Counter-Terrorism organized a third workshop for Bahrain on protecting the

__________________

The Coalition for Just Reparations is a diverse alliance of Iraqi civil society organizations
supporting reparation claims of survivors and victims of crimes perpetrated during the conflict
with ISIL.
12
See the information note of the Eurasian Group for Combating Money Laundering and Financing
of Terrorism on the impact of COVID-19; available from https://eurasiangroup.org/en/measurestaken-in-response-to-the-spread-of-the-covid-19-pandemic.
11

12/17

21-00560

S/2021/98

non-profit sector from terrorist misuse, and in January 2021 it initiated a similar
workshop series for Tajikistan together with the Eurasian Group on Combating
Money Laundering and Financing of Terrorism. The United Nations CounterTerrorism Centre also coordinated inputs from United Nations entities for the update
of the Eastern and Southern Africa Anti-Money Laundering Group’s strategic and
operational regional plan on countering the financing of terrorism and, together wi th
the Office of Information and Communications Technology, advanced the
development of a software solution for States to enhance the systematic collection,
analysis, use and sharing of financial transaction-related data.
64. In November, as part of its support for Iraq in countering the financing of
terrorism, UNODC organized a meeting for representatives of Egypt, Iraq, Lebanon
and the United Arab Emirates to enhance understanding of regional terrorism
financing risks and strengthen cooperation among com petent authorities. It also held
a training workshop for Iraqi practitioners on implementing sanctions pursuant to
Security Council resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1988 (2011) to disrupt terrorist
networks.
65. In September and October, the United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice
Research Institute delivered virtual pilot training courses for stakeholders i n Albania
and Kenya on the use of its policy toolkit entitled “The Hague good practices on the
nexus between transnational organized crime and terrorism”, developed by the Global
Counterterrorism Forum. In November, the Organization for Economic Cooperatio n
and Development, in collaboration with the World Customs Organization (WCO) and
UNODC, enhanced the work of its informal law enforcement network on mineral related crimes, focusing on information-exchange, capacity-building and knowledge
of supply chains and related trafficking offences. In the Sahel region, WCO, the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) and the
International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL) jointly delivered online
capacity-building training on tackling illicit trafficking in cultural property.

F.

Border management and law enforcement
66. The pandemic has challenged border security and law enforcement experts and
practitioners to re-evaluate border security measures, including the role that public
health authorities and measures should play in integrated border management
strategies. This requires an understanding of the tools and technologies available to
Member States to contain the spread of the virus, such as remote and touchless
biometric services, including their effectiveness, the adequacy of legislative
frameworks to regulate their use and their impact on human rights. In December, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate launched an initiative within the
framework of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact
to further explore the impact of the pandemic on border management and law
enforcement in the counter-terrorism context.
67. The United Nations Countering Terrorist Travel Programme led by the Office of
Counter-Terrorism continued to support beneficiary States in enhancing their
inter-agency detection capabilities by establishing human rights-compliant advance
passenger information and passenger name record systems in accordance with
Security Council resolutions 2178 (2014) and 2396 (2017). Under the programme,
the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate led online deep-dive
assessments to support Botswana, Côte d’Ivoire, the Gambia, Maldives and Sierra
Leone, resulting in the development of tailor-made implementation road maps for
advance passenger information and passenger name record systems. The programme
also delivered its first online training course in October for Botswana.

21-00560

13/17

S/2021/98

68. UNODC, in cooperation with the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and INTERPOL, continued to
support States in the Middle East and North Africa through its Airport Communication
Project to identify and intercept foreign terrorist fighters at international airports. The
Counter-Terrorism Committee held a closed videoconference on maritime security in
October and a virtual open briefing in December on terrorist threats to civil aviation,
the status of implementation of Security Council resolution 2309 (2016) and followup to the civil aviation-related provisions of Council resolution 2396 (2017). The
closed videoconference helped to lay the ground for joint meetings of the Counter Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and the Office of Counter-Terrorism
from October to December to prepare a discussion paper on evolving maritime
security threats, existing international frameworks, gaps, challenges and needs.
69. Under a new global programme launched in January 2020, the Office of
Counter-Terrorism and its partners continued to assist seven States in West and
Southern Africa in establishing counter-terrorism fusion cells to better share and use
information. Deep-dive assessments led by the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate were conducted in support of Botswana in July and Uganda in
September. The programme developed several knowledge products and training
courses for future delivery.
70. Within the framework of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Coordination Compact, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
continued to lead the development of technical guidelines on preventing terrorists
from acquiring weapons in line with Security Council resolution 2370 (2017).
UNODC continued to support States in South Asia in their efforts to assess their
capacity to counter the threat posed by improvised explosive devices.
71. In November, the Office of Counter-Terrorism and the International
Telecommunication Union delivered a virtual global exercise on responding to
cyberattacks against critical infrastructure, attended by participants from 34 Member
States. Also in November, the United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice
Research Institute and INTERPOL organized virtually the third annual globa l meeting
on artificial intelligence for law enforcement, in preparation for the development of
a toolkit on responsible artificial intelligence innovation for law enforcement. The
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre and the United Nations Interregional Crime and
Justice Research Institute continued to develop within the framework of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact an expert analysis of the
human rights aspects of the use of artificial intelligence in counter-terrorism.

G.

Countering terrorist narratives and engaging communities to
prevent and counter violent extremism conducive to terrorism
72. At a virtual open briefing held by the Counter-Terrorism Committee in
December on the threat of terrorism in Latin America and the Caribbean, it was stated
that terrorist propaganda had become more ubiquitous globally, while existing
inequalities exacerbated during the pandemic had increased the risk of ter rorist
recruitment and radicalization. Globally, misinformation, conspiracy theories and
hate speech, which can interplay with terrorist narratives, have continued to flourish
online. In many States, necessary physical distancing measures have reduced the
ability of front-line practitioners, teachers, religious leaders and health-care and youth
workers to identify and address signs of radicalization to violence. Such trends were
highlighted during three round-table meetings held in August and September on the
nexus between COVID-19 and violent extremism organized by the Counter-Terrorism

14/17

21-00560

S/2021/98

Committee Executive Directorate and the Global Internet Forum to Counter
Terrorism, joined by United Nations staff and researchers, including the Global
Counter-Terrorism Research Network.
73. Several United Nations entities undertook specific efforts in response to these
challenges. UNESCO, the European Commission, the World Jewish Congress and
Twitter launched the “Think Before Sharing” campaign in August to counter the
spread of conspiracy theories. The United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre,
working with the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, piloted a COVID -19
ISIL communications toolkit to support Member States in enhancing their response
and preparedness in this respect and in developing messages that promote social
cohesion. In October, the United Nations Office on Genocide Prevention and the
Responsibility to Protect, together with the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre
and the United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute, organized
two virtual workshops on understanding and responding to hate speech and incitement
to violence. In November, the Joint Research Institute published a research report on
the risk of the malicious use of social media during the pandemic, and in December
it organized virtual courses on the topic in Sierra Leone. The United Nations Counter Terrorism Centre worked with the United Nations Development Programme,
Facebook and civil society organizations in Novemb er to strengthen the capacities of
young grass-roots social media activists in Bangladesh to counter misinformation.
74. Building capacity on preventing and countering violent extremism conducive to
terrorism by encouraging human rights-based, gender-sensitive, evidence-informed
and innovative approaches remained a priority for United Nations entities in line with
their respective mandates, with a specific emphasis on engaging young people and
communities. In November, the United Nations Interregional Crim e and Justice
Research Institute published a research report on the impact of terrorism on young
Malians, which identifies young people as both victims of terrorism and essential
drivers of positive societal change. A separate report by the Joint Research Institute
published in the same month offers evidence-based recommendations resulting from
experiences in the Sahel and North Africa for more effective interventions to build
community resilience against violent extremism. In December, the Office of Counte rTerrorism established an international hub on behavioural insights to counter
terrorism as a new programme office in Doha.
75. In September, as part of a global programme on sports and security, the Office
of Counter-Terrorism, the United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research
Institute and the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations convened a virtual high level meeting on the promotion of sport and its values as a tool to prevent violent
extremism, followed by a technical-level event. The programme subsequently
launched a global call for funding proposals in November 2020 for grass-roots sportsbased interventions for preventing and countering violent extremism conducive to
terrorism, and in January 2021 it held its first youth consultations with the purpose of
shaping a global messaging campaign against terrorism.
76. The United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre developed a semi-virtual, peerto-peer approach to youth engagement for preventing and countering violent extremism
conducive to terrorism, which engaged hundreds of young people in Australia, the
Sudan and Sweden between August and November 2020. UNESCO and the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre continued to implement a joint interdisciplinary
project on youth empowerment in Jordan, Libya, Morocco and Tunisia.
77. In Iraq, UNESCO continued to implement its “Reviving the spirit of Mosul” and
“Voices of the children of Old Mosul” initiatives to empower the local community to
rebuild the city through heritage, education and cultural life. In Anbar and Ninawa
Governorates, UNESCO launched a project aimed at mainstreaming gender
21-00560

15/17

S/2021/98

considerations into preventing violent extremism through education, with a focus on
addressing the social constructs of masculinities and femininities. It also provided
further support for prevention through education in Burkina Faso, Mali, the Niger and
Senegal.
78. The Group of Friends of Preventing Violent Extremism and the Group of Friends
of Women, Peace and Security received a joint briefing in November o n the outcomes
of a global digital consultation of civil society on the gender-related dimensions of
violent extremism and counter-terrorism responses. The consultation, which was held
from May to July, was led by the United Nations Entity for Gender Equal ity and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) and funded by the Office of CounterTerrorism within the framework of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Coordination Compact. Participants highlighted the importance of ensuring a human
rights-centred approach, promoting gender equality, the leadership of women and a
culture of inclusion and considering the views and experiences of women’s civil
society organizations in efforts to prevent and counter violent extremism conducive
to terrorism.
79. In November, the “Tech Against Terrorism” initiative supported by the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate launched a beta version of its Terrorist
Content Analytics Platform, a centralized platform of verified terrorist content
designed to rapidly support technology companies in identifying the use of their
services for terrorist purposes. As at December 2020, the Platform’s alerts serve more
than 60 technology companies, which represent the full ecosystem of companies
whose services have been misused by ISIL. In December, the Executive Directorate
also hosted a “Tech Against Terrorism” webinar on cooperation between the United
Nations and smaller technology platforms in countering the use of the Internet for
terrorist purposes. Participants emphasized the critical role of the United Nations in
fostering public-private partnerships as part of a comprehensive multi-stakeholder
approach to effectively address related challenges while safeguarding human rights
and fundamental freedoms online.

IV. Observations
80. Efforts by ISIL to regroup and to reinvigorate its activities since the loss of its
last stronghold in the Syrian Arab Republic in March 2019 gained momentum
throughout 2020. The threat posed to international peace and security is on the rise
again amid the COVID-19 pandemic. Several Member States have warned that the
group could regain the ability to carry out external operations in the course of 2021,
out of either its core in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic or one of its stronger
regional affiliates.
81. Although the group has not developed a consistent strategy to exploit the
pandemic, its core and affiliates took advantage of the disruption caused by the virus
to increase operations in the second half of 2020, within and outside conflict zones.
These included high-profile attacks in Afghanistan, West Africa and Central Africa.
Meanwhile, a string of inspired attacks by lone individuals in Europe in the latter half
of 2020, shortly after the easing of physical distancing measures, suggests that online
terrorist propaganda continues to pose a near-term threat of home-grown attacks
outside conflict zones.
82. I urge Member States to remain united in their efforts to counter ISIL and the
broader threat of terrorism, despite the strains and competing prior ities caused by the
pandemic. Ensuring full accountability for crimes committed by ISIL and upholding
the rights and needs of victims cannot be postponed. The United Nations will continue
to prioritize coordination and capacity-building support for Member States, including
16/17

21-00560

S/2021/98

in addressing evidentiary challenges and
rehabilitation and reintegration strategies.

developing

tailored

prosecution,

83. As a matter of the utmost urgency, I reiterate my call to Member States for the
voluntary repatriation, with the consent of relevant Governments and in line with
international law, of adults and children, including those with suspected links to ISIL,
stranded in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic. I appeal to Member States that have
already repatriated their nationals to share their experiences and partner with the
United Nations to support others in doing so.
84. The profound global impact of the pandemic will continue to transform the
human and operational environments for ISIL and other terro rist groups, as well as
their potential linkages to organized crime. It is imperative for Member States to
continue to monitor these developments, exchange information and collaborate to
ensure the maintenance of preventive measures. The pandemic has exace rbated
conditions conducive to terrorism, which widens the pool of vulnerable individuals
for ISIL to target. Decisive, concerted measures are needed to effectively counter the
use of the Internet and digital technologies for criminal purposes, including
incitement and financing of terrorism. Human rights-compliant systems must be in
place to detect and apprehend terrorists, including foreign terrorist fighters, given the
prospect of the resumption of large-scale international travel.
85. The United Nations system, working through the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact, will continue to partner with Member
States to support their implementation of the counter-terrorism resolutions of the
Security Council and the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. I call
upon Member States to use 2021, a year of milestones – marked by the twentieth
anniversary of Council resolution 1373 (2001), the fifteenth anniversary of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and its seventh biennial review – to renew
their commitment to multilateral action against terrorism under the auspices of the
United Nations.

21-00560

17/17
