UVITED NATlONS

TWENTY-EIGHTH

YEAR
th

MEETING: 17 MAY 1973
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l714)

. . . . . . . . . . . ,. . . , . . . , . . . . . . . . . . .

1

....,.,. ........ .... ....... .. ... ..,...

1

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
(a) Letter dated 8 May 1973 from the representatives of Guinea and kenya to
the President of the Security Council (S/10925);
(bl Second special report of the Committee established in pursuance of Security
Council resolution 253 (1968) concerning the question of Southern Rhodesia
(S/10920and Corr.1) . , . . , . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . , , . . . . , . . .

1

Adoptionoftheagenda

S/PV.1714

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Securily Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEEN

HUNDRED

AND FOURTEENTH

Held in New York on Thursday,
President: Mr. Rahmatalla ABDULLA (Sudan).

MEETING

17 May 1973, at 3.30 p.m.
Council. Please, Mr.President, be assured of the fullest
co-operation of my delegation during your tenure of office.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia.

3. I should like also to express the gratitude of my
delegation to my good friend the Ambassador of Peru for
the way he presided over the deliberations of the Council
last month. He had a difficult task, but he acquitted himself
with distinction.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l714)

4. The Security Council is once again meeting to discuss
the question of Southern Rhodesia. This particular meeting
stems from Council resolution 320 (1972), which requested
the sanctions Committee

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Question concerning the situatiqn in Southern
Rhodesia:
la) Letter dated 8 May 1973 from the representatives
of Guinea and Kenya to the President of the
Security councjl (S/l 0925);
(b) Second special report of the Committee established
in pursuance of Security Council resolution
253 (1968) concerning the question of Southern
Rhodesia (S/10920 and Corr.1).

“to consider the type of action which could be taken in
view of the open and persistent refusal of South Africa
and Portugal to implement sanctions against the illegal
r&me in Southern Rhodesia (Zimbabwe)“.
It is therefore fundamental that whatever action this
Council now takes should squarely meet the situation
which caused the Council last year to adopt that resolution-namely, it should take action vis-li-vis the posture of
non-co-operation and open defiance of Portugal and South
Africa.

The meeting was called to order at 4.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda

5. The situation in Southern Rhodesiaitself continues to
be grave. Opposition to the illegal white r&me has
increased-as was expected, for it would be unrealistic to
Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
expect a whole people, in the twentieth century, to suffer
(a) Letter dated 8 May 1973 from the representativesof
the scourge of colonialism in silent inactivity. Thus, since
Guinea and Kenya to the President of the Security
last December, the conflict has assumed serious dimensions,
Council (S/10925);
pointing to a situation threatening peace and security in
@I Second specialreport of the Committeeestablished
in
that part of Africa. Not that we take any comfort in the
pursuanceof Security Council resolution 253 (1968)
loss of life; we see it as unnecessary and a direct result of
concerning the question of Southern Rhodesia settler obduracy. The Smith rbgjme, however, instead of
(S/10920 and Corr.1)
learning from its mistakes, has met the situation by
sentencing captured freedom fighters to death and has now
1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
embarked on a programme of collective punishment under
taken by the Council at its last meeting that the reprewhich cattle has been seized, villages have been fined
sentative of Somalia be invited to participate in the
collectively and schools have been closed down and turned
discussion under the terms of Article 31 of the Charter, a
into interrcgation and concentration camps.
place has been reservedfor him in the Council chamber.
6. The Smith r&ime, not satisfied with what is happening
2. Mr. ODEROJOWI (Kenya): Permit me, Mr. President,
in its police State, has embarked on a foolhardy attempt to
to extend to you the most warm and hearty congratulations
convince the world that the African people of Rhodesia
on Your accession to the presidency of the Security
have now had second thoughts on the Anglo-Rhodesian
Council. Since you come, as you do, from the Sudan, a
“proposals for a settlement” of 1971 [see S/10405 of
good neighbour of my country and a country for which we
I December 19711, News has come out that the Rhodesian
have the highest respect, my delegation cannot but feel
regime may sh,ortly be giving the world proof of that
proud of yotir position. Your wisdom, good senseand long
change of attitude on the part of the African people of
experience in public affairs cannot but be an asset to this
Zimbabwe. Let it be said loudly and clearly that these
The ugendu wasadopted.

1

tion of chrome and other minerals. Furthermore, last
month Rhodesia was able to show the world that it has
been able to purchase American-made jet liners in spite af
the sanctions.

cheap tactjcs will convince no one and that whatever proof
the regime chooses to dish out to the world is destined for
the waste-paper basket.
7. The policy of economic sanctions against the illegal
Rhodesian regime dates from 1965, when this Council
urged all Member States to do their utmost to break all
economic ties with the illegal Rhodesian rCgime. That was
followed in 1966 by the imposition of collective enforcement measures under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations which made selective economic sanctions
mandatory. In 1968 this Council embarked on a total trade
boycott against the illegal r@,ime. However, all those
measures failed to bring down the illegal regime even
though on paper all doors appeared to have been closed.
The reasons for that failure are very clear. They are the
following,

13. Document S/l 0920 and Corr.1 contains a number of
recommendations, suggestions and proposals by the sane.
tions Committee. The recommendations and suggestions
that have been agreed to by all delegations are, in the view
of my delegation, only palliatives. I have already given three
methods by which the illegal regime escapes sanctions-that
is, through secret trading, the American Government’s open
trading and the open-door policy adopted by the South
African and Portuguese Governments. Our palliatives will
not be able to counter those three elements, and, what is
more germane, they will not even restrain or prevent South
Africa and Portugal from defying this Council. That is the
basic question at the heart of resolution 320 (1972). We
shall therefore find ourselves in a situation of built-in
failure.

8. First, a number of countries have been trading with
Rhodesia secretly. Some of them have been exposed, and a
quick reading of the fifth report of the sanctions Committeel gives a general view of the number of countries that
have been violating the United Nations sanctions.

14. In plain language, the agreed recommendations and
suggestions would be nothing but stop-gap measures designed to boost African morale and to exert a little more
pressure on the rdgime. It will serve no purpose of tllis
Council, of the international community and, above all, of
the people of Rhodesia to have hopes raised that at last
something really effective is being mounted, because that is
far from the truth. We could foresee, at the end of this
discussion by the Council, having a resolution that emom.
passesthe recommendations and suggestions that have been
agreed upon by all members of the Council. That could be
the very minimum we could expect from the Council. But,
as I have just stressed, it could be an exercise in futility.
because failure is built into that course of action. Hence,
African and other delegations proposed in the sanctions
Committee the adoption of meaningful measures thst
would have led to positive action. My delegation takes t&s
opportunity to express our appreciation for the support
lent us by many members of the Council-support that was
shot down by prominent Western members of the sanctions
Committee.

9. Secondly, the United States Government has through
legislative measures undertaken to break its international
commitments by openly importing chrome and other
minerals from Rhodesia.
10. Thirdly, the glaring weakness in the operation of
sanctions has, of course, been the open defiance by twd
other States Members of the United Nitions-namely
South
Africa and Portugal. Trade is openly conducted with the
illegal r6gime through South Africa and the Portuguese
colony of Mozambique, and the two Governments have
openly declared that they will continue to defy the
international community.
11. If sanctions were designed to topple the r&ime, it
must be admitted that the result has been a total failure.
However, sanctions do constitute a form of pressure on the
illegal r&ime, and it is widely acknowledged that it is
because of sanctions that there is a chronic shortage of
foreign exchange ln Rhodesia, But as time goes on the
usurpers of power in Rhodesia make the necessary adjustments. Initially, sanctions did constitute a threat to
Rhodesia, but by March 1971 we were able to read in the
Guardian an article by Peter Niesewand which stated that:

15. The proposals by African members and other sympathetic delegations can also be found in the document
before us. Kenya, together with the sister Republics of the
Sudan and Guinea, put forward a series of 24 proposals, all
designed to bring the severestpressure on the illegal regime.
We intend to pursue in this series of Council meetings fauc
line of action because any other course of action would, in
practical terms, amount to nothing.

“Regular tobacco buyers are back in Salisbury for the
first time since Rhodesia’s seizure of independence five
years ago, in defiahce of economic sanctions. Farming
sources told me that the buyers-mostly Americanswould attend the sales which start in secret here
tomorrow.”

16. The proposals put forward by African countries art?
really very mild. We do not seek to mount anything
dramatic. The following are just a few examples among Ue
proposals suggested by the African countries.

12. By May of the same year petrol rationing waslifted,
and today we have a situation in which a permanent
member of the Security Council is openly telling the world
that it is defying a decision reached by this Council-a
Council decision it had voted for-through the importa-

17. First, all States should limit their importation
of
minerals and agricultural products from South Africa,
Mozambique and Angola to the levels prevailing in 1965.
18. Second, all purchase contracts for goods from
WI
Africa and the Portuguese colonies should include a da&e
to the effect that if goods purporting to be from l.ftosc

1 official Records of the Security Council, Twenty-seventh Year,
Speciaf Supplement No. 2.

2

c

!~r~jkdXi

tUrl1 Out to be of Rhodesian origin, this would

automatically

28. We believe that the Committeeshould assumean

render the contract void.

activist role. lt should be involved in forestalling
sanctions
brea&Z, not merely in an analysisof breachescf sanctions,

19. Third, all States should require that sales contracts
between their countries and South Africa and Portuguese
TWdbieS for goods like aircraft, vehicles, machinery
and
spare parts should include a clause expressly forbidding any
resale to Rhodesia and that further sales would be
prohibited should the conditions be broken.

or Post mortems after the event, ashas beenthe case
hitherto. This can be doneby the Committeeexamining

ways and means of functioning in direct contact wi~ the
violators, cr Potential violators of sanctions, notably the
companies.The presentsystem,wherebyit goesthroU&
Governments,is hardly conduciveto yielding immediate

results, becausethe culprits are insulated by their Govern.

20. Fourth, Member States should pass legislation tc
forbid insurance companies from covering air flights into
and out of Southern Rhodesia.

meritsfrom a face-to-faceconfrontationwith the represen.
tativesof this Council,

29. The Committee should work in close collaboration

21. Fifth, Member States should enact legislation to create
imPedimcnts to the sale and transport of modesian goods
or of goods destined for Southern Rhodesia specifying that
no Shipping lines should carry any such goods and that
insurance companies should not insure such goods or ships
carrying them.

wjth non-governmentalorganizationslike the natjonal
chambersof commerce,trade unions and employers’

organizations whosesupport, information and comments it
might find invahrablein the discharge
of its functions.The
basicexperienceand day-to-day contactsof suchbodies
shouldbe positively utilizedto the enlightened
endssought
by the vastmajority of the internationalcommunity.

22, Sixth, Member States should legislate that insurance
companies attach warranties to all marine insurance contracts specifying that no goods of Southern Rhodesian
origin are covered by the contracts.

30. So muchfor the sanctions.But we still haveto find a

solution to the over-all Rhodesian situation. Here, the
responsibilitylies with the British Government.As my

Foreign Minister stated two months ago:
23. Seventh, the Beira blockade, which at the moment
covers tile importation of oil into Beira, should be extended
lo cover the port of Lourenqo Marques, and to cover all
commodities and products originating from or going into
Southern Rhodesia.
24. It is incredible

“Britain bearsa specialresponsibility.The time has
comewhenBritain mustdecisivelyexercisethisresponsibility, insteadof adoptinga policy of talkativeinaction,”

This Council is, of course,not now dealing with this aspect
of the question, but my delegation wishesto reiterate to

that such mild and realistic proposals

the United Kingdomthat short of its physicallymovingin

were turned down and some of them by none other than
the administering Power at whom the rebellion is directed.

and assertingits rights in the rebel colony, the least we can
expect of it is that the British Governmentshoulddeclare

25. My delegation seizes this opportunity to commend tc
the Council the resolution adopted by the Committee of
Twenty-Four at its 91 lth meeting on 27 April 1973.2 That
resolution, inter al/a, draws this Council’s attention to the

that:
(a] Therewill be no independence
beforemajority rule;
(b) The 1971Britishproposals
on Rhodesia
areno longer
on the table; they areasdeadasthe dodoandarebured;

Urgent need to widen the scope of sanctions against the

illegal rr5gime so as to include all the other measures
envisaged under Article 41 of the Charter and calls for the
priority need to impose sanctions against Portugal and
South Africa.

(c) The Umted Kingdomis willing and readyto initiate

steps for a constitutionalconferenceto be attendedby all
concerned,that is, by African political partiesand their
leaders,the United Kingdomas the administeringPower,
and the representativesof the settlers. The primary aim of
such a conferenceshouldbe to seekto acceleratethe
attainmentof majority rule in Rhodesia.

26. If I may, I should now like to focus attention cn the
sanctions Committee. As members of that Committee, we
all have first-hand experience of its working. The Committee, with the invaluable help of the Secretariat, and within
its limits, has done commendable work. The report which
we are now considering is clear evidence of the energy, time
and thought that has gone into the work of the Committee.

31. MY delegationwould like to expressthe hope that at
the end of this discussion,
we would be ableto comeout
with a concreteandmeaningfulProgramme
of action.If we
do not we would have doneour bit in pushingthe People
of &desja further into the abyssof racial hatred and
violence.

27. The Committee is now five years old and we could
now reasonably pause and take stock of its Performance
and learn from its experience. In any man-created institution, there is always room for improvement and the Kenya
delegation would like to share with Council colleagues-a
number of ways in which we could imProve on the
performance and effectiveness of the Committee.

32. witi these considerations
In mind, mY delegation
would like to introducetwo draft resohhns
on sanctrons
on behalf of the delegations
of Guinea,the SudanandOn
its own behalf, In introducingthesedraft resolutions,my
delegationthinks it is quite legitimatefor one to askwhy
two draft resolutionsare being introducedon the same

2 Officcial Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-eighth Session*

StrpplwnentNo. 23, chap.VII, para.22.

3

35. It is now tive years since the Security Council decided
to impose comprehensive mandatory economic sanctions
against the present regime in Southern Rhodesia, The
intention of the Council, as expressed in resolution
2.53 (1968) at that time, was to bring the rebellion in
Southern Rhodesia to an end. It can only be a matter for
profound regret that this has not yet been achieved,

subject. The answer to that is simple and straightforward.
In resolution 320 (1972), the Security Council charged the
sanctions Committee with two clearly stated tasks. In
paragraph4 of that resolution, the Committee was asked:
“to undertake, as a matter of urgency, consideration of
the type of action which could be taken in view of the
open and persistent refusal of South Africa and Portugal
to implement sanctions against the illegal regime in
Southern Rhodesia”.

36. It would be a mistake, however, to regard sanctions as
a failure. It is clear that the illegal regime is under
substantial pressure, both from the impact of sanctions and
from majority opinion within the country. Its protestations
about the popular support it enjoys have been fallible since
1965, and they have rung even more hollow since the
Pearce Commission made clear that the people of Southern
Rhodesia rejected the 1971 proposals for a settlement, and
in the light of events in the area since that time.

The Committee discussed this aspect of the question, but
was unable to reach an acceptable course of action. In fact,
there was a deadlock. Therefore, rather than let the whole
matter go by default, we have considered it our duty to let
the Council address itself to this matter. Hence, the draft
resolution on measures to counter South Africa’s and
Portugal’s defiance of sanctions [S/l 09271.That is the first
draft resolution that I am placing before the Council. The
delegation of Kenya, on behalf of the delegations of
Guinea, the Sudan and on its own behalf, has the pleasure
of recommending that this draft be adopted by the Council.

37. We can only regard the present situation in Southern
Rhodesia as cause for considerable disquiet. Recent actions
of the illegal regime continue to show complete indifference to the opinions of the majority of the people of
Southern Rhodesia and of the international community. I
am thinking in particular of racist legislation, of the
regime’s actions against Zambia, of its attack on the
freedom of the press and of the imposition of punishment
on whole communities. I am disposed to comment in
passing that such actions are not those of a Government
fully confident of its mastery of the situation.

33. In paragraph 5 of the resolution of last year that I
have just mentioned, the sanctions Committee was requested to examine all proposals and suggestions “for
extending the scope and improving the effectiveness of
sanctions against Southern Rhodesia”. The sanctions Committee, I am glad to say, did come, to some extent, to grips
with this aspect of the question and the consensusreached
in section III of its report is adequate testimony of this. But
this is not enough and we think consideration should also
be taken of some of the original African proposals which
were put before the Committee. My delegation, on behalf
of the delegations of Guinea, the Sudan and on its own
behalf, has the honour to submit to the Council a draft
resolution on extending the scope and improving the
effectiveness of sanctions [S/10928/. It will be noted that
in this draft some of the original African proposals have
been altered so as to meet the views that were expressedby
numerous delegations in the Committee. Essentially, therefore, this is a compromise text. It is not by any means the
best text we would have liked to submit and I am certain
that some delegations will rightly consider it diluted. We
would, however, appeal to all members of the Council to
give this draft their closest and most sympathetic consideration so that this Council may be said finally to have started
making sanctions meaningful and effective.

:

38. The peace and security of Africa and regard for the
rights of the majority in Southern Rhodesia require that
this rebellion be ended. For this reason, the Council has
been concerned for some time about the breaches of
sanctions that have clearly occurred on a large SC&,
sometimes openly, sometimes covertly. Those primarily
involved, as the Council noted in resolution 320 (1972), are
South Africa and Portugal.
39. However, they are manifestly not alone. Those States
which permit or turn a blind eye to trading by their
companies in goods coming from or going to Rhodesia must
also be regarded as in default of their obligations. hiy
delegation would appeal to their Governments to reflect
not only on the urgent need to secure a just settlement in
Southern Rhodesia but also on the importance to out
Organization of making the sanctions machinery work and
be seen to work.

34. Sir Laurence MCINTYRE (Australia): Mr. President,
let me first of all take this opportunity of welcoming your
accession to the presidency of this Council and of assuring
you of my delegation’s full confidence in your sound
judgement and wide experience. It is, I think, particularly
appropriate that you should be presiding over our discussion of this second special report of the sanctions Committee, which deals with matters of special significance for
the countries of Africa and also for all who uphold the
principles of justice and equality for all men. I must at the
same time convey the thanks and congratulations of my
delegation to our esteemed colleague, Mr. Perez de C&Bar
of Peru, for the firm, skilful and tactful manner in which he
conducted our proceedings throughout some difficult negotiations during the month of April.

40. The comparative obscurity in which some of these
countries have consistently broken sanctions is clearly
bound to come to an end. A feature of the report wo ate
considering, as for example in paragraphs 18 and 21, is the
desire of the Committee to expose them. My delegation
hopes that the prospect of exposure will provide th’e
stimulus they need to bear down harder on their companies. If that fails, the Council will inevitably find itself
having to consider more drastic steps.
41. Another feature of the recommendations made in rhe
report is the emphasis on technical aspects of the adm*tis.
tration of sanctions. It is clear that many States, and rhe
Committee itself, require more expert advice and assistamx.
My delegation, therefore, fully endorses the recommenda.
4

tions regarding the manual, the list of experts and the
strengthening of the Secretariat. In particular, my delegation believes that the Committee should proceed as a
matter of urgency, with the assistance of the Secretariat
expert and the experts nominated by States, to produce the
manual on documentation and clearing procedures, which
we believe will be an important and constructive step.

decisive measures against the racist rQime in Southern
Rhodesia, the voice of the African peoples who defend the
freedom and independence of the people of Zimbabwe.
48. It is perfectly natural that the consideration and
assessment by the Council of this report should be carried
out in close connexion with the study of the situation in
Southern Rhodesia itself. Indeed, the events in that country
give rise to serious concern.

42, There are other measures which the Committee has
recommended and which my Government fully supports.
There are still others which were considered but not
adopted by the Committee and some of which my
Government could have supported, But there is a limit to
what we can achieve by refinements of the scope and
administration of sanctions. What is needed is a greater will
to make them work and the necessary zeal to apply them as
they were meant to be applied. My Government is
determined to do all that it can to make sanctions against
the illegal r&me fully effective, and it has taken or is
taking what additional legislative and administrative actions
are necessary to this end. Racism and the denial of the
rights of the majority of the people of a country are
concepts which are altogether unacceptable to my Government and to the international community as a whole. They
are evils which we all have a solemn duty to eradicate, and
my Government and my delegation will spare no effort to
this end.

49. The illegal racist and anti-African regime in Salisbury
continues forcibly to impose upon the Zimbabwe people
the infamous “proposals for a settlement” with which the
Council is familiar; these were drafted some time ago
against the wishes of the people of Zimbabwe, in collusion
and jointly with the British Government and its official
representatives. Each one of us and the Security Council as
a whole is well aware that the people of Zimbabwe
indignantly rejected those proposals during the visit of the
Pearce Commission, despite all the efforts, intimidation and
terror instigated by Ian Smith’s regime.
50. Within Rhodesia there has been an increase in the use
of terror against the Zimbabwe patriots and in the
persecution of all who oppose the Smith r6gime. The Smith
regime has introduced and is continuing to introduce laws
and decrees designed to establish Fascist and racist practices
similar to those existing in South Africa and the Portuguese
colonies. Only the names have been changed. The South
African racists’ policy of setting up “Bantustans” is being
carried on in Southern Rhodesia under the title of
“provincialization”. The same restrictions have been placed
on the movement of Africans in white areas of Southern
Rhodesia as in South Africa. Draconian measures are being
taken against the African population of Southern Rhodesia
which supports the just and patriotic struggle for the
liberation of the Zimbabwe people.

43. The representative of Kenya has just introduced two
draft resolutions. My delegation will of course study them
with all possible and necessary care. We shall consult our
Government and in due course we shall be ready to offer
considered comments on them.
44. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translation from Russian): Mr. President, before turning to
the question on the Council’s agenda, permit me, on behalf
of the Soviet delegation, to congratulate you, the representative of an African State, on your assumption of the
responsible post of President of the Council. We congratulate you and sincerely wish you successin discharging the
complex, responsible and honourable duties of President.
For its part, the delegation of the USSR will co-operate
fully with you and will make every effort to ensure that the
Council completes the tasks before it under your presidency.

51. Members of the Council remember well the recent
discussion of the aggressiveacts of the Southern Rhodesian
racists against the sovereign African State of Zambia. That
discussion clearly showed that the racist Smith regime not
only continues to trample underfoot the rights of the
Zimbabwe people but even goes so far as to pursue a policy
of aggression against neighbouring independent African
States, particularly Zambia. This policy of aggression by the
Smith rdgime against neighbouring African States is similar
to the, policy of aggression being pursued by Israel against
neighbouring Arab States.

45. We should also like to take this opportunity to express
our feelings of gratitude and esteem to your predecessor,
the distinguished Permanent Representative of Peru, Mr. Pirez de Cuellar, the eminent representative of a Latin
American country who successfully and effectively presided
over the Security Council during the month of April.

52. The conditions in Southern Rhodesia itself and the
Smith regime’s policy of racism and aggression demonstrate, therefore, that the situation there is fraught with
serious consequences for the future and threatens to
aggravate the state of affairs in this region of Africa. This is
not surprising, for the Southern Rhodesian r&ime is closely
linked to its allies, the colonial and racist re’gimes of
southern Africa, the Republic of South Africa and Portugal.
The regime of the racists in Southern Rhodesia is aided and
supported above all by South Africa and Portugal. A sort of
triple alliance of racists and colonialists has been formed,
comprising South Africa, Portugal and Southern Rhodesia,
with a policy of racial hatred and aggression against all the
peoples of Africa and the sovereign African States. The

45. The Security Council has met to consider the second
special report submitted to it in pursuance of resolution
320 (1972) by the Committee on Southern Rhodesia.
47. The Soviet delegation listened with great interest to
the extremely detailed statement by the Permanent Representative of Guinea, Mrs. Jeanne Martin Cisse, the Chairman
of the Committee. She introduced the report to the Council
[I 712th meeting]. In her statement, we heard the voice of
the whole of Africa calling for the adoption of the most
5

anti-African spearhead of this sinister union is being
sharpened. There are in the territory of Southern Rhodesia
South African armed forces whose task is to crush the
national liberation movement of the Zimbabwe people.
They continue to remain there, despite the repeated
demands of the Security Council for the withdrawal of
these forces from Southern Rhodesia. These reactionary
and anti-popular r&imes are implementing their dangerous
plot against the peoples of Africa.
53. Against this background of increased activity by these
aggressive forces of racism in southern Africa, the growing
concern of the peoples of Africa and of all democratic and
peace-loving forces in the world at the situation in Southern
Rhodesia and in southern Africa is fully understandable.
54. At the meetings in April this year of the decolonization Committee, the Committee of Twenty-Four, in which
representatives of the Zimbabwe African People’s Union,
the Zimbabwe African National Union and the AMcan
National Council of Zimbabwe took part, serious concern
was expressed at the further deterioration of the situation
in Southern Rhodesia, Taking into account that concern
and reflecting the just demands of all Africa, the Committee of Twenty-Four, in a resolution adopted on 27
April,3 drew the special attention of the Security Council
to the urgent need to widen the scope of sanctions against
the illegal regime in Southern Rhodesia to include all the
measures envisaged under Article 41 of the Charter of the
United Nations. In view of the persistent refusal of South
Africa and Portugal to implement the Council decisions on
sanctions against Southern Rhodesia, the Committee of
Twenty-Four recommends that consideration be given to
the question of employing sanctions against Portugal and
South Africa themselves. The Council cannot disregard this
pressing demand from the Committee of Twenty-Four.

its goods on the foreign market
sanctions.

in violation

of tile

58. Where do these Southern Rhodesian goods go? Whg
buys them? As can be seen from the American press,
particularly The New York Times of 28 April, illegal trade
with Southern Rhodesia is carried on by a number of
Western countries which, as the paper states, violate the
Security Council’s sanctions on a large scale. The members
of the Council are also well aware from the reports of the
Committee on Southern Rhodesia that it has before it 143
cases of suspected violations of sanctions. This fact has
already been mentioned by previous speakers but it must be
pointed out yet again. The names of certain Western
countries have been mentioned in connexion with these
cases between 20 and 40 or more times. This obviously
gives food for thought, especially in view of the fact that
three caseswhich the Committee has already determined to
be direct violations of the sanctions do, in fact, involve
three Western countries: the Federal Republic of Germany,
Switzerland and Australia. This shows that, as the expression has it, there is no smoke without fire.
59. Finally, everyone knows and it has already been
pointed out by many speakers that despite and in violation
of the Security Council resolutions on sanctions against the
Southern Rhodesian racist r&me, one of the permanent
members of the Council, namely, the United States of
America, is importing from Southern Rhodesia chrome ore,
nickel, asbestosand other Southern Rhodesian products.
60. Such are the concrete facts about violation of the
Security Council’s sanctions against Southern Rhodesia.
61. All this contradicts and violates Council resolution
288 (1970), in which the Security Council criticized States
providing political, economic and other aid and support to
the racist, anti-African regime of Southern Rhodesia.
Further, in resolution 318 (1972), the Council condemned
all acts violating the Council’s pronouncements on saIEctions.

55. Five years ago, in its resolution 253 (1968), the
Security Council introduced compulsory sanctions against
Southern Rhodesia. Their purpose wasto put an end to the
racist Smith &ime so that the Zimbabwe people could
freely and independently govern their own country and
decide their own fate without any external interference.
The Council Committee on Southern Rhodesia was set up
to assist in the effective implementation of the decisions
and bring about a settlement of the Southern Rhodesian
question.

62. Because of its concern at the unsatisfactory implementation by certain Member States of its decisions on
sanctions, approximately seven months ago, in its resolution 320 (1972), the Council instructed the Committee on
Southern Rhodesia to consider these questions. Firstly, thi:
Committee was to prepare proposals for measures which
could be taken in view of the open and persistent refusal by
South Africa and Portugal to implement sanctions against
the illegal racist rCgime in Southern Rhodesia. Secondly, it
was to draw up recommendations designed to extend the
scope of sanctions against Southern Rhodesia itselr.
Thirdly, it was to prepare recommendations designed to
improve the effectiveness of sanctions already in force asa
result of Security Council decisions.

56. However, notwithstanding that decision by the Council and its subsequent enactments, the sanctions against
Southern Rhodesia are systematically being violated. They
are being violated both covertly, secretly, and overtly.
57. As is well known, the wide doors through which illegal
trade and economic co-operation with the racist Salisbury
regime are being carried on despite and in violation of the
Security Council resolutions are the ports and borders of
South Africa and the Portuguese colonies. The Government
of South Africa and the authorities in the Portuguese
colonial Territories, especially in Mozambique, issue false
certificates of origin for the Southern Rhodesian goods
they ship out, thus helping the Smith regime to disposeof

63. Members of the Council are well aware of these terms
of reference given by the Council to its Comtittec
on
Southern Rhodesia. Now the Committee has submittcrl a
report which we have all had the opportunity to study in
detail, the report which is currently being considered by the
Council.

3 Ibid.

6

1

64. During the Committee’s drafting of this report, the
USSR delegation insisted on the need to adopt the most
decisive measures against the racist regime in Salisbury as
well as against South Africa and Portugal, which openly
support that rt$ime in violation of Security Council
decisions. The USSR delegation proposed that, in view of
the fact that South Africa and the Portuguese colonialistdominated Angola and Mozambique are the main avenues
through which passesillegal trade with Southern Rhodesia
in violation of the Council’s sanctions, the Committee
should recommend that the Council decide that all States
should cease their purchases from the Republic of South
Africa, Mozambique and Angola of goods which are the
staple exports of Southern Rhodesia. We also proposed that
the Council institute an obligatory embargo on the sale to
South Africa and Portugal of petroleum and petroleum
products and that there should be a further obligatory
embargo that deliveries to South Africa and Portugal of all
types of’arms, military equipment, material and munitions
should be completely prohibited.

unsatisfactory results of the Committee’s work not only do
not counteract the continuing violation of sanctions but, on
the contrary, actually result in the concealment and
encouragement of the violators and enable them to continue their harmful practice of violating the Security
Council’s resolutions on sanctions. Thus, there are two sides
to the same coin.
70. The survival and continued existence of the foreign
minority’s racist regime in the African country of
Zimbabwe, which has an African population of 5 million, is
above all a direct consequence of the policy of connivance
with and protection of that regime on the part of certain
Western countries, particularly the “godfather” of that
regime, the United Kingdom. It is the United Kingdom
which bears the prime responsibility for the emergence and
continuing existence of the racist regime in South Africa.
Everyone knows that it is the United Kingdom which has
repeatedly protected and defended the Southern Rhodesian
regime in the Security Council by its veto. In recent years
alone, the United Kingdom has used its veto three times-in
1970, 1971 and 1972~in voting on just resolutions
defending the rights of the Zimbabwe people and has thus
prevented the Council from adopting the effective decisions
necessary to support that people and counteract the racists
who oppress it. It has thus embarked on a course of direct
support of the racist regime in Southern Rhodesia. The
United Kingdom representatives, as before, recommend the
typical British “calm and cautious” approach to the
solution of this problem. However, the pernicious effects of
this so-called calm approach are known to all. As the result
of such an approach, the Zimbabwe people has already
been suffering for almost 10 years under the yoke of a
racist regime. The British Foreign Secretary, Sir Alec
Douglas-Home, during his recent visit to African countries,
energetically advertised the idea of a “dialogue” between
the racists of Southern Rhodesia and representatives of the
Zimbabwe people, in order, as he put it, “to create an
atmosphere of agreement between the races”. However, the
Security Council and its members are well aware of the
failure of the famous “dialogue” between the United
Nations and the racists of South Africa which wasimposed
on the Council by certain friends of those South African
racists. It is easy to see that, by advocating the idea of a
dialogue with the racists in Southern Rhodesia, British
ruling circles are clearly trying to contribute to the
consolidation of the positions and the perpetuation of the
racist and aggressive Smith r&me; they are undermining
the resolutions on sanctions and other Council resolutions
concerning this regime and are pursuing a policy aimed at
strengthening the positions of all racist and colonialist
forces in southern Africa.

\iz65. With a view to extending the scope of sanctions
against Southern Rhodesia itself, the Soviet delegation
proposed that the Committee should recommend that the
Security Council decide that all States should, in accordance with Article 41 of the Charter, institute the complete
; interruption of radio, telephone, telegraphic, postal and all
other means of communication with Southern Rhodesia.
66. However, as a result of the position adopted by certain
members of the Committee, neither these effective measures nor the African proposals have been included in the
Committee’s recommendations to the Council.
67. In this respect, the USSR delegation would like to
point out, as it did in the Committee itself, that the
recommendations and proposals contained in this report
cannot be considered satisfactory, since they do not Fully
correspond to the mandate given to the Committee by the
Council. The scope of sanctions against Southern Rhodesia
has not been extended; the report does not contain any
recommendations for sanctions against South Africa and
Portugal, as was envisaged in the mandate given to the
Committee by the Council. Attention has already been
drawn to this fact by a number of previous speakers.
68. What is the reason for this failure to comply with the
Security Council’s decisions and who is responsible for it?
The main factor is that the positive proposals submitted by
African States and supported by the Soviet Union and a
number of other States in the Committee, while in
complete accordance with the mandate conferred on it,
encountered resistance and opposition on the part of the
representatives of certain Western countries. As a result, the
work of the Committee was not only considerably hampered but was, in fact, paralysed; it wasdeliberately given a
technical rather than a political and economic bias. The
positive proposals of the African States and the Soviet
Union were not adopted.

71. Whether you like it or not, let us be frank: this
anti-African regime is in fact also aided and abetted by
those countries which continue their illegal trade and other
relations with it.
72, The policy of encouragement for and strengthening of
the racist regime in Southern Rhodesia is contrary to
resolutions of the Security Council and other United
Nations bodies and is directed not only against the interests
of the Zimbabwe people but also against the interests of all
the peoples of Africa.

69. However, it is not merely a matter of difficulties in the
Committee’s work in these complicated conditions under
which it was unable to perform its task. There is a more
serious aspect to the problem. In point of fact, the sad and
7

73. The USSR delegation is resolutely opposed to such an
anti-African position and policy. We fir&y support the
implementation
of the United Nations decisions on
Southern Rhodesia and the immediate implementation
of
all Security c0Ut-d
resolutions concerning Southern
Rhodesia in order to end the violation of sanctions against
Southern Rhodesia. Specific proposals appropriate to this
end were, as we have already said, made by the Soviet
delegation in the Committee on Southern Rhodesia.

78. The Soviet delegation will study carefully the draft
resolutions just submitted by the distinguished Permanent
Representative of Kenya, Mr. Odero-Jowi, on behalf of the
three African members of the Council. We congratulate the
delegations of those three African States on the initiative
they have taken in preparing the draft resolutions. We shall
support
all measures aimed at putting an effective end tc
the violation of sanctions against Southern Rhodesia and at
extending sanctions to include South Africa and Portug&

74. In the opinion of the USSR delegation, it is only by
taking decisive action that the Council can contribute to
the achievement of the noble and humanitarian objectives
which the United Nations has set itself with regard to
Southern Rhodesia, namely, to put an end to the illegal,
anti-African racist regime in Southern Rhodesia and to
create the conditions necessary for the full exercise by the
Zimbabwe people of their lawful and indisputable right to
freedom, national independence and sovereignty. It is not
difficult to see that, in the light of these tasks, the
recommendations submitted by the Committee do not
correspond to those objectives and are, therefore, unsatisfactory.

79. Mr. JANKOWITSCH (Austria): Mr. President, it is a
pleasant duty, in taking the floor for the first time t&s
month, to offer you the warm wishes of the Austrian
delegation on assuming the presidency of the Council aad
to assure you of our full and loyal co-operation. As I had
the privilege of working with you on the Council’s mission
to Zambia, I not only am gratified to see you in the Ch&,
but also am convinced that the Council will profit greatly
from your experience, competence and wisdom.
80. Zet me also address a word of thanks to the outgoing
President, my friend Mr. Perez de Cuellar, for the admirable
way in which he acquitted himself of his duties as President
of this Council in the month of April, leading us safely out
of many a delicate and difficult situation.

75. Under these conditions, the USSR delegation has
serious doubts as to whether the Committee itself is not
serving by its action in this matter as a cover, a kind of
screen for certain countries and international imperialist
monopolies which systematically violate Security Council
decisions on sanctions against Southern Rhodesia; does it
not seem to be a United Nations body which merely creates
deceptive illusions and an external impression that the
Security Council is doing something in this matter, whereas
all that is actually happening is that time is being wasted
and there is opposition to the adoption by the United
Nations of truly effective measures to free the people of
Zimbabwe from the tyranny and terror of racist domination?

81. Turning to the second special report of the Committee
established in pursuance of Security Council resolution
2.53 (1968), concerning the question of Southern Rhodesia,
which is now before the Council, it is not only a matter of
courtesy but one of profound conviction to express, on
behalf of my delegation, gratitude and praise to the
Chairman of the Committee, Mrs. Jeanne Martin Cisse-she
is not with us this afternoon but her delegation will
certainly convey our thanks to her-for the way she led the
Committee, which is best reflected perhaps in her brillant
introduction of the report that she gave us last Monday
[I 712th meeting], an introduction in which we find
combined both her political engagement in the question as
representative of Guinea, a country which has led the fi&t
for African independence for many years, and also her
never-ceasing efforts to achieve the impartiality for which
she has been known ever since she presided over this
Council as its first woman President.

76. The Soviet Union, true to the Leninist principles of
giving all possible aid and support to oppressed peoples in
their just struggle against colonialism and racism for their
freedom and national independence, will continue to
support efforts aimed at the speediest possible elimination
of the racist r&gime in Southern Rhodesia so that the
people of Zimbabwe may be free and independent and their
country may become yet another sovereign African State,
the Republic of Zimbabwe.

82. The question facing the Council today is one on ~hhh
the Council, even though this may not always appear from
debates, stands basically united. The comprehensive mandatory sanctions, imposed on Southern Rhodesia by resolution 253 (1968), have been adopted unanimously, and
many of the subsequent resolutions have found the same
degree of unanimity and unity of purpose.

77. In decisions adopted at the April 1973 plenary
meeting of the Central Committee of the Communist Party
of the Soviet Union, it was stressed yet again that the
unaltered policy of the Soviet Union towards the countries
of Asia, Africa and Latin America which struggle for their
freedom, for the affirmation of their independence and for
economic and social progress is one of active support for
this just struggle. As before, the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, in opposition to imperialism, colonialism and
racism, will firmly follow in all its international policy
activities the socialist, Leninist line, will give support to
peoples defending their right to independence and national
progress and will pursue the policy approved by the
Twenty-Pour&
Congress of the Communist Party of the
Soviet Union to the effect that hot-beds of racism must be
universally boycotted and condemned,

83. The position of the Austrian Government on the
hposition of sanctions against Rhodesia has been elaborated in a statement I made before the Council on 31
January
of this year [1689th meeting]. But despite the
strong support this action of the Council has received, we
are, almost five years later, still a very long way from the
goal we have set ourselves. This appears to be all the more
serious as m imposing sanctions the United Nations for the
first time has used one of the strongest available means
provided for in the Charter, to change a situation that it
found both politically and morally intolerable. This is al
8

Ihe more
continued
%wIizatioll

as the rebellious rBgime in Salisbury has
to pursue policies which Members of this
in their vast majority reject emphatically.

Serious

84. Grave aspects of these policies have been mentioned in
he course of this debate and they include violations of
elcnlentarY human rights and open defiance of the internathud
community.
Ill seeking success for sanctions therefor% we have to examine two questions: firstly, how
effectively or how completely are they implemented; and
secondly, in what WRY has the implementation of sanctions
brc%ht us closer to our political goal: namely, majority
Nile in Southern Rhodesia?

go* On the other hand, Rhodesian goods, transiting
through these neighbouring territories, under false certifiCates of origin, still do not seem to be at a loss to find
buyers in nJanY parts of the world. Governments of
importhg countries have until recently often been unable
to keep track of the more and more sophisticated efforts to
evadesanctions regulations.
91. The second special report does therefore, in my
delegation’s view, attack precisely these problems when lt
recommends, in paragraph 10, thorough checking procedures for certain categories of goods coming from South
Africa, Mozambique and Angola, and, in paragraph 21,
recommends informing Governments of any discrepancies
in the statistics of their trade with South Africa, Angola
and Mozambique, which might be suggestiveof sanctions
evasionscommitted by their nationals,

85. In focusing attention during this debate on the more
technical aspects of sanctions, we must at the same time
never overlook the broader political context of the Southern
Rhodesian question, which indeed was brought to our
attention, in a most dramatic way, by Mrs. Cl&s introduction of the report.

92. We also welcome the intention of the Committee,
stated in section III of the report, to produce a manual on
these checking procedures or to establish a panel of experts
to assist Governments in their efforts to prevent sanctions
violations.

86. These questions, even if examined separately, are
obviously linked, because only if sanctions achieve economic effectiveness will political effectiveness follow. Also,
the economic effects of sanctions on Southern Rhodesia
leave much to be desired, largely because of many
lOOpllOles
in their application. There are indications that
their psychological, and consequently their political, impact
on the illegal rBgime in Salisbury has by no means been
negligible. They are thus the indispensable complement of
the heavy moral pressure that the international community
exercises through international
public opinion, but espec.
ially through the strong sense of moral indignation expressed by all the peoples of the world in solidarity with the
peoples of Africa.

93. In pursuing casesof suspected sanctions violations,
which do become increasingly complicated becauseof the
many detours the sanctions-breakingtrade takes, the role of
the Committee, in gathering and co-ordinating information
and making this information available to Governments
concerned, will be increasingly important.
94. The powersof the Committee will be further increased
by the proposal contained in paragraph 18 of the report,
which recommends the quarterly release of the names of
companies found guilty of sanctions violations and of
Governments which have not replied within the prescribed
period.

87. My delegation is convinced, consequently, that even if
we cannot hope for total effectiveness of sanctions in the
near future, and despite the numerous difficulties in their
practical application, comprehensive sanctions, as provided
for in resolution 253 (1968), still constitute one of the
principal means of pursuing the goal of political change in
Southern Rhodesia. We are further strengthened in this
optimism, moderate as it may be at the moment, bY the
recent decision of the Government of Zambia, a decision
for which it has received the deserved commendation of
this Council, to comply forthwith with sanctions decided
on by the United Nations.

95. The new powersand the new machinery thus offered
to the Committee will give it newand heavyresponsibilities
in the dischargeof its functions. It will be a thorough and
objective discharge of these functions which will ultimately
increase the usefulness,indeed the indispensability, of the
Qmmittee to the Council.
96. The present and future activities of the Committee,
which are also the most valuable assistanceof Governments
w&h carry ultimate responsibility in pursuing and stopping sanctions violations, deserve wide support, support
wl&h my delegation is prepared to give to the fullest
extent.

88. The Austrian delegation therefore particularly welcomes the second special report, which reflects for the first
time a much better understanding of the practical Problems
involved in the application of sanctions against Southern
Rhodesia.

97. In seeking the co-operation of Governments it seems
doubtful, however, if, for instance, a useful purpose can be
served by the early publicizing of details of a case of
suspected sanctions violations before either the guilt or
compEcity of a company has been established or “”
Government concerned has had the possibility of rePlYlng
to the case.

89. These problems arise, in the first Place, out of the
privileged geographical position of Southern Rhodesia,
which not only allows it to maintain trade relations withits
southern neighbours, who act in defiance of United
Nations sanctions policy, but also permits an even bigger
transit trade through their territories neighbouring south*
ern Rhodesia.

98. In recommending adoption by the Council of the
proposals contained in section III of the report, mY
delegation does not believe that will relieve us of all further
cOncern about the effectivenessof sanctions. Indeed, 1 find
9

myself in agreement with the representative of Somalia who
said that because of the slow and piecemeal imposition of
sanctions Southern Rhodesia has always been given enough
time to prepare for their evasion [I713th meeting/. It is
therefore of the utmost importance that the Committee can
act swiftly and competently for the effective implementation of its proposals. Moreover, the Council might wish to
recommend to the Committee that it continue its search for
further agreement on measures such as those contained in
section IV of the report. My delegation hopes it will be
possible to achieve compromise on a number of proposals,
and we for our part are ready to co-operate in that effort.
99. In order to accomplish those tasks a substantial
increase in the already overburdened staff of the Secretariat
assisting the Committee will be needed. I may recall in this
connexion that in the last year the Committee has held
three times as many meetings as it had in any comparable
previous period.
100. I have briefly outlined the views of the Austrian
delegation on the question before us and on more effective
implementation as proposed in the second special report,
which we regard as a most urgent matter. Many previous
speakers have pointed to the grave situation developing
almost daily in Southern Rhodesia and to the alarming
amount of tension in that region. Renewed efforts, in
which the administering Power, the United Kingdom, will
have to play an important part-in which we have repeatedly expressed faith-and also efforts by all other parties
concerned, and, last but not least, continued action by this
Council, will be necessary to achieve a political solution
corresponding to the wishes and desires of those principally
concerned-the
people of Southern Rhodesia, Zimbabwe.

105. The Chairman of the Committee, Mrs. Jeanne Martin’
C&B, with the assistance of other African representatives
and officers of the Committee and the co-operation of all
its members, has submitted a report which is the result of
hard and painstaking work. On 14 May 1973 / 1712th
meeting], the representative of Guinea gave us a clear and
precise explanation, which satisfied us completely. Accordingly my delegation will confine itself to making a few
brief comments.
106. The delegation of Panama considers that the rec.
ommendations and suggestions contained in section 111of
the report accord with the terms of reference of the
Committee, which seeks to avoid violations of sanctions to
be imposed on Southern Rhodesia in order increasingly to
isolate the illegal rkgime of Ian Smith. We should have been
very pleased had the report included more severe recommendations to counter the refusal of Portugal and South
Africa to comply with the sanctions against Southern
Rhodesia. My delegation agrees with the representative of
India, Mr. Sen, who yesterday [1713th meeting] expressed
the view that something more must be done so that
information media will more energetically draw the attention of world public opinion to the tragedy through which
the people of Zimbabive are living so that at the earliest
possible time we can achieve the more effective solidarity
of all peoples who are aware that the minority rkgime of
Ian Smith must be done away with as soon as possible.
107. Even though the economic sanctions against Southern Rhodesia are not as effective as we would have wished,
we are encouraged that daily broader and more drastic
measures are being taken in the right direction to exercise
pressure on the Ian Smith regime in order to obtain the
objectives sought-the prompt control of the Government
by the long-suffering people of Zimbabwe, who represent
the real majority of Southern Rhodesia.

103. Finally, as we have just been presented with two
draft resolutions by the representative of Kenya, allow me
in conclusion to say that at this stage I wish to thank him
and the delegations of Guinea and the Sudan for preparing
those drafts for the consideration of the Council and to
assure him that we shall promptly and carefully study the
texts put before us and not fail to comment thereon after
consultations with our Government.

108. In the course of the last five years the delegation of
Panama has not altered its line of conduct and has always
made its posit.ion clear, namely, to co-operate so that all the
sanctions against the usurper Government of Southern
Rhodesia may be effectively complied with. In view of its
anti-colonialist position, the Government of Panama takes
advantage of this opportunity to reiterate its condemnation
of all types of discrimination. We once again declare that
we are behind the people of Zimbabwe in their desire to
put an end as soon as possible to the illegal regime imposed
on the majority of Southern Rhodesia by a racist minority.
Accordingly, my delegation welcomes and warmly supports
the two draft resolutions submitted this afternoon by the
delegations of Guinea, Kenya and the Sudan. They were
brilliantly introduced and explained on behalf of the:
sponsors by the representative of Kenya.

102. Mr. BOYD (Panama) (interpretation from Spanish):
Mr. President, first of all I should like to express to you my
delegation’s satisfaction at having you preside over the
Security Council during the month of May. We who know
your qualities as a skilful and experienced diplomat are
convinced that you will guide our work efficiently and
successfully.
103. As Latin Americans, and because of the very special
ties between Peru and Panama, we wish to place on record
our appreciation of the correct and wise manner in which
Mr. PBrez de Cu6llar guided our work during April,

109. Sir Laurence MCINTYRE (Australia):
I believe i
heard the representative of the Soviet Union, in his
statement earlier this afternoon, include Australia among
countries in respect of which alleged cases of breach UT
sanctions either have been or are under study by the
sanctions Committee, I believe the Soviet representative:
may have been referring to sales of Australian wheat to
Southern Rhodesia which the Australian Government hr;ts
authorized in recent years on the basis that those s&s

104. We shall now give our views concerning the second
special report of the Security Council Committee established in pursuance of resolution 253 (1968) concerning the
question of Southern Rhodesia since today we are bound to
comply with resolution 320 (1972), which states the need
to examine and debate this report,
10

could be regarded as justified within the terms of Security
Council resolution 253 (1968) on humanitarian grounds. I
should just like to make it clear, so that the representative
of the Soviet Union should be fully aware, that the
Australian Government decided and announced at the end
of last year that no more Australian wheat would be sold to
Southern Rhodesia, and that as a consequence the case has
now
been closed by the Committee.
110. Mr. SAFRONCHUK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translation from Russian): The fact that Australia
has violated the resolution on sanctions against Southern
Rhodesia was mentioned in the Committee’s fourth
report;4 furthermore, as is clear from this document, which

I now have before me, the reference by Australia to
paragraph3 (d/ of resolution 253 (19683,in which mention
is made of “special humanitarian circumstances”, was
recognized by members of the Committee as not being
completely acceptable. Members of the Committee expresseddoubts as to the applicability of paragraph3 (d). At
the same time, we take note with satisfaction of the
statement by the representativeof Australia to the effect
that, as it appears from the Australian Government’s
statement at the end of last year, the Government of
Australia has halted the export of wheat to Southern
Rhodesia.We can only welcomethat statementand express
the hope that the other countries which are violating
sanctionsagainst Southern Rhodesiawill follow that good
example.

4 Official Records of the Security Council, Twenty-sixth Year,
Special Supplement Nos. 2 and 24.

The meetingrose at 53.5 p.m.

11

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
Nations
publications
throughout
the world,
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
your bookstore
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies aont en vente dam
les librairies
et les agences
depositaires
du mondc entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nations Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas estan en venta en Iibrerfas
y casas distribuidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte
a su librero
o dirfjase
a: Naciones
Unidas, Section de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

Price:

$U.S.

1 .OO (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

73-82151-November

1976*-7:*:$
