S/2019/393

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 May 2019
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia
I. Introduction
1.
The present report, submitted pursuant to paragraph 22 of Security Council
resolution 2461 (2019) and paragraph 55 of resolution 2431 (2018), provides
information on the implementation of those resolutions, including on the mandate of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) and the United Nations
Support Office in Somalia (UNSOS). The report covers major developments in
Somalia during the period from 14 December 2018 to 4 May 2019.

II. Political, security and economic overview
A.

Political developments
2.
The relationship between the Federal Government of Somalia and the federal
member states showed some signs of improvement following meetings held in
Garoowe on the margins of the inauguration ceremony of the new President of
Puntland, Said Abdullahi Mohamed Deni, on 26 January 2019. That was the first
meeting between leaders of the Federal Government and federal member states since
June 2018. The reconciliatory meeting did not yield immediate results, however, and
the political impasse between the Federal Government and federal member states
continued to hamper progress on key political and security processes in the reporting
period.
3.
Relations between the executive and legislative branches thawed when the
motion of impeachment against President Mohammed Abdullahi Mohammed
“Farmajo”, submitted on 9 December 2018, was withdrawn on 20 December.
Disagreements between the two houses of the Federal Parliament, however,
culminated in a resolution by the Upper House to suspend cooperation with the House
of the People (lower house) on 1 January, based on the claim that they had not been
consulted on the 2019 budget adopted by the lower house two days prior. To resolve
the impasse, President Farmajo requested that the two houses form a 10 -member
committee to recommend measures for resuming cooperative relations. Following a
two-week delay, President Farmajo officially opened the fifth session of the House of
the People on 27 March 2019.
4.
The electoral cycle for the federal member states began in South-West State,
where, on 19 December, Abdiaziz Hassan Mohamed “Lafta Garen” was elected
President. His election followed the arrest of the former deputy leader of Al -Shabaab

19-07748 (E)

160519

*1907748*

S/2019/393

and South-West State presidential candidate, Mukhtar Robow, which led to violent
protests resulting in the deaths of civilians. After being sworn in on 16 January as the
second President of South-West State, President Lafta Garen launched reconciliation
talks with Mr. Robow’s Leysan sub-clan. At the time of writing, an agreement to pay
compensation to families of individuals killed during the violence had been reached,
but broader issues, in particular those pertaining to the release of Mr. Robow, who is
still in custody, and to power-sharing, remained unresolved. The seven-member
South-West State fact-finding committee appointed to investigate pre-election
violence issued its report in February, in which it concluded that four people had been
killed, including a member of the South-West state Assembly. The Federal
Government also conducted an investigation, led by the Ministry of Internal Security,
the findings of which have yet to be released. On 27 February, the Assembly approved
President Lafta Garen’s Cabinet, with 25 ministers and 25 deputy ministers, including
three women.
5.
In Puntland, the electoral process for the 66 new members of the Puntland state
Assembly was concluded on 31 December 2018. Said Abdullahi Deni was elected as
the fifth President of Puntland on 8 January 2019. While both processes resulted in
the peaceful transfer of power, some concerns were raised by the public about a
perceived lack of inclusivity and the fact that only one woman was elected to the
Assembly.
6.
The Prime Minister, Hassan Ali Khayre, visited Kismaayo from 11 to 14 March
and met with the President of Jubbaland, Ahmed Mohamed Islam “Madobe”, to
resolve the continuing differences between the Federal Government and Jubbaland.
The two leaders discussed the Jubbaland election preparations, cooperation between
the Federal Government and Jubbaland, support for federal member state security,
budget transfers and the involvement of the Federal Government in state -level
politics. President Madobe reciprocated with a visit to Mogadishu on 25 March for
meetings with President Farmajo to further discuss those issues; both side s reportedly
reached an agreement on the resumption of cooperation. Separately, there was
progress towards the holding of Jubbaland state elections, with the appointment and
approval of the members of the Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission
on 23 and 24 March, respectively. The direct appointment of Commission members
by President Madobe has been criticized, however, by opposition politicians, who
have demanded a more transparent and inclusive process. The timeline for the
regional assembly selection process has yet to be announced.
7.
In Galmudug, the state electoral calendar continued to be disputed. The Federal
Government, supported by political opponents of the Galmudug state administration,
who are based in Cadaado, asserted that elections are due to take place in July 2019,
while the President of Galmudug, Ahmed Duale Gelle “Haaf”, insisted on their being
held in December 2021, based on a four-year term beginning from the signing of the
power-sharing agreement between Ahl al-Sunna wal-Jama‘a and the Galmudug state
administration. Furthermore, the Galmudug state administration continued to protest
both the involvement of the Federal Government in Galmudug politics and the
absence of budgetary support. On 2 March, in Cadaado, tensions between t he Federal
Government and Galmudug heightened, when National Intelligence and Security
Agency personnel attempted to take control of security over the Galmudug
presidential compound premises from local clan militias. Upon the intervention of a
group of elders, the militias vacated the area and yielded control to the Agency.
8.
In HirShabelle, relations between the executive and the legislative branches
improved, following the appointment of some Assembly members as ministers.
Meanwhile, the state administration raised security concerns over the drawdown of
Burundian troops from the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), in line
with resolution 2431 (2018), which commenced in Shabelle Dhexe in February. In
2/18

19-07748

S/2019/393

March, Somali National Army personnel in Shabelle Hoose and Shabelle Dhexe
temporarily abandoned their positions in protest over a lack of salary payments. The
HirShabelle regional Assembly approved the state’s second budget, projected at
$12 million.
9.
The House of Elders (Guurti) of the “Somaliland” Parliament extended the term
of office of the House of Representatives for the fifth time, owing to unresolved
differences between the parties in relation to the National Independent Electoral
Commission. The Guurti decided that the parliamentary elections would be held on
12 December 2019 instead of 27 March 2019; however, a further delay cannot be
excluded.
10. Relations between Somalia, Ethiopia and Eritrea continued to be strengthened.
Relations with Djibouti also saw improvement, following a State visit by the
country’s President, Ismaël Omar Guelleh, to Mogadishu on 16 March 2019.
Relations between Kenya and Somalia deteriorated, however, and the maritime
territorial dispute between the two countries was revived following a conference on
oil and gas exploration, held in London on 7 February 2019. On 16 February, the
Government of Kenya recalled its ambassador to Somalia, following claims that the
Federal Government of Somalia had allegedly auctioned oil and gas blocks in
the contested territorial waters. The Federal Government of Somalia publicly refuted
those allegations, stating that the purpose of the conference had been to share seismic
data and not to auction oil and gas blocks. On 6 March, Pr esident Farmajo met in
Nairobi with the President of Kenya, Uhuru Kenyatta, in the presence of the Prime
Minister of Ethiopia, Abiy Ahmed. Following a meeting between the foreign ministers
of Kenya and Somalia, held in Nairobi on 3 April, both sides expres sed their strong
commitment to a normalization of relations and stated that, as a first step, their
respective ambassadors would return to their diplomatic postings.
11. On 1 January, the Somali Ministry of Foreign Affairs notified my Special
Representative for Somalia, Nicholas Haysom, that he was no longer welcome in
Somalia. On 4 January, I issued a statement expressing deep regret at the decision of
the Federal Government and announced my intention to appoint a replacement. On
5 January, the members of the Security Council also expressed their regret at the
decision of the Federal Government. The Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, Rosemary DiCarlo, visited Somalia from 29 to 30 January to
discuss how to reset relations following the decision by the Federal Government. At
the conclusion of her visit, the Federal Government and the United Nations issued a
joint statement indicating that they had discussed practical measures for UNSOM and
the Federal Government to work more closely together and that they were looking
forward to deepening their longstanding partnership.

B.

Security developments
12. The security situation remained volatile during the reporting period. Al -Shabaab
continued to be the main perpetrator of attacks against government facilities,
government officials and security forces, as well as popular restaurants and hotels.
March and April witnessed a significant increase of attacks in Mogadishu, where
incidents involving improvised explosive devices occurred al most every day.
Incidents involving suicide vehicle-borne, under-vehicle and remote-controlled
improvised explosive devices, as well as mortar attacks and targeted assassinations,
continued.
13. In March alone, there were 77 attacks using improvised explosive devices across
the country. That was the highest number in any single month since 2016. The
majority of incidents were reported in Mogadishu and in the Shabelle Hoose, Juba

19-07748

3/18

S/2019/393

Hoose and Gedo regions. In Mogadishu, there were 28 incidents involving improvi sed
explosive devices, including two attacks by suicide vehicle -borne improvised
explosive devices, two attacks by other vehicle-borne improvised explosive devices
and one complex attack.
14. There was also a notable increase in mortar attacks, which demon strated
Al-Shabaab’s improved capacity to hit strategic targets with precision and accuracy.
On 1 January, seven 81 mm mortars were launched at the United Nations compound
in Mogadishu, resulting in injuries to three United Nations staff members and
consultants. On 15 February, there was a mortar attack at a military base of the United
States of America in Baledogle, Shabelle Hoose. On 2 March, Al -Shabaab launched
five mortar rounds into Villa Somalia.
15. Al-Shabaab continued to carry out attacks by suicide vehicle -borne improvised
explosive devices. These included a complex attack against a forward operating base
of the national security forces at Bar Sunguuni in Kismaayo, Juba Hoose, on
19 January, and the targeting by suicide vehicle-borne improvised explosive devices
of the Daljirka Dahsoon monument near Parliament in Mogadishu, on 29 January.
Al-Shabaab also continued to conduct complex attacks in Mogadishu, including the
attack on 28 February against the Makkah al-Mukaramah hotel and the attack against
the ministries of public works and labour in Mogadishu on 23 March, resulting in the
killing of the Deputy Minister of Labour, Saqar Ibrahim Abdalla.
16. There was an increase in security operations and a large number of air strikes
targeting Al-Shabaab training bases and assembly points. Those air strikes were
deemed to have degraded Al-Shabaab’s operational capability and freedom of
movement. They have also led, however, to increased Al-Shabaab movement into
urban centres, in particular Mogadishu, where their forces are less likely to be targeted
from the air. There was a decline in air strikes in March, when nine airstrikes were
recorded, which was a 62 per cent decrease from the 24 incidents the month b efore.
As at 4 May, eight airstrikes have been reported.
17. An overall decline in activities by pro-Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) elements has been recorded in the past two months. Clashes between pro -ISIL
elements and Al-Shabaab, however, were reported in the Bari region since February.
In Shabelle Dhexe, Al-Shabaab sought to take advantage of national army protests
over salary payments by occupying positions temporarily abandoned by the army.
18. On 7 April, fighting between “Somaliland” forces and a local militia, reportedly
supported by Puntland, resulted in an unknown number of fatalities. The incident
demonstrated the continued volatility in the Tukaraq area. Tensions also increased in
the disputed Sanaag region following activities by a group of “Somaliland” troops,
which had defected to Puntland. Community elders in Sanaag commenced
preventative mediation efforts to avert violent escalation.

C.

Economic developments
19. Efforts by the Federal Government to mobilize domestic resources have resulted
in increased revenue performance. The total reported domestic revenue collected
between January and November 2018 amounted to $161 million, compared with
$142.6 million in 2017. That increase was driven by continued efforts to broaden the
tax base; enhanced compliance, including through the newly e stablished large-andmedium-taxpayers’ office in June 2018; and improved collection capacity.
20. Large segments of the population, however, remain vulnerable to poverty and
food insecurity. In its forthcoming poverty and vulnerability assessment, the Worl d
Bank estimates that 77 per cent of the population is below the international extreme

4/18

19-07748

S/2019/393

poverty line of $1.90 per day. Poverty is especially deep and widespread in rural areas
and in internally displaced persons’ settlements. Almost 90 per cent of households
lack access to basic services, such as education and water and sanitation, with the
highest levels of deprivation found among nomadic populations. Somali households
continue to be vulnerable to shocks, including natural disasters, epidemics, personal
injury or death. Lack of education, overdependence on agricultural income, high
unemployment levels, low level of wealth and large household size contribute to the
high vulnerability of households to such shocks. Around 15 per cent of households
receive remittances, which are estimated at $1.3 billion per year, or approximately 20
per cent of gross domestic product and which play a critical role in reducing poverty
in those households and buffering them from shocks.
21. Following its third staff-monitored programme, conducted from May 2018 to
April 2019, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) reported on the Federal
Government’s strong commitment to ongoing capacity-strengthening and its efforts
to improve domestic revenue mobilization, in satisfying the program me’s
implementation requirements. IMF also urged rapid implementation of structural
changes to the Central Bank of Somalia and of anti-corruption and accountability
efforts, including the passage of relevant legislation. During a high -level round-table
discussion on Somalia held on 12 April, in Washington, D.C., during the Spring
Meetings of the World Bank and IMF, the country’s key creditors and donors
recognized the accelerated progress Somalia has made, especially in reforming its
economic institutions, bringing the decision-point stage for relief under the Heavily
Indebted Poor Countries Initiative within sight. All key creditors expressed their
intention to support the debt relief process for Somalia, and participants stressed that
the process remained milestone-based. The appointment of the Governor of the
Central Bank on 4 March was also a positive step towards ensuring that Somalia meets
its economic reform goals.

III. Support for peacebuilding and State-building efforts
A.

Establishment of a functional federal State

1.

Deepening federalism
22. While the status of Mogadishu in the federal architecture is yet to be addressed,
the Banaadir regional administration initiated consultations on the development of a
five-year regional development plan for the city of Mogadishu and the Banaadir
region. Representatives of all 17 districts of the region and officials from the regional
administration gathered on 16 February to start mapping needs and priorities of the
residents of the Banaadir region from 2019 to 2024.

2.

Constitutional review
23. There was improved cooperation between the three entities tasked with the
review of the Provisional Federal Constitution, namely, the Joint Parliamentary
Constitutional Review Oversight Committee, the Independent Constitutional Review
and Implementation Commission and the Ministry of Constitutional Affairs, which
met in Mogadishu from 4 to 7 February. In closing the meeting, the Prime Minister
welcomed the progress made in the constitutional review process and emphasized that
the review remained a priority of the road map on inclusive politics. Following the
meeting, the three entities issued a communiqué reiterating their commitment to
cooperation and stressed the need to avoid political disputes that could jeopardize the
constitutional review process and the need to fast-track the issues that require political
negotiations.

19-07748

5/18

S/2019/393

24. The technical review of 9 of the 15 chapters of the Provisional Federal
Constitution was completed by the Review and Implementation Commission of the
Constitution and the Oversight Committee, and 5 chapters were presented to the
House of the People.
25. Outstanding issues in the review process include the delineation of powers,
resource-sharing, the system of governance and the status of Mogadishu. A general
consensus has been found among the key players on timelines and sequencing, in
order to complete the review as an inclusive process before the end of 2019. The
Federal Parliament is expected to debate the reviewed chapters in a phased manner,
while the final adoption of the constitution by Parliament will apply to the entire
document. During a conference held in Kismaayo from 8 to 10 April, technical
representatives of both levels of government and the constitutional review
implementation bodies agreed to roll out a national awareness -raising campaign on
the chapters already reviewed. At the meeting in Kismaayo, leaders of the Fede ral
Government and federal member states were also urged to reach political agreements
on outstanding constitutional matters. Following the passing of the Minister of
Constitutional Affairs, Abdirahman Hosh Jibril, in March, the former Minister of
Labour and Social Affairs, Salah Ahmed Jama, was appointed as the new Minister
of Constitutional Affairs and officially inaugurated on 15 April.
3.

Prevention and resolution of conflicts
26. On 30 December 2018, the Ministry of the Interior, Federal Affairs and
Reconciliation completed the first draft of the national reconciliation framework,
which was endorsed by the Cabinet on 21 March 2019. The objective of the
framework is to end communal violence and re-establish trust among Somali
communities. From 19 to 21 February, the Federal Government hosted a national
validation conference attended by national, federal member state, regional, civil
society and community representatives. In an informal meeting with the Federal
Minister of the Interior, Federal Affairs and Reconciliation on 27 March, the “group
of friends of reconciliation” pledged capacity-building support for the national
reconciliation process. On 16 and 17 April, the Ministry hosted a workshop , together
with representatives of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP),
UNSOM and the Peacebuilding Fund Coordinator from the Office of the Deputy
Special Representative of the Secretary-General (Resident Coordinator/Humanitarian
Coordinator) for Somalia, on the implementation of the reconciliation process, at
which milestones, strategies and timelines for the process were discussed.
27. On 20 February, the President of “Somaliland”, Muse Bihi Abdi, held talks with
Prime Minister Ahmed in Addis Ababa, where President Bihi committed himself, in
his capacity as “President of Somaliland”, to strengthening working relations with the
Federal Government of Somalia. The Federal Government issued a statement
welcoming the development. While there has been no progress on the Somalia “Somaliland” dialogue, a number of international partners have offered to support
talks.

4.

Support for universal elections
28. The Federal Government has committed itself to presenting the electoral legal
framework to the Federal Parliament during the March–June session. The draft
electoral bill was originally scheduled to be adopted in December 2018. The Council
of Ministers approved the bill and the amendments to the Political Parties Act on
2 May 2019. Both are expected to be submitted to the Federal Parliament for review.
29. The National Independent Electoral Commission continued with preparations
for voter registration in the first quarter of 2020 and universal elections in 2020 and

6/18

19-07748

S/2019/393

2021 by expanding its subnational structure. The Commission is in the process of
establishing field offices in all federal member states, in Kismaayo, Baidoa, Garoowe,
Jawhar and Dhuusamareeb. To support the presence of the Commission in the federal
member states and the building of its technical capacity, UNSOM has deployed
electoral officers to those locations, with the exception o f Dhuusamareeb. The staff
will focus on providing technical advice for the preparation of voter registrations. The
Commission is currently in the process of finalizing the revision of its five -year
strategic plan. As at 4 May, the Commission had provisionally registered 50 political
parties.
30. In March, the Electoral Commission decided to use biometric voter registration.
The Commission continued to identify potential voter registration sites in Mogadishu
and in the federal member states, which will be verified on the ground over the course
of 2019.
31. The Federal Ministry of Internal Security has yet to officially nominate
members of an electoral security task force. The task force is expected to consist of
national and international members who will plan and oversee the implementation of
the arrangements to secure the electoral process in 2020 and 2021.

B.

Cross-cutting issues

1.

Gender equality and the empowerment of women
32. On 20 January 2019, an annex to the national gender policy on the economic
empowerment of women received validation at a workshop convened by the Ministry
of Women and Human Rights Development and attended by about 40 representatives
of federal ministries and women’s organizations. From 29 to 30 January, the Women
in Global Health organization held a conference in Garowe – its first-ever in
Somalia – with support from the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA). Women
in Global Health is a movement that promotes gender equality in global health
leadership.
33. In observance of International Women’s Day, the United Nations ran an internal
month-long awareness-raising campaign and supported commemorative activities in
Mogadishu and the federal member states. UNSOM supported a round-table
discussion, organized by the Somali Women’s Leadership Initiative and held in
Mogadishu on 3 March, on establishing a gender quota in the electoral law to secure
a minimum of 30 per cent seats for women in the 2020 elections. So me 21 prominent
women’s leaders, including Members of Parliament, the Chairperson of the National
Independent Electoral Commission and civil society leaders, attended the round -table
discussion and called for approval of the pending electoral reform bill, which would
enshrine the principle of a 30 per cent gender quota in future national legislation. On
11 March 2019, with the aim of strengthening the role of women in promoting and
sustaining peace at the community level, the Mudug Women Peace Committee car ried
out peace outreach activities in one village in northern Gaalkacyo and one in southern
Gaalkacyo.
34. During a convention held from 4 to 6 March and attended by over 300 women,
the Ministry of Women and Human Rights Development delivered a women ’s charter
demanding the full inclusion of women across the political, economic and social
spectrum in Somalia, including, in particular, a 50 per cent quota for Somali women
in government.

19-07748

7/18

S/2019/393

2.

Youth empowerment
35. The United Nations supported another national youth conference, held in
Mogadishu on 26 and 27 December and jointly organized by the Federal Ministry of
Youth and Sports and the Somali National Youth Council.
36. Between 16 and 26 February 2019, the Youth Council continued its preparations
to hold its first-ever national elections later in the year, by conducting a 10 -day
training course for its members, who represent all federal member states. Those
elections are planned to take place in the second half of 2019.

C.

Development coordination
37. The Federal Government began consultations with federal member states to
inform the development of Somalia’s ninth national development plan, covering the
period from 2020 to 2024, so as to ensure that the new plan would be aligned with
the interim poverty reduction strategy paper process. The consultations were intended
to provide a forum for participation by all major stakeholders, including civil society
organizations, private sector representatives, women’s groups, youth groups and
minorities, as well as traditionally less developed groups, such as internally displaced
persons. The preparation of the development plan for 2020–2024 is one of the
benchmarks of the third IMF staff-monitored programme.
38. A new portfolio of peacebuilding projects supported by the Peacebuilding Fund
was launched on 18 February, at an event in Mogadishu co -chaired by the Minister of
the Interior, Federal Affairs and Reconciliation and the Deputy Special Representative
of the Secretary-General. The five new projects are focused on key peacebuilding
priorities relating to national reconciliation, mass displacement and stabilization. The
portfolio is jointly implemented by the International Organization for Migration
(IOM), UNDP, the United Nations Human Settlements Programme, th e Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and UNSOM, in close partnership
with the Federal Government, the federal member states and civil society partners.
39. In January, the Federal Government, supported by the United Nations, finali zed
its first national communication on climate change. The national communication is a
first-ever analysis of the impacts of the climate change and inventory of greenhouse
gas emissions from key sectors in Somalia. In the national communication, the
Federal Government established the priority needs for vulnerability assessments and
climate risk reduction, adaptation and mitigation. The communication has been
submitted to the secretariat of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change. The Federal Government is also preparing a national climate change policy,
to be adopted in 2019.

IV. Comprehensive approach to security
A.

International coordination
40. Technical-level work continued within the framework of the comprehensive
approach to security, including the holding of several strand meetings , to align
support provided through the comprehensive approach among the Federal
Government, the federal member states and partners. Meanwhile, the Federal
Government started comprehensive planning with international partners for joint
operations in Shabelle Hoose.

8/18

19-07748

S/2019/393

B.

Strands of the comprehensive approach to security
Strand 1
Enabling the operations of the African Union Mission in Somalia and ensuring
its effectiveness
41. UNSOS continued to provide logistical support to AMISOM personnel
deployed in 78 locations in southern Somalia. The repatriation of 1,000 Burundian
troops mandated under Security Council resolution 2431 (2018) commenced on
21 February and was completed on 5 April. In support of the Somali transition plan,
UNSOS assisted in the relocation of 457 Burundian troops from the military academy
in Mogadishu. Of those, 200 were moved to Maslah, 20 km east of Mogadishu, while
the remainder were relocated to Jawhar and a forward operating base in sector 5.
42. Following its adoption at the twenty-seventh meeting of the AMISOM Military
Operations Coordination Committee, held in Addis Ababa on 30 November 2018, th e
AMISOM strategic concept of operations for the period 2018–2021 was endorsed by
the African Union Peace and Security Council on 13 February 2019 . A joint African
Union-United Nations review of AMISOM, in accordance with resolution 2431
(2018), was conducted between 4 and 19 March 2019, to assess progress on the
implementation of Somalia’s transition plan and AMISOM reconfiguration in support
and provide recommendations on the way forward, as detail ed in my recent letter to
the members of the Security Council (S/2019/388).
43. UNSOS continued to provide logistical support to 10,900 national army
members on joint operations with AMISOM. The Federal Gove rnment has yet to
provide guidance on adjusting that support to include up to 10,900 members of the
Somali security forces, who are formally part of the national security architecture.
UNSOS supported the Federal Government-led biometric registration exercise with
special flights from Mogadishu to 12 locations in February, to review the number of
Somali security force members eligible for UNSOS support at each location. In
preparation for joint operations by the national army and AMISOM against
Al-Shabaab, UNSOS provided logistical support, including food rations, fuel, water
and first aid kits. UNSOS continued to support AMISOM and the national army in
the implementation of the transition plan to open and secure the main supply routes
and population centres in Marka and Shalaamboot in Shabelle Hoose, South-West
State.
44. During the reporting period, the United Nations Mine Action Service trained a
total of 4,246 AMISOM troops in improvised explosive device search capacity, threat
mitigation and explosive ordnance disposal. The Service also provided canine teams
to AMISOM to search vehicles, luggage and infrastructure. As a result, 26 improvised
explosive devices were safely identified along the main supply routes, of which 17
were destroyed by AMISOM teams trained and mentored by the Service. A mine
action team deployed to the military academy cleared 215,153 m 2 of land, removing
438 remnants of war.
Strand 2
Strengthening Somali security institutions
45. The Code of Conduct and the organizational structure of the national army were
signed into law in January, and the biometric registration of troops was completed on
3 March 2018. AMISOM and the United Nations also supported the operational
readiness assessment of regional forces resulting in 19,683 indi viduals registered in
Jubbaland, Galmudug, South-West State and Puntland.

19-07748

9/18

S/2019/393

46. On 31 December 2018, the House of the People approved the draft bill on
pension and gratuities for members of the Somali armed forces and security services
and submitted it to the Upper House for endorsement. In December, the Somalia
Maritime Administration Department, within the Ministry of Ports and Marine
Transport, became fully operational, and, on 16 January 2019, the Somali Port
Authority was re-established. In April, the Federal Government signed the joint
security sector governance programme, which is intended to enhance civilian
oversight of the reforms of the security sector at the national and federal member state
levels within a framework of rule of law and respect for human rights.
47. The technical committees for the implementation of the country’s new policing
model in HirShabelle and Jubbaland updated their state policing priorities for the
period 2019–2020. The joint police programme, intended to support the Federal
Government and federal member states in implementing the model in accordance with
those priorities, currently operates on $50 million in funding. The programme
supports the training of 700 police officers in Galmudug, the recruitment and training
of 400 officers in South-West State and 600 officers in Jubbaland and the recruitment
of 800 officers in HirShabelle. The joint AMISOM -United Nations training of 200
police recruits in Jawhar, funded by the European Union, concluded in February. The
graduates were the first state police officers to be deployed in HirShabelle. Planning
is underway to support the strengthening of security checkpoints and the control of
potential mortar launch sites under the Mogadishu security plan supported by the
programme. Recommendations stemming from a sub-working group meeting on
strand 2.B (police), held on 19 March and chaired by the Minister of Internal Security,
included the development of a strategic plan on border patrol and immigration police
and the establishment of branches of the Criminal Investigation Department in the
federal member states.
48. On 23 February, the first phase of the Mogadishu prison and court complex was
handed over to the Federal Government, following the signing of a memorandum of
understanding on 3 February that included a landmark agreement that nobody
detained or convicted at the complex would be executed. The Federal Minister of
Justice and Judiciary Affairs and the co-chairs of the working group on strand 2.C
(rule of law and justice) convened a meeting on 26 February, attended by over 60
participants, including representatives of all federal member states, at which the
Minister noted achievements made, including the establishment of an anti -corruption
unit within the Ministry.
49. The Mine Action Service trained community-based clearance teams, which
carried out activities in 15 communities, verified an area 1,112,894 m 2 in size and
safely removed 1,034 remnants of war. The Service also deployed community liaison
officers across liberated districts and delivered explosive hazard risk education to
11,647 local community members. Some 73 per cent of the beneficiaries of the latter
programme were children.
Strand 3
Stabilization, community recovery and extension of State authority
and accountability
50. On 29 and 30 January 2019, the Ministry of the Interior, Federal Affairs and
Reconciliation, together with counterparts from federal member states and the
Banaadir regional administration, initiated the planning of the second phase of the
support for stabilization project. The second phase of the project includes
approximately $2 million aimed at strengthening institutional capacity and supporting
community reconciliation initiatives and local governance. A stabilization meeting
was held on 28 January, including representatives of all federal member states.
Discussions were focused on the need to increase the tempo of stabilization activities
10/18

19-07748

S/2019/393

and address issues concerning the slow progress on the formation of district councils.
From 26 to 28 February, the Ministry also hosted its quarterly interministerial forum
with federal member state counterparts, which was focused on the ministries ’
commitments to stabilization, the Wadajir National Framework on Local Governance
and the alignment of those initiatives with the programmes of international partners.
Strand 4
Preventing and countering violent extremism
51. As part of the project to operationalize the Somali national strategy and action
plans on preventing and countering violent extremism, the Office of the Prime
Minister and federal member states received technical assistance and capacity building support from the United Nations to strengthen the coordination of related
activities among line departments. At the federal member state level, further support
was provided to establish platforms for discussions between government and civil
society to address local grievances, and pilot interventions were identified to address
the root causes of violent extremism and radicalization. A total of 63 programmes
relating to the prevention and countering of violent extremism were identified in the
2018 Somalia aid-mapping exercise, which was reviewed and confirmed in March
2019.
52. UNSOM continued to support the Federal Government ’s national programme
for the treatment and handling of disengaged combatants, including coordination
support and the development of standard operating procedures. As from March 2019,
the three rehabilitation centres for low-risk Al-Shabaab defectors supported
70 individuals in Mogadishu, 144 in Baidoa and 57 in Kismaayo. The reporting period
was marked by the launch of the project, which was financed by the Peacebuilding
Fund and aimed at addressing the operational gap in the provision of rehabilitation
support to female Al-Shabaab members. Implemented by IOM, the initiative will
target 150 former combatants and up to 1,000 community members, with a view to
strengthening women’s organizations and community-based groups so as to support
reintegration, while also promoting gender-responsive capacity within the defector
rehabilitation programme.

C.

Transition planning
53. In March, the Federal Government announced military activities against
Al-Shabaab in Shabelle Hoose as part of the transition process. The operations are
intended to improve security in Mogadishu and support the gradual handover of
security responsibilities to Somali security forces and institutions. On 1 April,
national army-led operations commenced in and around the town of Sabiid, a step
towards securing the main supply route from Afgooye to Marka and establishing state
authority in the recovered areas, in accordance with the first phase of the transition
plan.
54. To support the coordination of stabilization activities in the newly liberated
areas as part of the Shabelle Hoose military operations, an interministerial task force,
consisting of the ministries of the interior, federal affairs and reconciliation; defence;
justice and judiciary affairs; internal security; health; information; and humanitarian
affairs and disaster management, met on 8 April with representatives of South -West
State and international partners. The task force recognized progress made by Somali
security forces in Shabelle Hoose and focused on the need to ensure a coherent and
conditions-based approach to stabilization activities.

19-07748

11/18

S/2019/393

V. Human rights and protection
A.

Human rights
55. During the reporting period, 757 civilian casualties were recorded by the
UNSOM Human Rights and Protection Group: 72 per cent (546 casualties) were
attributed to Al-Shabaab, 9 per cent (70 casualties) to state security forces and 10 per
cent (76 casualties) to unknown perpetrators, including 6 civilian casualties (2 killed
and 4 injured) attributed to air strikes conducted by unknown aircraft in Jubbaland
and Hiraan.
56. In all, 26 death sentences were pronounced by civil courts, of which 6 were later
commuted to terms in prison and 8 carried out.
57. Freedom of expression violations continued with the arbitrary arrest of eight
journalists, the harassment and assault of two journalists by state security forces and
the suspension of one media outlet by a court in “Somaliland”.
58. On 29 January 2019, the Ministry of Women and Human Rights Development
submitted the country’s mid-term report on the voluntary universal periodic review,
which provides an outline of the progress made by the Federal Government in t he
implementation of the recommendations accepted by Somalia.
59. On 4 March, the Prime Minister addressed the Human Rights Council and
reaffirmed the country’s commitment to upholding human rights, as a newly elected
member of the Council.

B.

Compliance with the human rights due diligence policy
60. Subsequent to the incidents of 13 to 15 December during the South -West state
electoral process, the Federal Government and the state established investigation
committees to consider the human rights issues and circumstances surrounding the
incidents. The state investigation committee found that four people were killed during
the incidents.
61. AMISOM has put in place measures with regard to civilian casualties arising
from air operations, including the application of the AMISOM rules of engagement
by troops, further training and procedures for incident reporting pertaining to civilian
casualties. The AMISOM-United Nations technical working group on the human
rights due diligence policy on United Nations supp ort to non-United Nations security
forces also reviewed other measures pertaining to the policy and agreed on joint
action to strengthen compliance.

C.

Children in armed conflict
62. During the reporting period, the country task force on monitoring an d reporting
verified 505 grave violations affecting 1,096 children (932 boys and 164 girls), 19
attacks on schools, 4 attacks on hospitals and 17 incidents of denial of humanitarian
access. Some 612 children were victims of recruitment and use, 236 were vi ctims of
killing and maiming and 90 were victims of sexual violence. Among those violations,
59 per cent were attributed to Al-Shabaab, while unknown armed elements accounted
for 10 per cent. Clan militias accounted for 4 per cent of the violations, while crossfire
between different armed forces and groups accounted for 3 per cent. The remaining
24 per cent were attributed to government and regional forces and unidentified armed
elements.

12/18

19-07748

S/2019/393

D.

Prevention of sexual violence
63. On 25 December 2018, the Federal Ministry of Women and Human Rights
Development appointed a new national action plan coordinator, thereby filling a
position that had been vacant since May 2018 and increasing the Federal
Government’s capacity to accelerate the implementation of the nat ional action plan
on ending sexual violence in conflict. Among the priorities identified by the Federal
Government was strengthening the work of the steering committee that coordinates
efforts across the federal member states to prevent and respond to sexu al violence.
64. From 27 March to 4 April, 52 health care providers were trained, with support
from UNFPA, in order to strengthen capacities to deliver adequate clinical
management of rape in Puntland and “Somaliland”. An additional session held in
Mogadishu from 10 to 14 April targeted 21 health professionals.

VI. Humanitarian situation
65. Humanitarian needs across Somalia remain high, with an estimated 4.2 million
people, constituting one third of the population, requiring aid and protection in 2019.
By mid-April, mild to moderate drought conditions were reported in some areas of
“Somaliland” and Puntland. Southern areas were also experiencing persistent
abnormal dryness. Owing to a further deterioration in the food security situation in
the northern and central areas of the country, in particular among pastoralists, a 5 to
10 per cent increase is expected in phase 3 and 4 populations, according to the
Integrated Food Security Phase Classification, compared with previous projections
for February to June 2019.
66. The late onset of the current March–May 2019 gu season, and the limited rainfall
received, has compounded the existing dry conditions, in particular in agropastoral
areas of northern and central Somalia. While light to moderate rainfall wa s received
in mid-April across many areas, the rainfall received to date is not sufficient to reverse
the impact of the dry conditions, which have resulted in serious water shortages across
the country. Significant deteriorations in crop yields are also pr ojected to affect food
security in the coming months. As a result of the deteriorating situation, there are
3.4 million people now facing crisis levels of food insecurity. Although the cholera
outbreak dating back to 2018 remains largely contained, active transmission
continued during the reporting period in Banaadir districts with a high concentration
of internally displaced persons. Cumulatively, since the onset of the outbreak, over
6,500 cases, or 59 per cent, have affected children under 5.
67. Over 1.5 million Somalis face acute food insecurity (classified as phase 3 and
above, under the Integrated Food Security Phase Classification) and require
immediate assistance. Overall, 4.9 million people are food insecure, an increase from
4.6 million people since last September. Of those, nearly 43 per cent are internally
displaced persons, who face chronic vulnerabilities. While moderate improvements
in nutrition have been observed, acute malnutrition rates, in particular among
internally displaced persons, remain high in some areas. In 2019, some 903,100
children under the age of 5 are likely to be acutely malnourished.
68. Protracted armed conflict, insecurity and erratic weather have continued to
displace civilians from their homes. Consequently, with 2.6 million internally
displaced persons, Somalia has one of the largest displaced populations in the world.
Internally displaced persons live in difficult circumstances, are highly vulnerable and
are in need of basic services and protection.

19-07748

13/18

S/2019/393

69. The increasing trend in forced evictions remains a recurring protection-related
concern, compounding the vulnerability of thousands of internally displaced persons.
In 2018, 314,000 internally displaced persons were forcefully evicted, an increase
from 200,000 evictions the previous year. Over 76,440 people were evicted by
mid-April 2019.
70. A federal-level durable solutions coordination mechanism has been constituted
by the Ministry of Planning, Investment and Economic Development, with the overall
objective of strengthening leadership by the Federal Government on durable solutions
for displaced communities across the country. Education was identified as a durable
solution by the mechanism as critical for resilience -strengthening and requires
dedicated investment. In Somalia, 70 per cent of school-aged children are out of
school.
71. The 2019 humanitarian response plan for Somalia, launched on 21 January
2019, requires $1.08 billion to provide life-saving assistance and livelihood support
to 3.4 million Somalis affected by conflict, climatic shocks and displacement.
Notably, the Somalia Humanitarian Fund and the Central Emergency Response Fund
have jointly allocated $45.7 million to targeted communities in areas of northern,
central and southern Somalia that have been most significantly affected by drought
conditions. As at 26 April, however, the humanitarian response plan was only 15 per
cent funded, demonstrating a significant shortfall in funding. Urgent and sustained
financial support for humanitarian operations is essential to enable aid agencies to
sustain operations and scale up response in the areas hardest hit by drought
conditions. Over the next six-month period, approximately $674 million will be
required to address critical life-saving needs arising from the drought conditions,
including with respect to food security, nutrition and water, sanitation and hygiene.
Without immediate resources, humanitarian partners will be unable to sufficiently
scale up early response to the deteriorating situation.
72. The operating environment continues to be challenging. Ongoing military
operations, clashes among armed groups and the presence of non -state armed actors
on key access roads continues to affect humanitarian operations, triggering
displacements and restricting the movement of personnel and goods. The impact of
ongoing violence on civilians continues, with repeated reports of child abductions,
the burning of commercial trucks and restrictions on movement into and out of areas
that need humanitarian assistance. State and local authorities are asserting a stronger
role in the monitoring and implementation of humanitarian programmes. While such
engagement is a welcome indicator of strengthened national institutions, attention is
necessary to improve the consistency and coherence of requests, considering the
current capacity of such authorities and the criticality of upholding humanitarian
principles. Ongoing discussions regarding the AMISOM reconfiguration and the
potential closure of forward operating bases may affect humanit arian operations and
response as AMISOM troops are drawn down.

VII. United Nations Presence in Somalia
73. United Nations entities continue to be present in the following locations in
Somalia: Baidoa, Beledweyne, Boosaaso, Dhooble, Doolow, Gaalkacyo, Garoowe,
Hargeysa, Jawhar, Kismaayo and Mogadishu. Significant progress was made on the
establishment of the United Nations office in Dhuusamareeb. As at 14 April, there
were 764 international and 1,402 national staff deployed throughout Somalia.
74. In the aftermath of the mortar attacks on the United Nations and AMISOM
camps in Mogadishu on 1 January 2019, the designated official/officer-in-charge of
UNSOM prioritized the provision of secure office and living accommodation for all
14/18

19-07748

S/2019/393

United Nations personnel. Support to enable Somali security forces to dominate areas
from which mortars are launched into the city was also provided.
75. To improve the safety of both United Nations and AMISOM personnel, UNSOS
initiated security enhancements on the premises thro ugh the provision of overhead
protection for the offices and accommodation spaces for all staff members,
reinforcing total bunker capacity and working closely with Somali security forces to
improve security on the main access routes to the Aden Adde International Airport
through the placement of additional checkpoints.
76. A joint coordination office bringing together the United Nations and Federal
Government representatives was established under the auspices of the Joint Host
Country Relations Committee. The coordination office, which became operational in
March 2019, provides a platform, under the status-of-mission agreement, to
accelerate the follow-up on pending issues between the United Nations and the
Federal Government, including the improved processing of visa requests. The
continued imposition of taxes and other fees on United Nations personnel not holding
a United Nations laissez-passer, however, continue to have a negative impact on
United Nations operations in Somalia.

VIII. Observations
77. The United Nations remains fully committed to supporting the Federal
Government in its efforts to achieve peace, stability and sustainable development for
all Somalis. I welcome efforts to reset and deepen the partnership between the Federal
Government and the United Nations. I also thank the Security Council for its ongoing
support for Somalia and UNSOM, as expressed most recently in resolution 2461
(2019), and look forward to UNSOM delivering on its entire mandate in the
framework of a fully restored relationship between the United Nations and the Federal
Government of Somalia.
78. Somalia continues to make progress towards building a functioning federal
State. The leadership of the Federal Government and the federal member states and
their continued commitment to peacebuilding and State-building is commendable.
The Federal Government has put forward a comprehensive reform agenda, structured
around four road maps aimed at maintaining progress on inclusive politics, security
and justice, economic recovery and social and human development, which should
receive the coordinated and sustained support of its international partners.
79. Somalia continues, however, to experience challenges that demonstrat e the
fragility of the gains made so far. The persistence of violent extremism, terrorism and
armed conflict, political instability, corruption and spillover effects from shifting
external dynamics, along with the possibility of further humanitarian crises , all
threaten progress. The best interests of the Somali people must be at the core of all
efforts to tackle those challenges.
80. In my previous report, I had expressed concerns for the continuing political
stalemate between the Federal Government and the federal member states, which
impedes further progress. I am encouraged by reconciliatory steps taken by Somali
leaders at the inauguration ceremony of the new President of Puntland in Garoowe on
26 January. I remain confident that constructive dialogue will resume and be
sustained, and I reiterate my call to the country’s leaders to meet again soon, and
regularly, and to resolve differences with the interests of the Somali nation as their
foremost concern. I am hopeful that the positive developments seen in the Horn of
Africa will give impetus to strengthened efforts for dialogue, both within the country
and in the wider region.

19-07748

15/18

S/2019/393

81. The Federal Government’s road map on inclusive politics lays out the steps to
meeting all major political milestones, including elections, the constitutional review,
federalism and reconciliation. Reaching those milestones will require sustained
dialogue and collaboration among Somali stakeholders and continued cooperation
between the executive and legislative branches of the Go vernment and within the
Federal Parliament. I am concerned about the suspension of cooperation between the
two houses of the Federal Parliament. I urge its members to fulfil their responsibilities
and resume cooperation in order to implement Parliament’s agenda and pass
necessary urgent legislation in key areas.
82. The year 2019 is a pivotal one for the review of the Provisional Federal
Constitution. I urge all key players to maintain a strong focus on the outstanding
issues relating to federalism and to achieve the political agreements needed for their
resolution. Constitutional reform should serve as a foundation and a means for
building a common vision of a federal, inclusive and democratic Somali State that
protects the human rights and fundamental freedoms of all its citizens. I urge the
leaders of Somalia to prioritize an inclusive and transparent constitutional review
process to ensure its broadest possible ownership by all sections of Somali society.
83. The progress made towards finalizing a national reconciliation framework, the
guiding document for nationwide reconciliation, is welcome. I furthermore commend
the National Independent Electoral Commission for advancing preparations for voter
registration and urge the Somali leadership to submit the n ecessary legislative
framework for the elections in 2020 and 2021 to Parliament for adoption. Adequate
planning, including on security, at both the national and subnational levels, to ensure
timely preparations for and conduct of the electoral process, sho uld commence as
soon as possible.
84. The limited political participation of women and their limited effective role in
decision-making remain matters of concern. I call upon the Federal Government, the
Federal Parliament, federal member states, civil society and the international
community to ensure enhanced participation of women in the political reform agenda,
including through gender-focused provisions in the electoral legal framework for
2020 and 2021. In that regard, the Somali leadership and Parliamen t should adopt the
principles outlined in the women’s charter.
85. The progress achieved by Somalia in economic development, revenue
generation and financial management over the past few years, which was
acknowledged by all partners in Washington, D.C., on 12 April 2019, is encouraging.
The Federal Government must redouble its efforts to meet the conditions required to
reach the decision-point stage under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative,
a major achievement on the way to stability that is now within sight.
86. Further to my recent letter to the Security Council pursuant to resolution 2431
(2018), I welcome the conduct of the joint African Union-United Nations review of
AMISOM to consider progress on the security transition in Somalia. Timely
implementation of the transition plan and the national security architecture aimed at
building a capable federal security sector is critical for Somalia to assume lead
responsibility. The renewed efforts by the Federal Government, with the support of
AMISOM, the United Nations and the international community, to accelerate progress
in that regard, notably through joint and comprehensive planning of the transition, are
laudable. The implementation of the reconfiguration of AMISOM and the handover
of locations to Somali security institutions, to be conducted in a coordinated manner,
with full regard for the humanitarian impact and for ensuring the protection of civilian
populations, is of utmost importance. I also commend the Federal Government for the
steps it has taken towards enhancing the accountability and transparency of security

16/18

19-07748

S/2019/393

sector financing through the direct payment of salaries to individual soldiers.
Coordinated international support also remains crucial for a sustainable transition.
87. The protection of human rights will be critical in Somalia ’s State-building
process. I note the completion by South-West State of its investigation into the
electoral-related violence that occurred in Baidoa in December 2018, and the
investigation by the Federal Government into those incidents. Those investigations
are a first step in accountability, and I encourage both the Federal Government and
the state administration to ensure that cases of wrongdoing are pursued in a
transparent manner, in accordance with the rule of law.
88. I further urge the Federal Government to ensure the independence of the
judiciary and the separation of the executive, legislative and judicial branches of
government, to support a functioning judicial service commission and to accelerate
the establishment of a constitutional court and an independent national human rights
commission.
89. I remain deeply concerned about the challenging security environment and the
continued impact of military operations, clashes among armed groups and the
presence of non-state armed actors on key access roads on humanitarian operations.
The stronger role being taken by state and local authorities in monitoring and
implementing humanitarian programmes is welcomed. While such engagement is a
welcome indicator of strengthened national institutions, it is important that it be
undertaken in respect of humanitarian principles.
90. The significant funding shortfalls with regard to the 2019 humanitarian response
plan, especially in view of the persistent dry conditions and corresponding
deterioration in the humanitarian situation, are of grave concern. In order to address
critical needs, $674 million will be required over the next six months. Urgent and
sustained donor support is needed to initiate early action by the humanitarian
community to address the situation.
91. I thank the African Union, AMISOM, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, the European Union, Member States, non-governmental organizations
and other partners for their continued support for peacebuilding and State -building in
Somalia. I pay tribute to AMISOM and Somali security forces for the sacrifices they
continue to make for long-term peace and stability in Somalia.
92. I pay tribute to my Special Representative ad interim, Raisedon Zenenga, and
the staff of UNSOM, the Head and staff of UNSOS and those of the United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes in Somalia for their continued hard work under
challenging conditions.

19-07748

17/18

S/2019/393

18/18

19-07748
