Resolutions adopted on the reports oE the Fifth Committee

( United Kingdom nf

75

Decides to appropriate for the operation of the United
Nations Emergency Force an amount of $18,911.000 for
1965 and an amount of $15 millicn for 1966;

:?. Calls upon States members of the specialized
agencies and of the International Atomic Energy
Agency which are not Members of the United Nations to
make contributions appropriate to their circumstances;
3. Decides that the contributions called for in paragraph 1 above may be made by a Member State, at
its option, in the form of services and supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, furnished for use in
connexion with the United Nations Emergency Force
during the period l January to 31 December 1965, for
which the Member State does not require reimbursement, the Member State to be credited with the fair
value thereof as agreed upon hv the Member State and
hv the Secretary-General ;
4. Decides that such amounts as a Member State
has advanced for the United Nations Emergency Force
pursuant to General Assembly resolution 2004 (XIX)
of 18 February 1965 shall be credited by the SecretaryGeneral to the amounts apportioned against such Member State in paragraph 1 above;
5. Further decides that such Member States as have
made voluntary contributions to restore the solvency of
the United Nations may request the Secretary-General
to apply these contributions to the amounts apportioned
against them in paragraph 1 above;
6. Decides that, for the purpose of the present resolution, the term "economically less developed Member
States" shall mean all Member States except Australia,
Austria, Belgium, the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Canada, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Finland,
France, Hungary, Iceland, Treland, Italy, Japnn. Luxembourg. the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Poland, Romania. South Africa, Sweden, the Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic. the Union of Soviet Socialist
Repnlilics, the United Kin_g-dom of Great Britain nnd
Northern Tre\and and the Fnited States of America:

II

III

1. Decides as an ad hoe arrangement, without prejudice to the positions of principle which may be taken
by Member States on the eventual recommendations of
the Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations on
this question :
(a) To credit against the appropriation for the
United Nations Emergency Force for 1965, provided
for in section I above, $3,911,000 from those funds
already contributed as voluntary contributions to restore
the solvency of the United Nations;
(b) To apportion an amount of $800,000 for 1965
among the economically less developed Member States
in the proportions determined by the scale of assessments for 1965 ;26
( c) To apportion an amount of $14.2 million for
1965 among the economically developed Member States
in the proportions determined by the scale of assessments for 1965 plus-in order to meet reserve requirements-an additional amount from each contributor in
this group equal to 25 per cent of its apportionment,
such additional contributions to be reimbursable on ~,
pro rata basis when the General Assembly shall determine that all or part of these additional contributions
:ue no longer needed ;

1. Decides as an ad hoe arrangement, without prejudice to the positions of principle which may be taken
by Member States on the eYentual recommendations
of the Special Committee on Pence-keeping Operations
on this question :
(a) To apportion an amount of $800,000 for 1966
among the economically less developed Member States
in the proportions determined lJy the scale of assessments for 1966 ;28
(b) To apportion an amount of $14.2 million for
1966 among the economically developed Member States
in the proportions determined by the scale of assessments for 1966 plus-in order to meet reserve requirements-an additional amount from each contributor in
this group equal to 25 per cent of its apportionment,
such additional contributions to be reimbursable on a
pro rata basis when the General Assembly shnll determine that all or part of these additional contributions
are no longer needed;
2. Calls upon States members of the specialized
agencies and of the International Atomic Energy
Agency which are not Members of the United Nations to
make contributions appropriate to their circumstances ;
3. Decides that the contributions called for in paragraph 1 of this section may be made by a Member
State, at its option, in the form of services and supplies
acceptable to the Secretary-General, furnished for use
in connexion with the United Nations Emergency Force
during the period 1 January to :n December 1966, for

(;rNtf

l?rilain and ,V nrflrrrn

frrfr111d),

Mr. Hector GROS ESPIELL (Urnq11ay), Mr. Lo11i, IGNACJn·
PINTO (Dahomey), Mr. Brar J\n-i<l Sturc PF.TRf.:N (Swrdrn),
Mr, Francis T. P. PLIMPTON ( United Stairs of .4merira)
and Mr, R. VENKATARAMAN (India).

2115 (XX). United Nations Emergency Foree22

The General Assembly,
H a'l,i,ng considered the reports of the SecretaryGeneral on the cost estimates of the United Nations
Emergency Force for the period 1 January to 31 December 1965 23 and 1 January to 31 December 196624
and the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions thereon,2~
Expressing the hope that the ad hoe arrangements
pro.vided in the present resolution will not need to be
repeated in future years and that the Special Committee
on Peace-keeping Operations will be able to recommend
to the General Assembly at its twenty-first session an
acceptable method for the equitable sharing of the cost
of peace-keeping operations involving heavy expenditure, taking into account the principles affirmed as
guidelines by the General Assembly in resolution 1874
(S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
Taking into account that the economically more developed countries are in a position to make relatively
larger contributions and that the economically less developed countries have a relatively limited capacity to
contribute towards peace-keeping operations involving
heavy expenditures.

1

22 See also note on this item on page S.
23 Official Records of the General Assembl3,,

TwentirtT,
Session, Annexes, agenda item 21, document A/6059,
24 Jbid., <locuments A/6060 an<l A /C.5/1041)
25 Ibid., <locument A/6171,
26 See resolution 2118 (XX), p. 77.

76

General Assembly-Twentieth Session

which the Member State does not require reimbursement, the Member State to be credited with the fair
value thereof as agreed upon by the Member State and
by the Secretary-General ;
4. Decides that, for the purpose of the present
resolution, the term "economically less developed Member States" shall mean all Member States except Australia, Austria, Belgium, the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Canada, Czechoslovakia, Denmark,
Finland, France, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Poland, Romania, South Africa, Sweden, the
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States
of America.
1407th plenary meeting,
21 December 1965.
2116 (XX). Pattern of conferences

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1202 (XII) of 13 December
1957, 1851 (XVII) of 19 December 1962 and 1987
(XVIII) of 17 December 1963,
1. Decides that a fixed pattern of conferences to
govern the places and dates of the meetings of United
Nations bodies shall come into force on 1 January
1966 for a further period of three years ;
2. Decides further that, as a general principle,
meetings of United Nations bodies shall be held at the
established headquarters of the bodies concerned, with
the following exceptions :
(a) The sessions of the International Law Commission shall be held at Geneva ;
( b) The United Nations Scientific Committee on
the Effects of Atomic Radiation. as well as the Scientific and Technical Sub-Committee and the Legal SubCommittee of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space, may meet at (;eneva if the exigencies of
their work so require ;
( c) The regular summer session of the Economic
and Social Council may be held at Geneva provided that
the closing date falls at least six weeks before the opening of the regular session of the General Assembly ;
( d) One Headquarters-based functional commission
of the Economic and Social Council. to be determined
by the Council, may meet at Geneva during the period
from January to April;
( e) Sessions of not more than three other Headquarters-based functional commissions or committees
of the Economic and Social Council may, by decision
of the Council taken after consultation with the Secretary-General, be held at Geneva during the period from
September to December without overlap;
(f) In addition, a session of the Commission on
N'arcotic Drugs may, in exceptional circumstances and
by decision of the Economic and Social Council taken
after consultation with the Secretary-General, be held
at Headquarters, New York ; in that event, one other
functional commission or committee may meet at
Geneva in its place ;
(g) The regular sessions of the Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East, the Economic
Commission for Latin America and the Economic Commission for Africa, as well as meetings of their subsidiary bodies, may he held away from their head-

quarlt>rs when the commission conct>rned so derides,
subject, in the case of regular sessions of the commissions, to the approval of the Economic and Social
Cmmril and of the General Assembly;
( h) In other cases meetings may be held away from
the established headquarters or authorized meetingplace of any body when a Government issuing an invitation for a meeting to be held within its territory has
agreed to defray, after consultation with the SecretaryGeneral as to their nature and possible extent, the actual
additional costs dirt>clly and indirectly involved;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
( ;eneral Assembly each year a basic programme of
conferences for the following year, established in conformity with the present pattern and after consultation.
as appropriate, with the organs concerned;
4. Decides that any meeting-other than an emergency meeting, in the sense of a meeting which cannot
be deferred without serious detriment to the United
N ations--not covered by the basic programme for a
given year shall not be held during that year;
5. Decides that not more than one major special
conference of the 1 Tnited Nations shall be scheclnled
in :my one year ;
6. Urges all organs of the United Nations, as well
as the specialized agencies, to review tht>ir working
methods and also the frequenry and length of sessions,
in the light of the present resolution, the growing
volume of meetings. the resulting strain on available
resources and the difficultv of ensuring the effective
participation of members. ·
·
74()7th plrnary 111rrtinr1.
21 Dcrrmbrr 19!'i5.
2117 (XX). Appointments to fill vacancies in the
membership of thf' Unitf'cl Natiom Staff
Pension Committf'f'

The General Assrmbly
1. Appoints the following persons as alternate memht>r~ of the United Nations Staff ~rnsion Commitkr:
Mr. Brian J. Lynch,
Mr. Jean-Claude Renaud;
2. Dec!arrs 1\fr. Lynch and Mr. Renaud to be appointed for a two-year term beginning on 1 January
1966.

14()7th plrnary meetin(J,
21 Dcrr111brr 19!'i5.
*

*

*

. I., ,i result nf 1111' ,t/,o;•,- af>poi11/111t11ts. 1hr 111rm/,crs and
alter11a/e 111,am/,ers t'/rct,,d b\' the r:,,naa/ Asso11l,l\' lo th,
1:11itcd Nations Staff !'msio11. Co11:111if/N «•1'/l /,e the f;,/lo-:,•i1111 ·
1fe111/1ns
\I r. Albert F

BENDER

( Unitrd

S111tc., of . I 111erirn) ;

\!r. Jose ESPINOZA (Chile):

\lr. James Grnso:s ( [initrd J<i11_11do111 of (;rrat Britain and
,\'orthrm Ireland).
,4/trrnale mr111bcrs

Mr. Brian J. LYNnr (Nm• 7ca/mzd):
l\1r. Jean-Claude RENAt;u (Fran,,•\:
\lr. Shilenclra K.

S1:--.1;11

1 f11dial.
