THIRTY-SECOND

YEAR

th
MEETING: 14 APRIL 1977

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2004)

,.,....,...........,.....,....

Page

1

Adoption of the agenda . . , . . , . , . . . . . . . , , . . . . . . . , . . , . . . , . . . . . .

1

Complaint by Benin:
Report of the Security Council Special Mission to the People’s Republic of
Benin established under resolution 404 (1977) (S/12294 and Add. 1) . . . . . .

1

S/PV.2004

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
Supplements

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2004TH

MEETING

Held in New York on Thursday, 14 April 1977, at 10.30 a.m.
Resident: Mr. Sim6n Albert0 CONSALVI (Venezuela).

and Mr. A. A. Kodjovi (Togo) took the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber

Present: The representatives of the following States:

Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Jamabiriya, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela,

2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I wish
to inform the members of the Council that I have received
letters from the representatives of Mali, Mongolia and the
United Republic of Tanzania in which they request to be
allowed to participate in the debate on the question on the
agenda. Consequently I propose, in accordance with past
practice and with the consent of the Council, to invite
those representatives to participate in the debate, without
the right to vote, under the provisions of Article 31 of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2004)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. Complaint by Benin:

Report of the Security Council Special Mission to the
People’s Republic of Benin established under resolution
404 (1977) (S/12294 and Add.1)

3. In view of the limited number of places available at the
Council table, I invite those representatives to take the
places reservedfor them at the side of the Council chamber,
on the usual understanding that they will be invited to take
a place at the Council table whenever they wish to address
the Council.

The meeting was called to order at 11.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda

At the invitation of the President,Mr* M, B. Kant6 (Mali},
Mr. T, Puntsagnorov(Mongolia) and Mr. S. Chale (United
Republic of Tanzania)took the placesreservedfor them at
the sideof the Councilchamber.

The agenda was adopted.
Complaint by Benin

4. The PRESIDENT (interpretationfrom Spanish):Before
calling on the first speaker, I wish to bring to the attention
of the members of the Council the draft resolution
sponsored by the delegations of Benin, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya and Mauritius which is contained in document
S/12322.

Report of the Security

Council Special Mission to the
People’s Republic of Benin established under resolution
404 (1977) (S/12294 and Add.l)*

1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): In
accordance with the decisions previously taken by the
Council, I invite the representatives of Algeria, Botswana,
Cuba, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Guinea, the Ivory
Coast, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Madagascar,
Mauritania, Morocco, Mozambique, Niger, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Somalia and Togo to take the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber.

5. Mr. R4MPHUL (Mauritius): Members are aware that a
draft resolution, contained in document S/12322, dated
13 April was circulated this morning. It has so far been
sponsored by the delegations of Benin, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya and Mauritius, The number of sponsors is not
limited to those delegations and consultations are still
under way with respect to further sponsors from the
non-aligned countries and other members of the Council.
At the end of this morning’s meeting, I shall perhaps be in a
position to announce other sponsors,

At the invitation of the President, Mr. I? K. BouayadAgha (Algeria), Mr. H. Modisi (Botswrrna), Mr. L. Gdmez
Anzardo (Cuba), Mr. A. E. Abdel Meguid (Egypt), Mr. M.
Ecua Miko (Equatorial Guinea), Mr. L. N’Dong (Gabon),
Mr. M. S. Gzmara (Guinea), Mr. S Akd (Ivory Coast),
Mr* Y; Sourinho (Lao People’s Democratic Republic),
Mr. B. Rabetafika (Madagascar), Mr, M. Kane (Mauritania),
Mr A. Bengelloun (Morocco), Mr. J. C. Lobo (Mozambique), Mr. J. Poisson (Niger), Mr. J. M. Baroody (Saudi
Arabia), Mr. M. Fall (Senegal), Mr. A. H Hussen (Somalia)

6. I should like now briefly to introduce the draft
resolution. It is very clear and expressedin simple language.
As members have had the opportunity to go over it since
yesterday, I do not think it is necessaryfor me to go into
details. It has beenthe subject of thorough and positive
negotiations.

* Subsequentlyissued as Official Records of the SecurityCouneii, 7. The first preambular paragraph refers to the report of
the Security Council Special Mission to the People’s
nirWsecondyear, Special Supplement No. 3 (S/12294/Rev.l).
1

\ :

spoken in the Council have used it and it seems to be very
much in the minds of representatives of developing countries.

Republic of Benin established under resolution 404 (1977).
The second paragraph expresses the concern of the Council
at the violation of the territorial integrity, independence
and sovereignty of the State of Benin. The third paragraph
states that the Council is deeply grieved at the loss of life
and substantial damage to property caused by the invading
force during its attack on Cotonou on 16 January 1977.

14. Under paragraph 7, the Council would request
“the Secretary-General to provide appropriate technical
assistance to help the Government of Benin in assessing
and evaluating the damage resulting from the act of
armed aggression committed at Cotonou on 16 January
1977”.

8. There are 12 operative paragraphs. Under paragraph 1,
the Council would simply take note of the report of the
Special Mission and express its appreciation for the work
accomplished,

I should like to inform the members of the Council that I
have discussed this paragraph with the Secretary-General,
who has agreed to the wording.

9. Under paragraph 2, which is an important one, the
Council would strongly condemn the act of armed aggression perpetrated against the People’s Republic of Benin on
16 January 1977. This language comes straight from a
resolution which was adopted by the Council of hiinisters
of the Organization of African Unity at LomC earlier this
year. We have been very careful regarding the wording of
this paragraph and I understand that it has been accepted
by all the members of the Council.

15. Under paragraph 8, the Council would address an
appeal to

10. Paragraph 3 reaffirms a previous Council resolutionresolution 239 (1967),

That is only an appeal and I do not believe that there can
be any objection to it.

“all States to provide material assistance to the People’s
Republic of Benin in order to enable it to repair the
damage and losses inflicted during the attack”.

“by which, inter alia, the Council condemns any State
which persists in permitting or tolerating the recruitment
of mercenaries and the provision of facilities to them,
with the objective of overthrowing the Governments of
Member States”.

16. Under paragraph 9, the Council would note
“that the Government of Benin has reserved its right with
respect to any eventual claims for compensation which it
may wish to assert”.

We have been very faithful to the language of resolution
239 (1967); we have not departed in any way from its
wording.

During negotiations there was much discussion on this
paragraph, but there has not been any serious objection to
it and its present wording has been accepted by all members
of the Council.

11. Under paragraph 4, the Council would call upon

17. Under paragraph 10, the Council would call upon

“all States to exercise the utmost vigilance against the
danger posed by international mercenaries and to ensure
that their territory and other territories under their
control, as well as their nationals, are not used for the
planning of subversion and recruitment, training and
transit of mercenaries designed to overthrow the Government of any Member State”.

“all States to provide the Security Council with any
information they might have in connexion with the
events at Cotonou on 16 January 1977, likely to throw
further light on those events”,
I am sure that all members of the Council and Members of
the United Nations feel that it is at least a moral duty to
provide such information and that there will be no
objection to that.

I do not see how anyone can object to that.
12. Under paragraph 5, the Council would further call
upon
“all States to consider taking necessary measures to
prohibit, under their respective domestic laws, the recruitment. training and transit of mercenaries on their
territory and other territories under their control”.

18. Under paragraph 11, the Council would request

13. Under paragraph 6, the Council would condemn

That is merely a matter of form. Under paragraph 12 the
Council would decide

“the Secretary-General to follow closely the implementation of the present resolution”.

“all forms of external interference in the internal affairs
of Member States, including the use of international
mercenaries to destabilize States and/or to violate their
territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence”.

“to remain seized of this question”.
19. As I said, the draft resolution is very clear and all
members of the Council are well aware of the contents of
this document; therefore, I do not see any need to spell
them out in detail.’

Here we have introduced the word “destabilize” because a
great many African and other representatives who have
2

20. After extensive negotiations with all members of the
Council-and I stand ready to be corrected by my colleagues on the Council-it is clear to me that they are
ready to adopt this draft resolution by consensus. In the
light of that fact, I should like to ask you, Mr. President, to
put it before the Council as soon as possible for adoption
by consensus.

Special Mission and its annexes, I feel duty bound to
express my delegation’s warm congratulations
to the
Chairman of the Mission, Ambassador Illueca of PanaIr%
and the other two members, Ambassador Kikhia of Libya
and Mr. Mulye of India, for their objective and comPre”
hensive report.
28. In my statement on 8 February, during the first stage
of the Council’s debate on the matter at hand, I said, inm

21. I should have preferred to see the debate on this
matter of Benin concluded this morning, but I see from the
list of speakers that there are some 10 representatives,
including nine representatives of States non-members of the
Council, who have asked to speak. Apart from Mongolia, I
think they are all African representatives. May I be
permitted to make an appeal to my African brothers to
consider the necessity, at this stage, of participating in the
Council’s discussion. If they must do so on the instructions
of their Governments, I suggest to them, very respectfully
and in a very friendly and brotherly manner, that they
should be brief, avoid bringing in extraneous matters that
may not be of direct relevance to our debate and confine
themselves to the report of the Special Mission and so avoid
all acrimony.

a&z:

“This is not the first case of its kind to come before the
Security Council. It will be recalled that in the past the
Council has been called on to take action because of
armed attack by mercenaries or because of other kinds of
armed intervention in the internal affairs of other African
States. It will constitute a grave threat to peace and
stability on the African continent if outside forces can
threaten with impunity the hard-won independence of
African States. It is not a question only of peace and
stability. What is at stake is also the very honour and
dignity of Africa.

22. I have made that appeal before and I hope that today
the representatives who speak will listen to and co-operate
with me in the best interests of Africa. If they co-operate,
then we could deal with this matter this morning and have
the draft resolution as submitted adopted by consensus. tl
Mr. President, I leave it to your good judgement and
discretion to consult other members and find out whether
it is possible to adopt this draft resolution very soon.

“At this stage, the least that the Government of the
People’s Republic of Benin can ask for, and the Council
support, is the dispatch of a fact-finding mission to
ascertain the origin of that brutal aggression. Such a
mission would bear in mind the importance of exposing
the evil of mercenary activities and the necessity of
eliminating that scourge from the face of the earth if we
are to ensure that the aims and objectives enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations are to be preserved.”
(1987th meeting, paras.96 ad 97.1

23. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I
agree with the view of the representative of Mauritius and
will, in so far as possible, carry out consultations with the
members of the Council and the representatives whose
names appear on the list of speakers.

29. We are grateful to the Security Council for having sent
a fact-finding mission to the scene of the aggression, the
People’s Republic of Benin. The Council is now called upon
to consider the report of its Mission.

24. The next speaker is the representative of Somalia,
whom I invite to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

30. It is crystal clear from the report that the People’s
Republic of Benin, a peace and freedom-loving country,
and also a member of the Security Council, was subjected
to blatant and treacherous aggression, master-minded,
financed and organized by imperialist forces and perpetrated by faceless and bloodthirsty mercenaries. This is
made abundantly clear in paragraph 141 of the report,
which states:

25. Mr. HUSSEN (Somalia): First of all, 1 should like to
express my gratitude to you, Mr. President, and the
members of the Council for having given me the opportunity to participate in this debate, May I also congratulate
you on your assumption of the office of President of the
Council for the month of April and extend to you our best
wishes for successin conducting this very important debate
in the course of which the Council is considering a matter
of great relevance to international peace and security. We
are confident that your diplomatic and political experience
will greatly contribute to the successful conclusion of the
deliberations of the Council.

“On the basis of the testimony received and evidence
examined by it, the Special Mission is in a position to
conclude that the People’s Republic of Benin was thus
subjected to an armed attack by the armed force which
arrived at Cotonou airport on the morning of
16 Januuary 1977. The primary objective of the invading
force was the overthrow of the present Government
of
Benin.”

26. I should like also to express our congratulations to
your predecessor, Ambassador Andrew Young, who, as
President of the Council, discharged his heavy responsibilities with tact, open-mindedness, diplomacy and skill
which earned him the admiratj;on of all of us.

That paragraph conclusively proves that, in act&i1 fact, an
armed attack was effected against the People’s Republic of
Benin.

27. I shall now address myself to the subject under
consideration. Having carefully studied the report of the

31. The next paragraph, paragraph 142, establishes that, as
a result of the armed attack by a foreign invading force,
3

on 22 November 1970, Angola in 1975 and Southern
Rhodesia and many other places, the Bob DBnards, the
Steiners, the Schramms and their soldiers of fortune
achieved notoriety through their odious crimes committed in cold blood against peace-loving African
peoples.” [Ibid., para. 104.J

Benin was subjected to aggression. The paragraph reads as
follows:
‘Q.asmuch as the territorial integrity, independence and
sovereignty of the State of Benin was violated by this
invading force which came from outside the territory of
that country, there can be no doubt that the State of
Benin was subjected to aggression.”

Those words briefly but pointedly reflect the continuance
of the contemptible acts of aggression committed against
African countries through the unleashing of the scum of the
earth-mercenaries-in
violation of international law and
morality.

32. The report confirms also that those who perpetrated
this ignoble aggression were mercenaries, who caused the
loss of lives of Benin nationals and the destruction of
property.

37. The Special Mission rightly sounded a note of warning
in paragraph 144 of its report, on the ominous presence of
the threat posed by the use of international mercenaries
against the developing countries-and particularly the
African countries. This is substantiated by an article which
appeared in The Christian Science Monitor, in its issue of
5 April 1977, part of which I should like to quote:

33. For those who expressed or harboured doubts that
blatant aggression had in fact been committed against the
People’s Republic of Benin, the report of the Special
Mission provides ample proof to confirm that that was
indeed the case. This is supported by detailed evidence and
comprehensively documented facts. The report proves
conclusively, without any shred of doubt, that this premeditated armed aggression was aimed at overthrowing the
legitimate Government of Benin and carried with it the aim
of eliminating that country’s leaders, massacring its people
and other far-reaching consequences.

“A new attempt to recruit American and British
mercenaries to fight in Africa appears to be getting
under way.
“I..

34. This external aggression against the independence and
sovereignty of the People’s Republic of Benin is, in our
view, part of an imperialist and neo-colonialist plan to
destabilize not only Africa but any developing countries
which refuse to succumb to the dictates of the imperialists
and their huge and morbidly profit-thirsty financing corporations. The People’s Republic of Benin has chosen scientific socialism as its political, economic and social orientation and as a means towards its development and national
reconstruction, In the eyes of the neo-colonialists, this is a
crime and Benin has to be punished.

“The first visible sign in the United States of a new
mercenary recruiting effort was a ‘help wanted’ advertisement placed in the Fresno Bee (California) on April. 1. It
asked for r&urn& from people with military backgrounds
for ‘high-risk’ work in Africa at $1,200 to $2,000 a
month, depending on qualifications.”
38. A question arises here. From these quotations we learn
that a “help wanted” advertisement has reportedly been
published in a newspaper, asking for r&urn& from people
with military backgrounds for “high-risk” work in Africa,
at salaries ranging from $1,200 to $2,000 per month. Now,
the question is: who employs those people and for whom?
Who pays for them and for what purpose?

35. It is also common knowledge that international
mercenaries are used by the minority and racist r6gimes in
southern Africa in order to thwart the struggle of the
African people for self-determination, freedom and dignity.
These mercenaries, recruited and assembled by the minority
rigties, have perpetrated many violations of and encroachments on the neighbouring African States because of those
countries’ solidarity with their beleaguered brothers and
sisters who languish under all forms of brutality and human
degradation; and also-and mainly-because those countries
decided to comply with the United Nations resolutions
regarding the regimes of white minorities in southern
Africa.

39. The problem of the use of mercenaries is not as
isolated an issue as some people want us to believe. It is an
integral part of a more complex and systematic scheme
contrived by neo-colonialism in order to rhaintain and
protect its huge interests in Africa. This means that those
powerful forces can at will meddle with and interfere in the
internal affairs of independent African States, especially
those which have opted for a system of government or a
political and socio-economic programme which is found to
be more responsive to the situation and needs of their
respective countries and which leaves little room for
exploitation by multinational corporations asthey are now
conceived and organized.

36. I need not refresh the memories of the members of the
Council with regard to the notorious crimes committed by
those agents of neo-colonialism-mercenaries-against
the
newly independent African States in order to frustrate
Africa’s efforts to rid itself of the shackles of economic and
political manipulation and subjugation. There can be no
better way of describing the dimension and gravity of the
mercenaries’ activities in Africa than by quoting the
remarks made by the representative of Mali on 8February:

40. The impact of multinational corporations has been
one of the primary concerns of the international corn.
munity for a good while. In 1974, the United Nations
issued a report entitled The Impact of Multinational
Corporations

on Development and on International

Rela-

tions.1
--._ __*_The
..~._report states, among other things, that most
i &ted Nations publication, SalesNO. E.74.II.A.S.

“From Katanga to Benin, via Bukavu in Zaire, in
November 1967, Biafra in 1968, the Republic of Guinea
4

countries are concerned about the ownership and control of
key economic sectors by foreign enterprises, the excessive
cost to the domestic economy which their operations may
entail, the extent to which they may encroach upon
political sovereignty and their possible adverse influence on
socio-cultural values. The report states how the operations
of those giants conflict with the political and social choices
of countries that may opt for different models of development. This is the crux and the heart of the problem. To
turn elsewhere for the identification of the real cause of the
use of mercenaries is like hiding one’s head in the sand.

Permanent Representative of Sri Lanka to the United
Nations, President of the General Assembly and Chairman
of the Coordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned Countries,
in a letter dated 7 February 1977, addressed to the
President of the Security Council [S/12283], stated, inter
alia, that the Co-ordinating Bureau had expressed its serious
concern over the events which took place on Sunday,
16 January 1977 because they seemed to be part of a Plan
aimed at undermining the stability of regimes whose
policies were viewed with displeasure in certain circles. I
think that that is truly the heart of the matter.

41. Now, from this debate, as from those before it
regarding acts of aggression against other African States, we
have drawn one conclusion: Africa is under constant threat.
It sounds as if the leaders of Africa have been served with a
kind of unwritten ultimatum in which they are reminded
that Africa is still crucially vital as a source of raw materials
for the industrial establishments of some developed countries and also as a market for the latter’s finished
commodities and that those titanic financial empires and
whoever is behind them will not be available for any
compromise on this point. So any “hardy” African leader
who tries to challenge the ultimatum of neocolonialism
must be ready for anything, and there will be mercenaries
to do the job.

46. In his statement on 12 April, the representative
Madagascar stated on this particular point:

42. It is depressing to know that any bunch of renegades,
or renegade bands, could at any time engage in a “punitive
mission” against an African country whose only crime, as in
the case now before us, is to have chosen a system of
development which, in the best judgement of its people, is
considered most suitable to their particular situation and
needs.

47. We believe that not only Africa but the entire
international community has a moral obligation to applaud
and to rally round those African countries that have
repulsed mercenaries’ attacks and thus defended their
national honour and sovereignty. We in the Somali Democratic Republic are indeed grateful to the President, people
and Government of Benin for scoring a resounding blow at
the aggressor’s forces of evil and human degradation, thus
protecting the great victories and dignity not only of Benin
but of Africa as a whole. I must hasten to add that, in the
face of this continuous threat, Africa should be vigilant
and, at the same time, mobilize its resources in order to
defeat and destroy those evil forces. In that way it will
convey to the imperialists and neo-colonialists the message
that any future attempts at aggression against Africa will
not be a walk-over but will certainly be crushed.

Of

“The attempts made to limit the ramifications of this
aggression to the African continent are not credible and,
in our view, are obviously part of a larger neo-colonial
plan to reconquer, destabilize and overthrow, one after
another, the regimes whose options and tendencies are at
variance with imperialist and neocolonialist objectives OR
the African continent.“[2002nd
meeting, para. I1 7. /
It is against that background that the acts of aggression of
which the People’s Republic of Benin was a victim should
be perceived and judged.

43. Those die-hard potentates of the nineteenth-century
prototype, with their well-known bigotry and imperialistic
thinking, are arrogantly convinced that they can stop the
winds of change and turn the clock backward in order to
maintain indefinitely their privileged and monopolistic
positions, thus frustrating the efforts that the third world
has been making, in an attempt to see the old economic
system replaced by a new economic order which calls for a
more equitable sharing of the resources of the globe. That is
the motive underlying all those aggressions and violations of
international law and morality. Any action that fails to take
into consideration this crucial fact is condemned to bear no
fruitful result.

48. As was stated by the representative of Mauritius
on
6 April, the Council of Ministers of the Organization
of
African Unity, at its twenty-eighth ordinary session held at
Lome from 21 to 28 February, adopted a resolution
condemning the armed aggression against Benin. In paragraph 1, so eloquently quoted by the representative
of
Mauritius, the resolution

44. The representative of India, in his statement on
8 February, during the first phase of the consideration of
Benin’s complaint, made the following observations:

“Strongly condemns the act of armed aggression against
the People’s Republic of Benin and congratulates
the
heroic brotherly people of Benin on their courageous
routing of the aggression”.

“Clearly, foreign agencies are involved, even though the
Governments may be unaware of the activities of these
mercenaries. Nevertheless, this does raise important questions of international responsibility for such situations.
Where do these mercenaries come from, and where do
they go? What are their motivations? Is it simply the
profit motive, or is it the political motive that underlies
their operations? ” [Ibid., para. 63.1

Furthermore,
follows:

paragraph 4 of the same resolution

reads as

“Empowers the African Group at the United Nations to
act in solidarity with Benin during the debate of the case
by the United Nations Security Council”.

45. These questions and many others are still awaiting
answers. In the same vein, Ambassador Amerasinghe, the
5

cenaries or the permitting or allowing of transit facilities for
mercenaries and their equipment, SO as effectively to
prevent their intervention in the internal affairs of the
peace-loving countries of Africa and elsewhere,

49. In this connexion, I should like to place on record that
all the African delegations which have so far participated in
this debate have strongly condemned the act of armed
aggression against the People’s Republic of Benin and
expressed their solidarity, as the resolution that I just
mentioned instructed us, with their sister country of Benin.

54. In conclusion, I should like to add my voice to all
those who have spoken out strongly against the activities of
mercenaries. In addition to condemning the aggression
committed against Benin, the Security Council should
appeal to the international COITImUnitY-as
it would
do in
the draft resolution just introduced by the representative of
Mauritius-to extend assistance to that country to repair
the consequences of the aggression committed against it,

50. It should also be noted here that the first Afro-Arab
Summit Conference Meeting, held at Cairo from 7 to
9 March 1977, condemned the same aggression against
Benin in paragraph 11 of its Political Declaration:
“The . . . Conference strongly condemns the practice of
mercenaries and undertakes to eliminate this phenomenon in Africa and the Arab world.” [See S/12298,

55. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish); 1
should like to inform members that India and Panama have
become sponsors of the draft resolution contained in
document S/12322.

annex.]

51. The Somali delegation believes that international
peace would be better preserved if all States Members of
the United Nations ensured that their territory and resources, as well as their nationals, were not used for the
recruitment, transportation and/or transit of mercenaries
for the purpose of interfering in the internal affairs of other
countries and/or overthrowing their legitimate Governments. In consonance with those goals, the United Nations
should invite all States to enact national legislation aimed at
combating mercenary activities in their territories, with
progress reports being made available on a regular basis to
the Secretary-General. In advancing this proposal, I base
myself on the substance of paragraph 3 of Security Council
resolution 239 (1967) of 10 July 1967, in which the
Council

56. The next speaker is the representative of Senegal,
whom I invite to take a place at the Council table and to
make a statement.
57. Mr. FALL (Senegal) (interpretation from French): In
speaking on 7 April in the Council (2001st meeting], I
wished to limit myself to expressing the solidarity of mY
Government with the sister Republic of Benin. In doing soI
wished to act in accordance with the spirit of the consensus
of the African Group, which called on Af;ican delegations
not to behave in this gathering in any way which would
benefit the enemies of Africa. It was clear to my delegation
that respect for that principle adopted in our Group should
be unanimous. The Council has noted that the Republic of
Guinea, in taking part in this debate tried to incriminate my
country, in the name of a pseudo-revolutionary solidarity,
in an affair which concerns it neither directly nor indirectly. In my statement of 7 April I provided the explanations required by their so-called revelations, which showed
a high degree of irresponsibility and a lack of senseof
proportion. I reserved the right to come back to this
rostrum-with the consent of the Council, of course-if the
document that had just been distributed by the represep
tative of Benin (S/12319/Add.l)
contained information
unacceptable to my country.

“CulZs upon Governments to ensure that their territory
and other territories under their control, as well as their
nationals, are not used for the planning of subversion, and
the recruitment, training and transit of mercenaries”.
The same resolution stated, ilzter alia, that the Council
“Condemns any State which persists in permitting or
tolerating the recruitment of mercenaries, and the provision of facilities to them, with the objective of
overthrowing the Governments of States Members of the
United Nations”.

58. I am sure you can appreciate our distress as we feel the
atmosphere deteriorate in this debate which should have
seen Africa united against the use of mercenaries, that tool
of imperialism used against our continent to disrupt Our
harmonious development. We should like to say right awaY
that responsibility for the present situation does not in aflY
circumstances rest with my delegation.

52. NOW that the barbaric foreign aggression committed
against Benin has been proved beyond any shadow of a
doubt, it is incumbent upon the Security Council not only
to condemn the use of international mercenaries but also to
take effective and stringent measures so as to prevent the
recurrence of such acts of aggression. We believe that the
problem of the use of international mercenaries is serious
enough to warrant Security Council action in accordance
with Article 1 of the Charter, which stipulates that the
purpose of the Organization is to maintain international
peace and security, and to that end, to take effective
measures for the prevention and removal of threats to
peace.

59. The document distributed by the delegation of Benin
cannot leave my delegation indifferent. In part V it states:
“This barbarous and savage imperialist aggressionwas
carefully prepared, financed and perpetrated by French
imperialism in collaboration with the Governments of the
Kingdom of Morocco, the Gabonese Republic and the
Togolese Republic and with the complicity of the
Governments of the Ivory Coast and the Republic of
Senegal.”

53. Accordingly, we believe that the Security Council
should adopt a resolution which would have broad applicability and would prohibit the planning of subversion, the
recruitment, training, equipping and/or transport of mer6

In part IV, under the heading “Senegal”, the report states:

any doubt about the impartiality and objectivity of the
members of the Mission” (2001st meeting, pam. 153J.

“With respect to Senegal, 13 mercenaries of Guinean
origin were recruited by a certain Joseph, whose real
name is Sy Sawane Oumat . . .”

64. I should like to take this opportunity to ask the
Chairman and the members of the Mission for a few
clarifications. The aggression of which Benin wasthe victim
took place on 16 January 1977. The Security Council first
met on that subject on 7 February, that is, mote than three
weeks later. The representative of the Republic of Benin
had ample time to contact his Government. I even believe I
am right in saying he went to Cotonou in the meantime. So
the statement he made in the Council must have been the
result of careful preparation and thought and not just the
expression of a mere emotional reaction. And yet, in that
statement I heard the following references to mercenaries:

-also of Guinean origin-and
“It has also been proved”-1 do not know by whom but
I should like to know-“that the Senegalese immigration
services issued false identity cards-i.e., safe conductsand assisted in the embarkation of. . . mercenaries , , .
without the prescribed formalities, on board an aircraft of
Royal Air Maroc.”
60. We deny these assertions, which are without foundation. In the course of my statement on 7 April, I
explained to the Council the circumstances in which the
500,000 Guineans living in Senegal enjoyed the hospitality
of out people. That among that large number there should
have been 13 scoundrels who took part in that foul
operation does not surprise us, although, in the circumstances, we have every right to doubt the substance of the
claims. But what my delegation certainly cannot accept is
the insinuation that official Senegalese services promoted or
even were informed about the activities of those blackguards.

“In a helter-skelter stampede chatacterized by general
disorder . . . those blood-thirsty agents abandoned in the
field a considerable quantity of war matkiel, . , as well as
very important and particularly telling documents. Their
pirate aircraft had to take-off very rapidly, leaving behind
quite a number of mercenaries, who were heavily drugged
and out of their minds, as well as the bodies of their
accomplices which they could not take with them.”
/1986th meeting, para. 19.1

65. AS fat as the “very important and particularly telling
documents”-the
visiting card left behind by the aggressots-are concerned, we know how little credit should be
accorded them, since the Mission itself said it had been
unable to check into the evidence provided in those
documents. That is all cleat and diplomatically very well
expressed. So it is in connexion with the “heavily drugged”
mercenaries and the bodies of their colleagues that I should
like to ask a few questions.

61. Accordingly, my Government has authorized me to
state in the Council that Senegal is ready to welcome any
United Nations mission of inquiry to Dakat to check into
the facts alleged by the delegation of Benin. My Govemment will provide any necessary facilities for such a
mission, which could include, if so desired, representatives
of Benin and the Republic of Guinea.

66. Between 16 January and 7 February, the Government
of Benin solemnly stated that it was holding white
mercenaries. Publications at Cotonou and Conakry carried
pictures of those mercenaries, as did other newspapers. On
7 February, three weeks after the act of aggression, the
official spokesman of the Government of Benin described
to the Council the state those mercenaries were in. They
were “heavily drugged and out of their minds”. I have too
much respect for my colleague from Benin to believe for a
moment that he wished to deceive the Council. Between
16 January and 7 February, those mercenaries who were
“drugged and out of their minds” certainly had plenty of
time to recover from their drugged condition and to come
to their senses. The members of the Mission ate distinguished men of law, and I am convinced that, as soon as
they reached Cotonou, their first desire was to hear the
mercenaries who had been captured. Now, in the report,
reference is made to a single prisoner who was interrogated,
an African of Guinean origin who had been captured not
where the fighting took place but somewhere in the
countryside, with his school certificate, his vaccination card
and his tax card! Everything gave the appearance of his
being a gentleman out looking for employment.

62. My delegation believes that this matter of the aggression against Benin has developed now in such a way that it
is absolutely essential to carry the investigations to the end.
I do not see what positive decision could be adopted by the
Council on the basis of the report of a mission of inquiry
which concludes with the words:
“However, the Special Mission wishes to state that the
terms of its mandate, as well as the time available at its
disposal for its implementation,
did not permit it to
investigate further and verify the testimony of the
prisoner pertaining to these matters. The same is true of
the suggestive evidence contained in the documentation.”
(S/12294, pam. 145.J

63. As the Council is aware, the entire substance of the
report of the Mission is based exclusively on the statements
of the prisoner which, in fact, do not incriminate the
Senegalese authorities, and on the evidence presented by
the documents. It is for that reason that, with your
permission, Sir, I would respond to the invitation extended
by the Chairman of the Special Mission at the meeting of
7 April. In keeping with his characteristic intellectual
honesty, he said he and his colleagues were willing

67. My question in this connexion is quite simple. I should
like to know whether the Mission asked to see the white
prisoners referred to by the representative of Benin in his
statement of 7 February. If it did, what was the response of

“to answer any questions which representatives may wish
to ask on any point which, in their opinion, might require
further elucidation . . . no one need therefore entertain
7

the authorities at Cotonou? I do not mean any harm by
this question. I simply do not want to have a guilty
conscience, because my delegation has already expressed its
very firm support for the Government and people of Benin.

73. Two facts have been established by these various
missions. The first is that an act of aggression did take
place. Benin was in fact the victim of aggression, and this is
not denied by anyone and certainly not by my delegation.
The second fact is that it is impossible to establish who was
responsible for that aggression.

68. On the other hand, I would not go so far as to tell the
Council of my surprise at the temerity of aggressors who
sent a mere 20 men to put out of action a military camp
they knew was guarded by 600 professional soldiers! The
whole affair is particularly strange because, in the radio
message he broadcast shortly before 9 a.m. on 16 January,
the President of the Republic of Benin said:

74. These facts had seemed so relevant to the African
Group that we had decided to confine ourselves to a
condemnation of the use of mercenaries, since the evidence
advanced incriminating
certain countries could not be
verified by the members of the Special Mission. I believe
that, in taking that stand, the African Group acted with
great wisdom. Those recommendations of the African
delegations were made openly during a plenary meeting of
our Group. Ambassador Ramphul, representative of a
member of the Security Council and of the Acting
President of the Organization of African Unity, mentioned
them during the meeting of 7 April.

“At the present moment, our combat units are at work
and are defending the strategic points . . . with revolutionary fervour” [see S/12319/Add. I, part IIJ.
That revolutionary zeal of 600 Beninese soldiers fighting 20
mercenaries would make one smile had it not cost the lives
of individuals who had done nothing to deserve such a
tragic fate, and had it not created orphans and widows who
are still mourning their dead.

75. At the outset of, my statement, I said that my
delegation was much distressed to see Africa presenting this
sorry spectacle to the entire world. But how could it have
been otherwise when, in the name of national sovereignty,
such serious accusations have so casually been made against
responsible Governments, with the hope that those Governments would remain silent?

69. It is no less curious that Adjutant Kouton, who
commanded the first forces engaged in the counter-attack
in the landing zone, did not have the presence of mind to
prevent the retreat of the attackers by making it impossible
for the famous DC-7 to take off. That would not have
required much in the way of strategy.

76. Senegal-and I have had to stress this-is a land of
hospitality. We have chosen our course, just as we recognize
that others have the right to choose theirs. The well-being
of our people is our sole concern, and our cardinal rule
both within the Organization of African Unity and within
other movements to which we belong, is to work for
understanding among peoples and co-operation among all
States, in full respect for our respective institutions. And it
is for that single reason that we welcome in our country
any African who considers that our country is a land of
asylum whose institutions completely safeguard his freedom and his human dignity.

70. Finally, let us express our surprise that B1 Alpha
Oumarou, the only mercenary captured, was able, from
inside the aircraft, to read the sign which said “FrancevilleABroport El Hadj Omar Bongo”, whereas in the car which
took him to Casablanca he was unable to read the roadsigns
showing the way to Marrakesh.
71. The same BB Alpha Oumarou, who was born in
Senegal and has lived only in that country and in Guinea, is
able to tell from the accent whether a person speaking good
French is of German or Breton origin! I believe that that
young man’s intelligence should have enabled him to
acquire more than a certificate of primary studies. At times,
in response to questions, that disturbing individual spoke in
English without waiting for translation by the interpreter.
That is according to a report I received and may be untrue.
It seems he was so skilled that he was even able to conclude
his statement by wishing long life to the Benin revolution
which he was supposed to put down. Some have even
suggested that he concluded by saying “Ready for the
revolution! ”

77. What ,we deplore in the document from Benin is the
ruthless desire to divide Africa into two camps known as
the revolutionary and the moderate. We belieye that the
Benin delegation bears a very heavy responsibility when it
plays into the hands of those who are trying, for reasons
which have nothing to do with the interests of Benin, to
promote dissension among African States.
78. In his statement at the meeting on 12 April /2002nd
the representative of Madagascar, in a flight of
oratory of which he alone is capable, asked who could
prove that the Benin Government had forged a single one
among the many documents. He even said that it would be
enough to prove the falseness of a single document to
demolish the entire body of evidence furnished. That is his
opinion; it is not mine. I should like, however, to reply to
his question, because it just so happens that I know a thing
or two about air navigation.
meeting],

72. With regard to this act of aggression of 16 January,
seven missions went to Benin to establish the facts. It
cannot be said that Benin did not co-operate in the search
for evidence. Those missions consisted of the International
Commission established by Benin, the commissions of the
African, Malagasy and Mauritian Common Organization, of
the World Federation of Trade Unions, of the Afro-Asian
Peoples’ Solidarity Organization, of the secretariat of the
Organization of African Unity, of the Council of Ministers
of the Organization of African Unity and, finally, the
Special Mission of the Security Council.

79. In part IV, section 3 of the document issued by the
delegation of Benin/,S/12319/Add.I],
reference is made to
the navigational chart of the pilot of the DC-7, which
landed at Cotonou on the morning of 16 January. Everyone
8

sent to Cotonou has provided all the irrefutable proof
required to show that Benin was in fact a victim of a
treacherous act of armed aggression.

knows that such a document is removed from the cockpit
only if the crew is changed. We have been told that the
DC-7 kept its engine running, throughout the entire commando operation, which sugg,sts that the crew remained on
doard. P&haps the representative of Madagascar could tell
us how the navigational chart could have been left on the
ground when the crew remained within the aircraft.
Furthermore, that same chart should enable the authorities
of Benin to know the aircraft’s destination after take-off
from Cotonou. It would seem that we do not have
sufficient information on that score.

87. After the failure of the operation, the mercenary
commando withdrew and left behind it important documents, including official papers of all kinds issued without
any doubt by the relevant ministries of well-known Member
States.
88. For our part, without having to be geniuses, we had to
shed as much light as possible on the origin of the bearers
of those official documents. Both the OAU Council of
Ministers and the African Group at the United Nations
requested that African States which possessed additional
information likely to make a positive contribution to the
Council’s debate should transmit it to the Council. The
statement of the representative of the Republic of Guinea
was entirely in keeping with that precise request,

80. This debate, which was requested by the delegation of
Benin, is regrettable on more than one account. Grave
accusations have been levelled against sovereign States in
such a casual manner as to be provocative and without any
serious proof to back them up.
81. This morning, a United Nations diplomat who is a
friend of the Government and the people of Benin said this
to me: “Benin has been the victim of aggression; that is
indisputable and nobody denies it. But why are the Benin
authorities adding to their story in such a way as to SOW
doubt in people’s minds. 7 ” Those are not my words; that is
what a friend of Benin said, and I could give his name.

89. The objective nature of the evidence and the information provided in our statement is eloquently demonstrated by information contained in the annexes to the
report of the Security Council Special Mission, letters from
Ivory Coast and Senegalese patriots and photocopies of
membership cards of the members of the Association of
Guineans Abroad and identity cards published on pages 14
to 50 of Horoya, No. 2264, of 6 to 12 March 1977, which,
incidentally, we should like to make available to representatives. We should like to point out that these important
documents are accompanied by a map of the mercenary
baseson Guinean frontiers which also shows the future plan
of attack shortly to be carried out against the free African
territory of Guinea.

82, There is a proverb in my country which says: “What is
too full always overflows, but the overflow is always
diluted and weakened”. In this affair, I have the distinct
impression that Benin has filled the receptacle a little too
Ml.
83. It is truly regrettable that, in such a grave and tragic
affair, which everyone agrees took place, the delegation of
Benin should have chosen this peculiar way to plead its
cause, for I am convinced that no one will gain much by it,
and Benin least of all.

90. Instead of making wild attacks against the Guinean
rigime and its great leader, we had hoped that the
representatives of Senegal and the Ivory Coast would have
explained the irrefutable documentation of the aggression
against Benin which was definitely issued at Dakar and
Abidjan, namely, identity cards and vaccination certificates
for the mercenaries.

84. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
next speaker is the representative of Guinea, whom I invite
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

91. After such barbarous, treacherous and diabolical acts
of aggression as we witnessed in Guinea in 1970 and as
recently took place in Benin, the members of the Council
and those of the entire international community will
understand how well justified our apprehension is, as well
as that of the peoples of African countries, in the face of a
constant threat against our independence and sovereignty.

85. Mr. M. S. CAMARA (Guinea) (interpretation from
French): Thank you, Mr. President, for allowing me to
speak a second time in this debate to make a statement in
response to the representatives of Senegal and the Ivory
Coast who, on 7 April and this very morning, said such
opprobrious things about us following our statement, a
statement which we intended to be entirely in keeping with
the purpose of the present meeting. In so doing, we shall
not follow the example of our critics from Senegal and the
Ivory Coast and allow ourselves to be diverted in the
direction in which they wish to lead us with the aim of
robbing the current debate of its extremely serious nature
and making us turn our attention from our objective:
condemning aggression and the use of mercenaries and
providing aid and assistance to Benin to enable it to staunch
the wounds it sustained during the war.

92. We know that the anti-Guineans of the Association of
Guincans Abroad (RGE) and the Fraternal Association of
Guineans in the Ivory Coast (AFGCI) are based in .Senegal
and in the Ivory Coast. One of those criminals, the
wretched Bri Alpha Oumarou, said:
“We Guineans were supposed to be trained in order to
train others in different countries-Senegal, or other
countries-train them for guerrilla war. That is what we
were told.” [See S/12294/Addl, annex Ill.1

86. All honest men of good sense have recognized that the
People’s Republic of Benin was in actual fact a victim of
aggression on 16 January 1977. The voluminous documentation produced by the Security Council Special Mission

93. The representative of Senegal, in his statement, said,
among other things, “Africa has become the chosen land of
the international mercenary” [2001St meeting, Para. 331.
9

which have thousands of Guineans living on their territory,
The Republic of Guinea would have had no interest in
making gratuitous accusations against those two neighbours
if they had not become springboards for anti-Guinean
activities.

94. The Bt Oumarous-where
were they recruited? In
Senegal and in the Ivory Coast, in the puppet movements of
RGE, AFGCI, OAL [Organization
of Free Afn’cal and
FLERD [Front for the Liberation and R&?abilitation of
Dahomey]. Who are they? They are nothing but renegades
of
the type of Sy Sawan Oumar, a mercenary recruiter
who has been condemned to death in absentia by our
national revolutionary court.

101. What wrong did the representative of Guinea do
when he made available to the Security Council and
international public opinion the information he had that
could shed all p.ossible ligh,t . on this diabolical act of
aggression against the People’s Republic of Benin at a time
when the people of that country were working so hard on
the gigantic task of building socialism, a task they had
freely set themselves? For our part, we do not wish to see a
repetition of such an act of armed aggression in Africa or
elsewhere.

95. Further, our brother from Senegal recognized that
“The aggression of which the Republic of Benin has
been the victim is part of a long chain of other acts of
aggression committed by mercenaries against independent
African States.” [Ibid., para. 34.1
96. Do people want armed aggression to become ‘institutionalized in Africa? If that is not the wish of the
international community in general and the African States
in particular, each Member State must be firmly committed
before all mankind to fight and root out this evil of
mercenary activity which is a threat to everything that has
been achieved by the African peoples, particularly revolutionary rCgimes.

102. With regard to the slander which the prophets of
doom, the neo-colonialists, the puppets constantly spread
against our country, by describing its leaders as persons
obsessed with plots, persons who wish to camouflage
political and economic failures, and by speaking of the
alleged ruin to which they have brought the country, and so
forth, we reply that the Guinean revolution is doing very
well. No plot, whatever its dimensions, will ever prevail in
the free land of Guinea. Furthermore, counter-revolution
throughout the world militates in favour of the triumph of
our revolution.

97. It is for the Governments of Senegal, the Ivory Coast
and others to honour their commitments by effectively
banning on their territories the activities of organizations
like RGE, AFGCI, OAL and FLERD, whose objective is the
overthrow of Governments and rBgimes freely chosen by
the peoples of countries which have once and for all
repudiated those renegades, those bad Africans, who are fit
only to be thrown on the scrap heap of history. Other
States have already honoured those commitments
with
regard to my country. We thank them for their objectivity.

103. We Guineans are happy with the eloquent results
achieved since 1958. Indeed, Guineans can be proud to be
absolute masters of their own land, owners of their
economy, their banks, their industry, their trade, their
means of transport, their universities, and so forth; they can
be proud that they are administering all those things in the
exclusive interest of the Guinean people, without having to
take orders from technical advisers of any kind. We know
that the imperialists, the colonialists, the neo-colonialists
and the puppets cannot stomach the striking successeswe
constantly record in the Guinean revolution.

98. Every speaker should make his contribution to the
solution of these urgent problems of the use of mercenaries
and the armed aggression that accompanies it.
99. In the statement of our colleague from Senegal, we
detect a flagrant contradiction. He said, on the one hand,
that we had not even turned the pages of the Special
Mission’s report and, on the other, that everyone knew that
“one does not have to study this report in detail to realize
that the essential elements it contains are to be found in the
statements of the only prisoner who was captured after the
withdrawal of the mercenaries and that the prisoner is an
African and, what is more, a citizen of Guinea” [ibid.,
para. 421. All that we can do is refer the representative of
Senegal to our statement, which he does not seem to have
heard or read, but which none the less is entirely in keeping
with the purpose of this series of Council meetings.

104. Out of modesty, we would simply remind the
Council of the impressions taken back to his own country
by a distinguished African head of State-incidentally, a
member of the Conseil de l’entente-on his return from a
State visit to the Republic of Guinea in 1976:
“To start with, it was a visit of friendship but, when we
got there, the authorities of Guinea transformed it into a
State visit. This was the first time we had gone to that
beautiful country. But we were made to feel absolutely at
home in Guinea, and we were struck by the high degree
of mobilization of the Guinean people. I have had many
opportunities to stress that, ‘when one wants to do harm
to someone, one attributes all kinds of failings to him’.
You have certainly heard, as we have, how people talk
about Guinea. We had an opportunity to realize on the
spot that that country was simply a target of criticism.
People said: ‘Guinea is an unfortunate country: the
Guinean people are living in poverty; there is nothing to
eat; the country has nothing’. That is false, absolutely
false! Nothing is lacking in Guinea. It is not by any
means a backward country. It is a country wliich is

100. As can easily be seen from the voluminous documentation presented by the Special Mission on the armed
aggression against the People’s Republic of Benin, some
documents that were captured and other irrefutable proof
that has been provided entirely match the information and
statements constantly put forward by the Republic of
Guinea for the attention of international public opinion.
We have been accused of being very much against our two
neighbours, Senegal and the Ivory Coast. As is well known,
the Republic of Guinea has more than two neighbours
10

clearly ahead of others. The people of Guinea are very
loyal to their leader. We saw a happy people, a cheerful
people, a very hospitable people. Everywhere we went we
noted general and total mobilization.
Everything
is
lacking? Absolutely not. Maybe it is imperialism that is
lacking, but that is all.”
105. Guineans are giving pride of place to human dignity,
to a sense of responsibility, in their quest for happiness.
THUS, for us Guineans a poor but worthy man deserves
more respect and esteem than one rich but unworthy.
106. The State Party of Guinea, the Government of the
Republic of Guinea, have always faced up to their
responsibilities-national,
African and international. Cur
great accomplishments on all fronts of the strugglepolitical, economic, social, Cultural-require no comment
from me. We Africans of Guinea are aware of the villainous
role played in Africa by the puppet Governments whose
heads of State are African in name only, with their palaces
and their fabulous sums of money stolen from the people
and deposited in banks outside Africa.
107. My colleagues from Senegal and the Ivory Coast were
very generous in regard to the Republic of Guinea, a
member of the Organization of African Unity. What they
said about the President of the Republic of Guinea shows
us the kind of morality they preach, especially as Senegal
and the Ivory Coast have never in human memory made a
clear statement about the liberation struggle in southern
Africa. Furthermore, the Minister of Information of the
Ivory Coast brought back from his visit to Pretoria so much
praise for Vorster that we cannot be offended when those
who encourage apartheid make a judgement of the Guinean
revolution that is filled with insolence and insanity.

testimony of these abominable agents on the radio or in the
press.
110. We do not want to reply here word for word to the
ravings of the very people who pose as great experts on the
United Nations; nor do we want to reply to the puppets, to
the neo-colonized or to those who pine for the “good old
days” gone forever, who are haunted by the spectre of
scientific socialism, which they think should be eliminated,
at all costs, from African society as a way of life.
111. The representative of the Ivory Coast spoke to us of
happiness and well-being in his country, which is supposed
to be so prosperous. But who is prosperous there? A
handful of individuals who are exploiting the people. We
remind you that in Guinea everything belongs to the
workers.
112. After that clarification which we were absolutely
obliged to make, we wish to stress that the battle here is
between the revolutionary forces, on the one hand, and the
forces of reaction in the service of imperialism, colonialism
and the bourgeoisie, on the other.
113. Our deep devotion to Africa, to African unity and
the cause of Africa’s freedom is well known to all. Indeed,
President Ahmed Sekou Toure’s great love for Africa has
been recognized even by President Senghor, who likes to
say that President Sekou Tour6 has a tyrannical love for
Africa. That is true, because he is African above all else.
114. To revert to the question on the Security Council’s
agenda, we appeal to the international community to see to
it that the present meetings culminate in just and firm
decisions so that the activities of mercenaries and the use of
force in international relations may be banished for ever
from our present-day world and so that the necessary aid
and assistance may be given to the People’s Republic of
Benin to staunch its war wounds. To help Benin is to help
Africa as a whole.

108. The representative of the Ivory Coast, to whom we
have already partly replied in what I just said, will allow me
to remind him that anger, indignation, insults are the
weapons of base people who have run out of arguments.
Nevertheless, although it is inadmissible, in our Organization, for an ambassador to use the kind of foul language
he did about a head of State, I would tell him-since I am
speaking in exercise of the right of reply-that the words he
used about my distinguished chief of State, namely the
“pathological case that really requires the . . . attention of
the medical profession” [ibid., para. 1341, really apply to
the puppet Houphouet-Boigny, who is now in treatment for
such an illness in Europe. And we would add that soon
Africa will be celebrating the end of the system of puppets,
because the days of the puppets Houphouet-Boigny and
Leopold Sedar Senghor are numbered.

115. The Republic of Guinea has always consistently
denounced all forms of reaction, divisiveness, oppression
and exploitation of peoples. Indeed, what could have been
more natural than that, from the very first moments of the
dastardly act of aggression against the people of Benin,
their Guinean brothers should have been behind them?

109. ‘lhe Republic of Guinea always provides Proof of
what it says to the world. Thus, in 1973, thanks to the
extreme vigilance of our people, we foiled a plot which had
basically been planned in the Ivory Coast and Senegal. I
would refer the Council to our magazine m-4, volume 69,
of August 1973. Anyone who wishes to refresh his memory
may look at that document, which was circulated in the
United Nations during the twenty-eighth session of the
General Assembly. What I have said applies also to 1976.
We are sure that our critics have heard or read the

117. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):The
next speaker is the representative of the United Republic of
Tanzania, whom I invite to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.

116. We beg the indulgence of the members of the Council
if we have been somewhat long. In the light of the fact that
clarity in inter-State relations is one of the principles most
prized by my country, I reserve my right, Mr. President, to
ask you to allow me to address the Council once again if
the need arises, particularly if we find ourselves obliged to
speak again.

118. Mr, CHALE (United Republic
of Tanzania):
Mr. President, first of all, I should like to express my

delegation’s sincere gratitude to you personally and,
through you, to all the members of the Security Council for
affording us the opportunity to participate in this important and increasingly serious debate on the question before
us. It is our strong conviction that the discussion of the
subject under review should be given wide scope, should
command wide participation and should proceed with all
the seriousness it deserves. So vital an issue should not be
allowed to maintain a low profile. I submit that it is
incumbent upon all of us, collectively, to examine the
problem realistically and deal with it squarely and with fine
impartiality, in accordance with the principles and spirit of
the Charter. It is for this reason that the Tanzanian
delegation has asked to take part in this protracted
discussion and, thereby, perhaps will be able to make some
modest contribution to this question with which we are,
one and all, deeply concerned. To do otherwise would be to
fail deplorably in one’s duty.

report which is a factual account of what happened at
Cotonou on that fateful day of 16 January 1977. My
delegation thus congratulates the members of the MissionAmbassador Illueca of Panama, Chairman of the Mission,
Ambassador Kikhia of Libya and Mr. Mulye of India-and
the staff of the Secretariat who accompanied them on the
valuable services rendered.
122. The Special Mission, established under Security
Council resolution 404 (1977), was given the task of
inquiring into and investigating the tragic events of
16 January at Cotonou and of submitting a report to the
Council. In compliance with the decision of the Council,
the members of the Mission promptly went to Benin to
discharge the task entrusted to them. Leaving no stone
unturned, they availed themselves of every opportunity to
investigate every ’ event and circumstance that could give
them an indication of what had happened on 16,January.
To be precise, let me quote what the Chairman of the
Mission stated:

119. Having said that, I should like, on behalf of my
delegation and on my own behalf, to associate myself with
the speakers who have preceded me, in congratulating you
most sincerely, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of April. After
hearing my good and great friend, Ambassador lllueca, the
learned and respected Permanent Representative of Panama
to the United Nations, who so ably and boldly painted you
in your proper colours as the embodiment of the ideals and
aspirations of your great country, Venezuela, I am left with
no option but to admire you and your country, which is so
deeply committed to the liberation of man-unless, as the
saying goes, I should wish to seem to be illuminating the
sun with a lantern. Suffice it, therefore, to say that you are
a man of refined character and conspicuous ability and
experience. With your organizing mind and integrated
personality, the Council has found in you a distinguished
President who has already demonstrated competence, effrciency, wisdom and understanding. We wish to assure you
of our co-operation.

“the members of the Mission did everything they could
not to miss any opportunity to investigate every event
and circumstance that might be relevant to what happened on 16 January” [2OOOth meeting, para. 221.
123. Permit me to refresh my memory aloud as to what
the word “circumstance” stands for because this will show
us how seriously and conscientiously the members of the
Special Mission accomplished their task. By using the word
“circumstance”, the Mission deliberately wished to draw
our attention to and to inform us of the fact that they went
into every detail possible and probable as to who, what,
where, by what means, why, how and when that mercenary
operation was carried out on that tragic day. Learned
iawyers would simply say, with regard to the word
“circumstance”, in Latin: “Quis, quid, ubi, quibus auxiliis,
cur, quomodo, quando? ” This is clear evidence of how
meticulously and circumspectly the Mission tried its level
best to accomplish its task. One wonders why the findings
of the Mission carried out in this manner should not be
given credence and respect.

120. I.wish likewise to avail myself of this opportunity to
pay tribute to your predecessor, Ambassador Andrew
Young of the United States, who, with understanding,
devotion, impartiality and distinction, conducted the work
of the Council for the month of ‘March. iiis concern and
commitment to the cause of justice and freedom enabled
him to handle with great diplomatic skill the crucial issues
of apartheid in South Africa. His performance and attitude
were indeed exemplary, the more so considering that, in his
short time here, he has managed, in a crash programme, to
acquaint himself with the style, operations and intricacies
of the United Nations.

124. On completion of the mission, a comprehensive and
factual report was submitted to the Council b$ the Special
Mission, giving us a clear picture of what happened at
Cotonou on 16 January, when wickedness almost carried
the day. The report contains, among other things, evidence
and substantiated statements that are completely agreed
upon by the three wise members of the Mission. It would
appear, therefore, that by reading the report, those of us
who either waited for more information on the event or
were doubting Thomases should now be gratified and
satisfied, since more light has been shed on the question.
The report could not be more objective and informative.

121. Before turning to the question on the agenda, I
should like to express my appreciation to the members of
the Special Mission for the outstanding and commendable
work they have done in so short a time. The valuable report
of the Mission and the annexes are very useful. In our view,
the report should help the Council examine the question in
its proper perspective, draw logical conclusions and arrive at
pertinent unanimous decisions on matters and points which
are per se nata-that is, on matters which are very obvious
and crystal clear in the report. We are grateful to the
Special Mission for presenting us with so comprehensive a

12.5. I am made to understand, however, that it would
seem that the report does not go far enough; more
specifically, in that one of the finishing touches-namely,
that of verification-was not undertaken. If we are honest,
we must admit that it would mean, to all intents and
purposes, asking for the impossible, to expect the Special
Mission to submit a verified and scrupulously rescrutinized
report, considering the short time at its disposal-an
12

explanation that is clearly indicated in the report itself. We
know full well that nobody is bound to the impossible‘nemo tenetur ad impossibile’: Besides, this would have
meant somehow employing and deploying the complete
network of, shall we say, an international intelligence
service, which, I am afraid, the United Nations has not
established as yet.

130. Needless to say, mercenaries have been used to SOW
seeds of confusion and cause destabmzation in small and
developing countries for the benefit of the forces of
imperialism, colonialism and racism.
131. The events of 16 January 1977 at Cotonou show that
similar operations could be undertaken against other small
defenceless countries for the purpose of overthrowing those
Governments whose internal or external policies are not to
the liking of certain circles abroad, The Special Mission has
to be commended for drawing attention to this in paragraph 144 of its report.

126. In our view, the Special Mission has, with objectivity
and impartiality, produced tangible evidence and sufficiently convincing factual data to serve as premises for the
Council’s logical conclusion and decision. It is my sincere
hope, therefore, that a resolution that is wide in scope will
be unanimously adopted.

112, The OAU Summ& Meeting; held in Mauritius in June
1976, and the Fifth Summit Conference of the NonAligned Countries, held at Colombo in August 1976,
denounced the use of mercenaries to undermine the
independence of sovereign States and obstruct the struggle
of national liberation movements against colonial rule.
Those who foster, maintain and promote mercenary operations should fully realize that their actions are a complete
negation of all the principles of the Charter and pose a
serious threat to international peace and security.

127. My delegation refrained from taking part in the
debate when the Council first considered the complaint by
Benin last February. We were then of the opinion that more
information would be required as to the nature and source
of the aggression, even though it was clear enough that
mercenaries were employed to commit acts of aggression
against the People’s Republic of Benin on Sunday,
16 January 1977. There could not have been any mistake in
what Ambassador Boya, a distinguished son of Benin,
stated on 7 February [1986th meeting1 to the effect that a
group of mercenaries had landed in a DC-7 aircraft at
Cotonou airport and attacked and fired at random. The
destruction of buildings and property, the loss of lives and
the injuries inflicted upon defenceless civilians could not
have been a matter of mere imagination. The report of the
Special Mission, however, shed further light on the unfortunate events of 16 January and leaves no doubt that the
People’s Republic of Benin was a victim of aggression and
that its territorial integrity and national sovereignty were
violated by an armed force from outside.

133. This is no matter to be taken lightly. Heavy losses,
both in property and the lives of innocent people, have
been inflicted upon the people of Benin, The magnitude of
the losses could have been even greater had it not been for
the valiant and heroic people of the People’s Republic of
Benin, who repulsed with such valour and determination
the barbaric and unprovoked .acts of aggression by these
strange and reckless saboteurs and murderers against the
independent and sovereign State of Benin. The sons and
daughters of Benin must be commended for thus defending
the independence, territorial integrity and sovereignty of
their country, on which the invaders cast covetous eyes,
because, as one could say rightly, the earth here is so kind
that “just tickle her with a hoe and she laughs with a good
harvest of kernel seeds and palm oil”.

128. The employment of mercenaries for subversive activities against independent African countries is no new
phenomenon. Africa has been the victim of repeated acts of
aggression; it has, indeed, been made a theatre of mercenary
activity by the perpetrators. Why, one may ask, is this? Is
it because-as Pliny the Elder, who lived during the first
half of the first century, said somewhat prophetically: “‘Ex
Africa semper aliquid novi”-there is always something new
coming out of Africa? And rightly so, for mercenary
activities now find their place in Africa and this is a new
development.

134. It is abundantly clear, therefore, that the recruitment
and use of mercenaries against sovereign States-and even,
for that matter, against national liberation movements-and
all acts of aggression should be strongly condemned. The
Security Council should adopt legislative measures prohibiting the recruitment, training or transit of mercenaries.

129. The Council is fully aware of the menace mercenaries
pose to the young developing countries. We may ask
ourselves, who are those mercenaries, who employs them
and for what purpose? The Special Mission, in paragraph
141 of its report, concludes that
“ . . . the People’s Republic of Benin was thus subjected
to an armed attack by the armed force which arrived at
Cotonou airport on the morning of 16 January 1977. The
primary objective of the invading force was the overthrow
of the present Government of Benin.”

135. The Foreign Ministers of African States, at their
meeting at Lome in February this year, strongly condemned the act of aggression committed against Benin.
136. In conclusion, my delegation expresses its complete
solidarity with and sympathy for the victims of this
aggression, the people and Government of Benin. We
support any assistance that can be made available to them.
137. Mr. RAMPHUL (Mauritius): At this stage of our
debate we have on the list of speakers the names of one
member of the Council, namely China, and five nonmembers. Therefore I am wondering whether we could not
hear China, the member of the Council, first this afternoon.

The report continues, in paragraph 143 :
“It is also clear that a majority of the attacking force,
not nationals of Benin, were participating in this action
for pecuniary motives and were, therefore, mercenaries.”
13

Should this be possible, I would suggest that the draft
resolution in document S/12322 be adopted by consensus-as agreed, I hope-immediately
afterwards. It is not
my intention to muzzle the non-members of the Council
that are listed to speak but I believe that the item under
consideration has been sufficiently debated. Therefore I
once again appeal to those who have indicated their wish to
speak this afternoon to reconsider their position and to
think about the advisability of putting an end to what has
turned out to be a rather sad affair in the Council. I am
confident that I shall prevail on my colleague and brother
of Benin not to intervene again to comment any further on
views expressed here this morning. I sincerely hope that my
African brothers will find it possible to co-operate with me.
Their views are already well known to all of us, and I do

not believe any more speeches would throw any further
light on the whole situation.
138. I am considering-with the consent of my Govemment whenever I receive it-placing the question of mercenaries as an item on the agenda of the General Assembly.
Should this be possible, I would suggest that that would be
an appropriate time for my African brothers to express
their views on this evil as we Africans see it. However, if my
African colleagues are under specific instructions from their
respective Governments to speak in this debate, I again
appeal to them to be brief and to avoid controversies as
much as possible.
The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.

14
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S.

1.00

(or equivalent

in other

currencies)

77-70001-March

1978-2,200
