A/74/348–S/2019/703

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
3 September 2019
Original: English

A CH

General Assembly
Seventy-fourth session
Item 37 of the provisional agenda*
The situation in Afghanistan

Security Council
Seventy-fourth year

The situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security**
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 68/11
and Security Council resolution 2460 (2019), in which the Secretary-General was
requested to report every three months on developments in Afghanistan.
2.
The report provides an update on the activities of the United Nations in
Afghanistan, including political, humanitarian, development and human rights
efforts, since the issuance of his previous report, dated 14 June 2019 ( A/73/902S/2019/493).

II. Relevant developments
3.
During the reporting period, campaigning started for the presidential elections
scheduled for 28 September, as preparations for the vote continued. The United States
of America continued to hold talks with the Taliban, and an intra -Afghan peace
conference was convened in Qatar, with a view to reaching a negotiated settlement of
the conflict. High-level engagements between the Governments of Afghanistan and
Pakistan were carried out in a positive atmosphere. The security situation remained
volatile, with heightened levels of conflict, in particular in the southern, eastern and
south-eastern regions. Civilian casualties decreased in the first half of 2019 but
remained at high levels. At a meeting of the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board,
representatives of the Government of Afghanistan, key donors and the United Nations
discussed achievements under the Geneva Mutual Accountability Framework, as well
as challenges in the Government’s ongoing reform efforts, in particular the slowing
of progress on countering corruption. The humanitarian situation remained serious.

* A/74/150.
** Reissued for technical reasons on 10 September 2019; previously issued under symbol
A/73/990-S/2019/703.

19-14323* (E)

100919

*1914323*

A/74/348
S/2019/703

A.

Political developments
4.
The Independent Election Commission and the Electoral Complaints
Commission continued preparations for the presidential election scheduled for
28 September. In parallel, some political figures, including the former President,
Hamid Karzai, and some presidential candidates argued that reaching a peace
agreement with the Taliban should take priority over elections.
5.
Between 8 and 29 June, the Independent Election Commission updated voter
registration across the country, resulting in the registration of 573,721 new voters, of
whom around 36 per cent were women. In addition, a full voter registration process
was conducted in Ghazni Province, where political tensions and insecurity had
prevented the holding of parliamentary elections in 2018. The decision by the
Commission, on 27 June, to extend the registration period in the province by one
week, along with security challenges in retrieving the registration materials, resulted
in a delay in finalizing the list of voters. On 25 July, the Commi ssion announced a
preliminary figure of 9.6 million registrants in total.
6.
In response to the demands of political parties and some presidential candidates,
the Commission continued preparations for the introduction of biometric voter
verification and the electronic transmission of results on election day. The
Government signed a contract with Dermalog, a technology vendor, for the delivery
of software and additional electronic equipment.
7.
Following the assessment by security agencies of a total of 5,3 88 polling centres
in July, the Ministry of Defence hosted a review exercise of the electoral security
plan, with the participation of the Ministry of the Interior, the Independent Election
Commission and other State entities, as well as the Resolute Suppo rt Mission of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). Security arrangements for the campaign
period were also implemented, including protection measures for candidates. On
28 July, in Kabul, unknown assailants carried out a complex attack on the off ice of
Amrullah Saleh, the running mate of the President, Ashraf Ghani, for the position of
First Vice-President. A total of 21 civilians were killed and 50 were injured in the
attack.
8.
Preparations for electoral observation and electoral disputes resolu tion also
continued. On 30 July, the President approved the appointment of 112 provincial
electoral complaints commissioners nominated by the central Electoral Complaints
Commission, 34 of whom were recommended by the Afghanistan Independent
Human Rights Commission, as required by the Election Law. The new provincial
commissioners took an oath of office on 3 August. As at 15 August, the Electoral
Complaints Commission had received 18 complaints regarding the electoral
campaign in five provinces, mostly related to the alleged misuse of security resources
for election purposes. In addition, the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights
Commission made available its local and provincial offices for voters and candidates
to file complaints regarding political rights violations during the campaign period or
the election, and the National Democratic Institute for International Affairs, a
non-governmental organization headquartered in Washington, D.C., began training
Afghan civil society organizations in electoral observation and announced its
intention to train candidates’ agents for the election. However, the number of
registered election observers remained low in most provinces.
9.
An election budget of $149 million was finalized, with the Government
committing $90 million in funding and the remaining $59 million funded through
donors’ pledges to the United Nations Electoral Support Project operated by the
United Nations Development Programme. On 1 August, the electoral management

2/16

19-14323

A/74/348
S/2019/703

bodies and the United Nations signed a revised project document, reflecting
adjustments to the 2019 election process and budget.
10. Throughout the reporting period, concerns persisted about the use of State
resources for electoral purposes. On 25 June, the Council of Presidential Candidates,
representing eight presidential tickets, staged a demonstration in the Ghazi stadium
in Kabul, calling upon the President to resign from office and allow a caretaker
government to administer the elections. Following the start of the campaign period,
the Council continued to raise concerns about alleged interference by the President in
the electoral process. On 29 July, a presidential candidate, Shahab Hakimi, told the
media that the Council was still discussing its stance on the election, with some
candidates threatening to boycott it if their concerns were not addressed. Separately,
on 13 July, three presidential candidates – Abdullah Abdullah, the Chief Executive,
Hanif Atmar, the former national security adviser, and Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, the
founder of Hizb-i Islami – announced that they had formed a coalition to lobby for
additional transparency mechanisms to prevent the misuse of State resources in the
elections. On 30 July, amid ongoing public debate, the head of the Transparent
Election Foundation of Afghanistan, Mohammad Naim Ayubzada, told the media that
a large number of public officials were participating in election campaigns using
government resources, and warned that such practices could lead to a loss of trust in
the elections. In response to formal complaints, on 1 August, the Electoral Complaints
Commission issued a written warning to both the President and the Chief Executive
for violating electoral campaign regulations, including by using State facilities and
financial resources for campaign purposes. In its warning, the Commission cited the
use of government vehicles and State equipment in campaign activities, as well as the
participation of high-ranking government officials at electoral gatherings.
11. On 19 July, the Election Support Group, chaired by the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and comprising key electoral donors,
issued a statement in which it noted public concerns about maintaining a level playing
field among all candidates and stakeholders. The Group welcomed the stated
commitment of the President and the Chief Executive to a credible election and called
upon both leaders to conduct themselves in a manner consistent with the Election Law
and the code of conduct and to guarantee the autonomy of the electora l management
bodies. On 21 July, the Independent Directorate of Local Governance issued two
orders, postponing subnational recruitment to mid - and senior-level posts until after
the presidential election and ordering officials to refrain from interfering i n electoral
affairs. Subsequently, the Independent Administrative Reform and Civil Service
Commission issued a press statement on 27 July, reminding civil servants of their
obligations under their code of conduct and calling upon them to refrain from
campaigning during work hours or using government resources either for or against
candidates. On the same date, the electoral management bodies issued a press
statement calling upon all stakeholders, especially candidates and supporters, to abide
by the law, including the procedures and regulations governing the campaign.
12. The official presidential election campaign period got off to a slow start on
28 July. On the same day, the President and the Chief Executive officially launched
their election campaigns, each holding large rallies in Kabul. These was followed by
the campaign launches of other presidential candidates, including Enayatullah Hafiz,
also on 28 July, Gulbuddin Hekmatyar on 1 August, Rahmatullah Nabil, the former
Director of the National Directorate for Security, on 3 August and Sayed Noorullah
Jalili on 4 August. Other candidates postponed their official campaign launches, citing
the lack of a level playing field and uncertainty over the impact of the peace process
on the elections as the main reasons for the delays. On 6 August, one presidential
candidate, Zalmay Rassoul, withdrew his candidacy and announced his support for
the President’s ticket. On 8 August, amid reports of internal tensions among
19-14323

3/16

A/74/348
S/2019/703

candidates on his presidential ticket, Hanif Atmar announced the suspension of his
campaign, citing interference in the electoral process by the President and arguing
that election-related political instability could imperil the peace process.
13. Momentum towards a political settlement to end the conflict accelerated,
bolstered by domestic and international efforts. Following a visit to Kabul by the
United States Secretary of State, Mike Pompeo, on 25 June, the United States Special
Representative for Afghanistan Reconciliation, Zalmay Khalilzad, held talks with the
Taliban in Doha from 29 June to 9 July, with a two -day pause for the intra-Afghan
peace conference. Hosted jointly by Qatar and Germany, the conference was attended
by representatives of the Government of Afghanistan, in their individual capacities,
political parties, civil society and the Taliban, with the consent of all parties.
Participants produced a two-page resolution that contained a call for all parties to
meet the demands of the Afghan people by obtaining peace through inclusive
negotiations. They also called for the release of prisoners, the protection of public
infrastructure and the reduction of civilian casualties, and stat ed that post-war
Afghanistan would have an Islamic legal system, assure women’s rights in political,
social, economic, educational and cultural affairs as part of the Islamic framework of
Islamic values and ensure equality for all ethnic groups. Mr. Khalil zad and the Taliban
resumed meetings in Doha on 3 August and the talks were concluded on 11 August.
14. Efforts to build an international consensus in support of the Afghan peace
process continued. On 10 and 11 July, the third trilateral consultation on t he Afghan
peace process was held in Beijing, attended by the Special Envoy of China, Deng
Xijun, the Representative of the President of the Russian Federation, Zamir Kabulov,
and Mr. Khalilzad. The consultation took place in an expanded format, including t he
participation of Pakistan. In a statement, the four countries welcomed the
intra-Afghan meetings held in Doha and Moscow, urged the reduction of violence and
called for an immediate start to intra-Afghan negotiations between the Taliban, the
Government and other Afghans.
15. The Government reconfigured its institutional arrangements in support of the
peace process. On 29 June, the President announced the appointment of his former
Chief of Staff, Salam Rahimi, as State Minister for Peace Affairs. On 27 J uly, the
President issued a decree dissolving the secretariat of the High Peace Council, and on
31 July, the Government announced the formation of a 15 -member negotiating team
to represent the country in future talks with the Taliban. The names of the team
members were not announced.
16. On 20 and 21 July 2019, the Deputy Secretary-General, together with the UnderSecretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and the Executive Directors
of the United Nations Population Fund and the United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), made a visit to Afghanistan
that was focused on women, peace and security. The senior officials recognized the
significant progress made over the past 18 years regarding women ’s rights and
emphasized the need for the meaningful participation of women in political and public
life, including in the peace process and elections. They further stressed the importance
of an inclusive peace process and of addressing discrimination on the basis of gender,
ethnicity and regional differences. The delegation also held a meeting with a diverse
group of women in Kabul, hosted by the First Lady, Rula Ghani, and travelled to
Bamyan Province to meet a variety of community representatives, including women
who undertake the work of mine removal.
17. In her meetings with the President and the Chief Executive, the Deputy
Secretary-General emphasized the importance of an inclusive peace process,
rebuilding trust and addressing discrimination on the basis of gend er, ethnicity and
regional differences.
4/16

19-14323

A/74/348
S/2019/703

18. Under its good offices mandate, UNAMA continued its engagement with
representatives of the Taliban on issues related to the peace process, the protection of
civilians and humanitarian access. My Special Representative for Afghanistan and
Head of UNAMA met with representatives of the movement in Doha on 28 July to
discuss progress towards intra-Afghan negotiations, highlighting, in particular, the
importance of the participation of women in the peace process, as well as the need to
build confidence by reducing violence and implementing other measures to protect
civilians. On 2 and 3 July, UNAMA hosted a meeting in Bishkek, including the
participation of scholars, civil society and former officials from countries in the
region. Discussions at the meeting, which was also attended by representatives of the
United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia, focused
on the role of countries in the region in the peace process in Afghanistan and poss ible
regional support for the country after peace has been established. Participants
highlighted the importance of a regional consensus on peace and called upon the
United Nations to play a central role in any future peace process.
19. UNAMA continued to work with communities and subnational government
authorities in support of local conflict resolution and reconciliation. So far in 2019,
UNAMA has begun to implement seven new local peace initiative projects, while
continuing to implement another eight projects, most of which are aimed at
strengthening local conflict resolution mechanisms and supporting sustainable local level peacebuilding. In a project in Kunar Province, UNAMA facilitated consultations
between two tribes that culminated in a peace jirga, i n which both parties and other
subnational government and community stakeholders, one quarter of whom were
women, successfully resolved a decades-long land dispute. The agreement was widely
covered by local media, prompting community elders in other provin ces to seek the
support of UNAMA in resolving local conflicts.

B.

Security
20. The security situation remained volatile, with a high number of security
incidents. Between 10 May and 8 August, UNAMA recorded a total of 5,856 security related incidents, a 1 per cent increase compared with the same period the previous
year. The highest number of incidents occurred in the southern region, followed by
the eastern and the south-eastern regions, with these three regions accounting for 63
per cent of all incidents. Established trends remain unchanged; 3,294 armed clashes
accounted for 56 per cent of all incidents, despite a 7 per cent decrease in armed
clashes compared with the same period in 2018. Incidents relating to the use of
improvised explosive devices remained the second highest category of incidents,
recording a 17 per cent increase. Suicide attacks decreased by 44 per cent. Afghan
and international military air forces continued to carry out a high number of air
strikes, 506 strikes recorded during the period, a 57 per cent increase compared with
the same period in 2018.
21. Fighting continued at consistently high levels during the reporting period. An
exception was recorded over the days covering the Eid al -Fitr holiday, on which the
levels of fighting declined markedly, in line with historical trends, as both
pro-government forces and anti-government elements reduced their offensive
operations. Conversely, there was no change in the pace of fighting throughout the
holy month of Ramadan, as anti-government elements carried out several suicide
attacks and both parties publicly stated their intention to maintain their operational
momentum. Afghan and international military efforts relied heavily on air strikes to
defend major urban centres against anti-government elements, air strikes in Helmand
and Ghazni Provinces comprising 47 per cent of the total number during the reporting
period. The Afghan National Defence and Security Forces also dedicated significant

19-14323

5/16

A/74/348
S/2019/703

resources to improving security along major roads across Afghanistan, in particular
in Ghazni, Zabul, Balkh and Jowzjan Provinces.
22. Neither pro-government forces nor anti-government elements achieved
significant territorial gains during the reporting period. The most active area of
conflict was Kandahar Province, followed by Helmand and Nangarhar Provinces. The
Afghan National Defence and Security Forces recaptured three district administrative
centres, Deh Yak and Khwajah Omari Districts in Ghazni Province and Bal Chiragh
District in Faryab Province. The Taliban captured Qush Tepah District in Jowzjan
Province and Kiran wa Munjan District in Badakhshan Province, and temporarily
overran three districts, Shamulzai District in Zabul Province, Ma ’ruf District in
Kandahar Province and Dilah District in Paktika Province. Although there were no
significant threats to government control of provincial capitals, high levels of Taliban
activity were reported near the provincial capitals of Farah, Kunduz and Ghazni.
23. High-profile attacks by anti-government elements continued, 22 suicide attacks
being reported during the period compared with 39 in the same period in 2018 and 8
in the previous reporting period. Ten attacks were reported in the city of Kabul,
including three complex attacks, one on 1 July, targeting an Afghan National Defence
and Security Forces logistics compound, one on 28 July, targeting the compound of
the Afghanistan Green Trend party of Mr. Saleh, and one on 7 August, targeting the
police headquarters in the sixth police district of Kabul. Other significant suicide
attacks occurred on 30 May, against the Afghan National Police district headquarters
in Shahidi Hassas district of Uruzgan Province, and on 18 July, against the provincial
police headquarters in the city of Kandahar. The Taliban c laimed responsibility for
both attacks.
24. Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan Province (ISIL-KP) remained
resilient. Afghan and international military forces maintained a high pace of
operations against the group’s strongholds in Nangarhar and Kunar Provinces,
resulting in some degradation of ISIL-KP leadership structures, but the movement
continues to compete with the Taliban in the eastern region and has retained an
operational capability in the city of Kabul. During the reporting period, 183 incidents
were attributed to ISIL-KP, compared with 93 in the same period in 2018. ISIL-KP
claimed 6 suicide attacks during the reporting period, compared with 15 in the same
period in 2018, as well as 2 in Kabul Province and 4 in Nangahar Province. All th e
suicide attacks were conducted using a single attacker wearing a body-borne
improvised explosive device.
25. There were eight incidents involving United Nations personnel during the
reporting period, including three incidents of intimidation, two crimina l-related
incidents and one armed clash: there were no incidents of abduction.

C.

Regional cooperation
26. Bilateral relations between Afghanistan and Pakistan showed signs of
improvement. On 10 June, the two countries conducted the first technical -level review
session of the Afghanistan-Pakistan Action Plan for Peace and Solidarity. On 27 and
28 June, the President visited Pakistan, where he met the Prime Minister, Imran Khan,
and the Foreign Minister, Shah Mahmood Qureshi. During the visit, he expressed
hope that the two countries could move from conflict to cooperation. The Office of
the Prime Minister of Pakistan released a statement in which it was noted that the two
sides had agreed to open a new chapter of friendship and cooperation. Meanwhile,
Pakistan pledged to continue support for talks between the United States and the
Taliban.

6/16

19-14323

A/74/348
S/2019/703

27. Afghanistan continued its engagement with countries in the region through
multilateral forums. On 13 and 14 June, the President attended the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization summit in Bishkek, at which he emphasized the need for a
regional consensus on peace and proposed several mechanisms to strengthen regional
cooperation on issues of mutual interest. On 25 June, a meeting of senior officials of
the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process was held in Ankara. The meeting was focused on
the implementation of the confidence-building measures under the Heart of AsiaIstanbul Process framework. On 22 July, an Afghan delegation participated in the joint
regional conference on counter-terrorism and counter-narcotics under the same
framework. Participants emphasized the need for a regional strategy to counter the
illegal drug trade as part of counter-terrorism efforts. On 6 August, the ambassadors
of Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan in Kabul issued
a joint declaration affirming their support for an Afghan-led, Afghan-owned peace
process, emphasizing that peace and stability in Afghanistan meant peace and stability
in the entire region.
28. As a sign of expanding economic relations among neighbouring countries,
representatives of Afghanistan and Turkmenistan met on 17 June in the city of Herat
to discuss trade and connectivity. Two memorandums of understanding were signed
between the railway administrations of Afghanistan and Turkmenistan on the
Toraghundi-Herat railway project. On 1 July, the Prime Minister of U zbekistan,
Abdulla Aripov, met the Chief Executive of Afghanistan in Balkh Province. The
delegations agreed on the construction of the Surkhan-Pul-e Khumri electricity line
between Uzbekistan and Afghanistan. The first meeting of the Afghan -Uzbek
Intergovernmental Commission for Trade and Economic Cooperation met in Tashkent
on 17 July.

III. Human rights
29. On 30 July, UNAMA released its 2019 midyear update on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. The Mission documented 3,812 civilian casualt ies (1,366
dead and 2,446 injured) in the first six months of 2019, a 27 per cent decrease
compared with the same period the previous year. The overall reduction of civilian
casualties was driven by a decrease in such casualties from suicide attacks by
anti-government elements and ground engagements, while civilian casualties from
aerial and search operations conducted by pro-government forces continued to rise.
Continuing the trend of the first quarter of 2019, the majority of civilian casualties
were attributed to anti-government elements, while pro-government forces were
responsible for more civilian deaths than anti-government elements. UNAMA
attributed 52 per cent of civilian casualties to anti-government elements (33 per cent
to the Taliban, 11 per cent to ISIL-KP and 3 per cent to undetermined anti-government
elements), more than half of which were documented as deliberately targeting
civilians. Some 37 per cent of civilian casualties were attributed to pro -government
forces (18 per cent to the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces, 12 per cent
to international military forces, 2 per cent to pro -government armed groups and the
remainder to multiple or undetermined pro-government forces). The remaining
civilian casualties were from incidents attributed to both anti-government elements
and pro-government forces, including crossfire.
30. UNAMA documented 16 per cent fewer civilian casualties from ground
engagements in comparison with the first six months of 2018. However, ground
engagements remained the leading cause of civilian casualties for the first half of
2019, causing one third of all civilian casualties. The use of improvised explosive
devices in suicide and non-suicide attacks accounted for 28 per cent of all civilian
casualties, with a 79 per cent decrease in civilian casualties from suicide attacks using
19-14323

7/16

A/74/348
S/2019/703

improvised explosive devices. Civilian casualties from aerial operations increased by
39 per cent compared with the same period in 2018, comprising 14 per cent of all
civilian casualties, while civilian casualties from search operations increased by 79
per cent, accounting for 6 per cent of all civilian casualties. Women and children
continue to be severely affected by conflict-related violence, representing 42 per cent
of the overall total of civilian casualties.
31. From 1 April to 30 June, the country task force on monitoring and reporting on
grave violations against children in armed conflict verified seven incidents in which
schools and related personnel were targeted. This represents a large decrease
compared with the 18 incidents verified during the previous quarter. Five incidents
were attributed to the Taliban, one to ISIL-KP and one to the Afghan National Army.
There were three attacks deliberately targeting schools, an indiscriminat e attack
damaging two schools, incidental damage to one school and two incidents involving
threats against teachers and students.
32. The task force verified 12 incidents against hospitals and protected personnel,
compared with 26 in the previous quarter. Eight incidents were attributed to the
Taliban and one each to the Afghan National Army, the Afghan National Police,
international military forces and an undetermined armed opposition group. There
were three cases of intentional killing of or injury to he alth-care personnel, three
abductions, one indiscriminate attack, three cases of incidental damage and two
threats. In total, 31 health-care facilities and 20 health-care personnel were affected.
33. The task force verified eight incidents of the recruitment and use of children
involving 19 boys, compared with two incidents involving 4 boys in the previous
quarter. The six incidents attributed to the Taliban involved 17 boys, who had a
combat role. One incident attributed to the Afghan National Police invo lved the
recruitment and use of a boy. Another boy was recruited for sexual purposes by
Afghan local police and pro-government militia commanders. The task force verified
two incidents of abduction by the Taliban involving two boys, one of whom was killed
and one released, compared with two incidents involving four boys in the previous
quarter. Moreover, the task force verified two incidents of sexual violence involving
two girls raped by the Taliban and a boy used for sexual purposes ( bacha bazi) by
both pro-government militia and Afghan local police commanders, compared with
two incidents involving two boys in the previous quarter.
34. The Government continued to advance the promotion and protection of
women’s rights. On 25 June, the Legislative Committee of the Ministry of Women’s
Affairs began to review the draft regulation on emergency funds for victims of
violence against women, aimed at ensuring the allocation of such funds in the regular
national budget, including the establishment of a transparent fu nd management
mechanism. The review of the 2009 Law on the Elimination of Violence against
Women is being carried out by a technical committee led by the Ministry of Women ’s
Affairs. With the assistance of the justice sector support programme for Afghanist an,
which is supported by the Government of the United States, the Ministry of Women ’s
Affairs prepared an assessment of the implementation of the National Action Plan on
Women, Peace and Security for 2007–2017 and presented it to the Cabinet.
35. The Government also took steps to combat impunity for sexual abuse and
harassment. On 11 July, a case of alleged sexual harassment of Afghan female
footballers was referred to the courts in accordance with the provisions of the Law on
the Elimination of Violence Against Women. A former president of the Afghanistan
Football Federation and five other individuals were charged with rape, sexual
harassment, abuse of jurisdiction and concealment of the crime; all suspects remain
at large. On 17 July, at a four-day national conference on coordination among entities
involved in the elimination of violence against women, the Attorney-General
8/16

19-14323

A/74/348
S/2019/703

announced the establishment of a special department to fight harassment against
women in the workplace. On 25 July, the President issued a president ial order
establishing a special secretariat within the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights
Commission to investigate recent allegations of harassment of women in government
institutions.
36. The national report on the third cycle of the universal period ic review of
Afghanistan (A/HRC/WG.6/32/AFG/1) was considered by the Working Group on the
Universal Periodic Review of the Human Rights Council in January 2019. In its
outcome report (A/HRC/41/5), the Working Group made 258 recommendations. At
the forty-first session of the Human Rights Council in July, the Government of
Afghanistan accepted 235 of those recommendations, noted 22 others and partially
accepted 1. The recommendations that were noted concern the establishment of a
moratorium on the death penalty or its abolition and the accession to human rights
treaties and other treaties to which Afghanistan is not a State party.
37. On 17 July, the President appointed nine new commissioners to the Afghanistan
Independent Human Rights Commission, four of whom are women, including the
Chairperson, Shaharzad Akbar. Sima Samar, who had been the Chairperson since the
Commission was established in 2002, was appointed Special Envoy of the President
and State Minister for Human Rights and International Relations. In a statement
issued on 19 July, the Civil Society Joint Working Group criticized the selection
process of the new commissioners for lack of complianc e with the principles relating
to the status of national institutions (Paris Principles).
38. Journalists and media workers continued to face conflict -related violence.
During the reporting period, UNAMA documented five incidents that resulted in the
injury of two journalists, both male, and threats against three others, including one
woman, as well as threats against a radio station and a television station. In addition,
four civil society activists, including three women, were threatened because of their
human rights work. All of the incidents were attributed to the Taliban. On 24 June,
the Taliban published a statement in which it warned media outlets to stop airing
anti-jihad propaganda paid for by the Government or they would be considered
military targets. During the twenty-sixth meeting of the Government and Media Joint
Committee, chaired by the Second Vice-President, Sarwar Danish, the Government
encouraged journalists and media organizations to continue normal operations and
promised increased security measures. During the reporting period, UNAMA
organized eight events, with 528 participants, including 150 women, on the promotion
of human rights, conflict prevention, access to information and freedom of
expression.

IV. Coordination of development assistance
39. On 22 July, the Government of Afghanistan and the United Nations jointly
convened the twenty-second meeting of the Joint Coordination and Monitoring
Board, jointly chaired by the acting Minister of Finance, Mohammad Humayun
Qayumi, and my Special Representative. The meeting was divided into three sessions.
In the first session, on the Geneva Mutual Accountability Framework, discussions
were focused on progress against anti-corruption indicators and other accountability
benchmarks. Donors noted some progress on reforms, including merit-based civil
service recruitment and the establishment of the Access to Information Commission,
but called for increased efforts to combat impunity for corruption by high -level
officials and enhanced reporting against anti-corruption benchmarks. The
Government reported that it had formally met one goal of the Framework by updating
its 2017 anti-corruption strategy in late 2018. However, the time frame for the strategy

19-14323

9/16

A/74/348
S/2019/703

only covers the period up until December 2019, and the mechani sm to devise a
follow-up strategy remains to be activated. Delays in the implementation of the
Anti-Corruption Law, notably in the establishment of an Anti-Corruption
Commission, have also slowed down overall anti-corruption reforms.
40. At the second session, on growth, development and peace, the Government
presented its plans for economic accelerators, focusing on agriculture, urban planning
and electricity infrastructure. Donors highlighted the need to reduce the country ’s
dependency on aid and to combat the illicit economy. The third session, on sectoral
coordination, was focused on the education and health sectors, with an emphasis on
improving aid coordination. At the conclusion of the meeting, the international
community and the Government agreed to conduct a joint assessment in order to
develop more robust reporting mechanisms for the Geneva Mutual Accountability
Framework.
41. The Government continued to implement its subnational governance policy. On
10 June, the President established the High Council of District Governors under his
leadership to ensure that districts take on increased responsibilities for local
development. By 24 July, the Independent Directorate of Local Governance had
introduced the Law on Local Councils, approved on 5 March 2019 , for subnational
authorities and civil society in five provinces, raising awareness and providing
guidance on the implementation of the Law. On 28 July, the Directorate signed a
memorandum of understanding with civil society organizations, aimed at foster ing
increased cooperation on subnational governance and development.
42. Progress was also made towards civil service reform. On 20 June, the
Independent Administrative Reform and Civil Service Commission reported the
successful completion of merit-based recruitment for 11,500 teaching positions and
6,500 entry-level civil servant positions in the capital and provinces since its launch
in 2018. In addition, a total of 55 district governors and provincial heads of line
departments have passed the new two-week leadership programme of the Afghanistan
Civil Service Institute, introduced on 22 June, which is aimed at training senior -level
civil servants working at the subnational level.
43. The output of the Anti-Corruption Justice Centre took a downward turn during
the reporting period. In June and July, its primary court heard two cases, one each
month, involving six defendants, which resulted in the acquittal of one defendant and
the conviction of five. The court also issued judicial rulings accepting jurisdic tion to
hear two cases arising from the 2018 parliamentary elections. The Centre ’s appeal
court adjudicated one case, the appeal by a former Deputy Minister against a
conviction and a sentence of three years’ imprisonment by the primary court. The
safety of justice sector officials remained a concern. On 6 July, one of the Centre ’s
prosecutors was shot dead while on his way to work. An administrative staff member
who was travelling with the prosecutor was also shot but survived the attack. Of the
list of 127 arrest warrants and 128 summonses, 71 warrants (22 outside Afghanistan)
and 82 summonses (5 outside Afghanistan) remained to be executed, while only one
person on the list was convicted and two were acquitted in a final verdict. As of
August 2019, the Centre has tried a total of 59 cases involving 229 defendants since
its establishment in 2016, convicting 183 and acquitting 44.
44. The Afghan economy continues to face significant challenges. On 21 July, the
World Bank released its half-yearly Afghanistan Development Update, in which it
reported an annual growth rate of 1.8 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP) in
2018, down from 2.7 per cent in 2017. The Bank attributed the decline to decreased
agricultural output as a result of the drought in 2017 and 2018, as well as the
deterioration of business confidence as a result of ongoing conflict, heightened
political volatility owing to the elections and uncertainty over the peace process. The
10/16

19-14323

A/74/348
S/2019/703

Bank reported that poverty was estimated to have increased in 2018 , driven by
declining per capita incomes, in particular in rural areas. The Bank also noted that
fiscal management remained strong, with an overall fiscal surplus of 0.7 per cent in
2018 and an improved budget execution rate of 92 per cent, compared with 8 3 per
cent in 2017.

V. Humanitarian assistance
45. The protracted conflict continues to cause extreme levels of physical and
psychological harm and high levels of displacement, further compounded by political
instability, drought, sudden-onset natural disasters, food insecurity and poverty. These
factors have resulted in significant numbers of people on the move. Between 16 April
and 29 July, 48,000 people were displaced, amounting to a total of an additional
206,000 internally displaced persons since the beginning of 2019, more than half of
whom (58 per cent) were children under the age of 18. Conflict -related displacements
in 2019 have increased by 2 per cent compared with the same period in 2018, and
many displaced families have no immediate prospect of returning to their areas of
origin. Internally displaced persons living in temporary settlements continued to face
difficult conditions, including a lack of basic essential services beyond the initial
provision of humanitarian assistance.
46. Owing to fighting between pro-government forces and anti-government
elements, 28,982 individuals were displaced from Baharak, Namak Ab and Iskamish
districts in Takhar Province to the provincial capital, Taluqan. The Government and
humanitarian agencies provided affected households with essential emergency
assistance, including shelter and emergency relief items.
47. The humanitarian drought response to displaced people ended in June, with 5.2
million people having been provided with food assistance, agricultural i nputs and
other forms of humanitarian assistance. Nevertheless, approximately 100,000 people
who were displaced to urban centres in Herat and Badghis in 2018 as a result of
drought are now living in protracted displacement. Early-season floods from January
to May affected thousands of families. The Government and humanitarian partners
provided emergency assistance to more than 265,300 people affected by the floods.
48. The most recent nutrition survey in Afghanistan showed that 22 of the 34
provinces are above the emergency level threshold for acute malnutrition at the time
of reporting. Since 16 May, the United Nations and partners have dispatched 362 tons
of specialized nutritious food to health centres across the country to support 99,000
children under 5 years of age and 46,700 pregnant and breastfeeding women suffering
from severely acute malnutrition.
49. Through the summer months, the ongoing agricultural harvest is expected to
improve the nutritional situation, although chronic food insecurity issues will persist
in many parts of the country. Average or above-average precipitation, better pasture
conditions and improved wheat production in 2019 are expected to have a positive
impact on food security for many households. Recent assessments have shown a 40
per cent increase in production compared with the same period in 2018, as well as a
slight increase in livestock sale prices. However, the impact of crop pests, diseases,
post-harvest losses and recent floods is still unknown.
50. While the return of undocumented Afghans from the Islamic Republic of Iran
and Pakistan has decreased by more than one third compared with 2018, the number
of Afghans returning from Turkey has increased. Between 16 April and 20 July 2019,
268,076 undocumented persons and refugee returnees arrived in Afghanistan,
including 109,543 undocumented returnees from the Islamic Republic of Iran (of

19-14323

11/16

A/74/348
S/2019/703

whom 45,995 returned spontaneously and 63,548 were deported), 4,737 from
Pakistan (of whom 4,123 returned spontaneously and 614 were deporte d) and 1,524
from European States and Turkey (of whom 372 returned voluntarily and 1,152 were
deported, including 893 people who were deported from Turkey). During the same
period, 4,081 registered refugees returned to the country, mostly from the Islamic
Republic of Iran and Pakistan. The number of registered refugees returning to
Afghanistan was 58 per cent lower than in the same period in 2018. In Pakistan, the
distribution of Afghan Citizen Cards to undocumented Afghans is continuing. As at 4
July, 546,511 Afghans had received cards out of a total of 879,000 undocumented
Afghans who registered to receive them. Holders of such cards are allowed to stay in
Pakistan until 31 October 2019; a further extension is still under discussion.
51. The conflict continued to generate high demand for trauma services. From
16 May to 16 August, 24,232 trauma cases received treatment, a 12 per cent increase
over the same period in 2018. The need for trauma care was particularly high in
Nangarhar, Kandahar, Helmand, Zabul and Ghazni Provinces, where clashes have
taken a heavy toll and access to health care has been reduced. During the reporting
period, 15 partners from the health cluster provided consultations to 48,923 people,
61 per cent of whom were women and girls.
52. A total of 12 confirmed cases of polio were reported during the first half of
2019, 2 in Kandahar, 5 in Helmand, 4 in Uruzgan and 1 in Kunar. Access issues owing
to a Taliban-imposed ban on all polio vaccination activities in the southern region
remain the primary reason for sustained polio transmission in the country, and,
notably, 11 of the 12 reported polio cases are from areas affected by the ban. In the
light of the ban, a contingency plan to sustain population immunity was implemented,
including site-to-site vaccination, the establishment of firewalls around inaccessible
areas by permanent transit teams, the inclusion of polio vaccination during measles
vaccination campaigns and a focus on strengthening routine immunization in
inaccessible areas. Complementary vaccination activities, such as permanent transit
teams and the vaccination of cross-border travellers, continue to reach more than 1
million children each month.
53. From May to August 2019, the United Nations and its partners cleared 4.7 km 2
of land contaminated by high-impact explosives, benefiting 34 communities.
Responding to the protection concerns of returnees from the Islamic Republic of Iran
and Pakistan, approximately 114,729 people in Afghanistan received risk education
funded by the United Nations during the reporting period.
54. The continued use of indiscriminate and unlawful victim-activated pressureplate improvised explosive devices by anti-government elements caused 205 civilian
casualties (58 deaths and 147 injured) in the first six months of 2019. More than half
of those casualties occurred in the southern region of Afghanistan. Such devices
continued to account for close to 50 per cent of mine action casualties in Afghanistan.
55. Widespread insecurity, mine contamination and difficult terrain continue to
present challenges to humanitarian access and the safety of humanitarian personnel.
From 1 January to 8 August, 24 aid workers were killed, 29 injured and 30 abducted,
compared with 27 killed, 55 injured and 87 abducted in 2018. I n total, there were 288
humanitarian incidents involving aid workers, assets and activities over the first seven
months of 2019. In all of 2018, there were 382 such incidents. Deliberate attacks
continued on health facilities and health workers, causing death and injury to staff
and the forced closure of health facilities.
56. In the humanitarian response plan for 2018–2021, 6.3 million people were
identified as being in need of humanitarian assistance in 2019, and requests were
made for almost $612 million to reach up to 4.5 million people during the year.
According to the Financial Tracking Service, $163.5 million in humanitarian funding
12/16

19-14323

A/74/348
S/2019/703

had been received as at 29 July 2019, or 26.7 per cent of the total funding required
for the humanitarian response in 2019. Despite the funding shortfall, humanitarian
partners had been able to reach 2.7 million people with assistance as at the end of
March.

VI. Counter-narcotics
57. On 29 July, the United Nations released the second part of the 2018 Afghanistan
Opium Survey, entitled “Challenges to sustainable development, peace and security”,
in partnership with the National Statistics and Information Authority of Afghanistan.
The report provides detailed information on the location and extent of opi um poppy
cultivation, potential opium production and the socioeconomic situation in rural
areas. The sharp decreases in opium cultivation and production from the record highs
of 2017 followed a sustained lack of rain and snow during the 2017/18 wet season,
and the resultant drought badly affected the agricultural sector, with incomes
reportedly falling by half in severely affected rural areas. A decrease in opium
cultivation and production led to a 56 per cent decline in the funds derived at the farm
gate from opium, from $1.4 billion in 2017 to $604 million in 2018. An estimated
$29 million was generated in illegal taxation of farm-gate revenues, of which
approximately $21 million was collected by anti-government elements, including the
Taliban. It was also estimated in the report that the gross value of the opiate economy
in Afghanistan was between $1.2 and 2.2 billion, a decline of 27 per cent to 51 per
cent compared with 2017, but still representing between 6 per cent and 11 per cent of
GDP.
58. From 1 June to 30 July, law enforcement authorities conducted a total of 773
counter-narcotics operations, leading to seizures of 600 kg of heroin, 5,000 kg of
morphine, 23,130 kg of opium, 4,040 kg of hashish, 300 kg of methamphetamine,
13,900 tablets of 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine, 111,500 kg of solid
precursor chemicals, 75,250 litres of liquid precursor chemicals, 72,420 kg of poppy
seeds and 3,580 kg of henbane. In total, 56 laboratories (55 heroin and 1
methamphetamine) were dismantled and four drug stockpiles were destroyed. The
operations led to the arrest of 879 suspects and related seizures of 120 vehicles, 61
weapons and four radios. Seven officers of the Afghan Counter-Narcotics Police were
killed and eight were wounded while carrying out their law enforcement operations.

VII. Mission support
59. As at 15 July, vacancy rates at UNAMA were 6 per cent for international staff,
4 per cent for National Professional Officers and 3 per cent for national staff,
compared with the approved rates of 7 per cent, 5 per cent and 3 per cent, respectively.
The proportion of female staff remained low, at 35 per cent for international staff, 41
per cent for United Nations Volunteers, 13 per cent for National Professional Officers
and 8 per cent for national staff. During the reporting period, the Mission continued
to implement its national United Nations Volunteer programme, aimed at establishing
a pool of qualified female candidates for possible future recruitment to staff positions.
A total of 30 women were recruited under the 2019 programme. Between 1 May and
1 July, UNAMA conducted 111 road and 14 air missions, as well as 579 reverse
outreach missions, during which district representatives visited UNAMA field
offices.

19-14323

13/16

A/74/348
S/2019/703

VIII. Observations
60. Over the coming months, the citizens of Afghanistan will face profound choices,
which could determine the future of the country for years to come. The winner of the
presidential elections will take on the hefty responsibility of leading the country
through the next phase of its journey towards stability and self-reliance and, above
all, of pursuing a negotiated settlement to end the devastating conflict. To fulfil those
responsibilities, the Government of Afghanistan must be viewed as accountable to
and representative of the Afghan people.
61. Elections remain the most widely accepted means of conferring political
legitimacy in Afghanistan. In order to ensure that the results are accepted by the
population, the elections require the responsible participation of all stak eholders.
They must be contested on a level playing field, without unduly favouring any
candidate. The public commitment of Mr. Ghani and Mr. Abdullahto contesting the
elections fairly, and the steps taken by the Government to separate the functions of
the State from the electoral contest, are welcome in that regard. At the same time,
allegations of misuse of State resources and perceptions of interference in the work
of the electoral management bodies are concerning. All stakeholders, including
candidates and their supporters, must abide by the laws and regulations governing the
electoral process, uphold the commitments made in the code of conduct for candidates
and act in a manner that enhances trust in the process and its outcomes.
62. I appeal to all national leaders and candidates to display leadership in
discouraging fraud and to take firm action to prevent it. Those who attempt or commit
fraud must be held to account. However, I call upon leaders to refrain from making
spurious or sweeping allegations of fraud without sufficient evidence. I urge all actors
to bring any allegations of fraud and irregularities to the appropriate institutions in
accordance with established procedures, and I urge the Electoral Complaints
Commission and the court system to carry out their mandates effectively.
63. The electoral preparations, in particular the completion of the top -up voter
registration exercise, should allow more Afghans to vote in the presidential elections,
many of them for the first time. The Government’s unprecedented commitment of
$90 million to fund the elections marks the first instance since 2001 in which Afghan
elections have been funded primarily from the national budget. Given the apparent
awareness gap among voters and other stakeholders about the electoral process, I urge
the electoral management bodies to further strengthen their public outreach.
64. The volatile security situation is highly concerning, including the direct threats
to the election process by anti-government elements that may discourage many
Afghans from voting. I call upon the Taliban and other armed groups to desist from
threatening or targeting electoral staff, candidates or voters; to refrain from damaging
electoral sites or disrupting electoral processes; and to allow the pe ople of
Afghanistan to exercise their political rights in safety and without fear of violence,
intimidation or retaliation. Attacks directed at polling centres and civilians
participating in the electoral process are violations of international law, and
perpetrators must be held accountable.
65. The war in Afghanistan has been long and brutal, and the path to peace will be
challenging. The continuation of talks between the United States and the Taliban, the
intra-Afghan peace dialogue in Qatar and the strengthening of efforts to build a
regional consensus on peace have given rise to cautious optimism that a formal peace
process may soon begin. Such a process, however, will be sustainable only if it is
inclusive, protective of the fundamental rights of all Afghans and grounded in a broad
consensus. Once again, I call for direct talks between the Government of Afghanistan
and the Taliban, aimed at resolving the profound issues which can be decided only by
14/16

19-14323

A/74/348
S/2019/703

and between Afghans. The United Nations stands ready to support such a process in
any way it can.
66. Afghan women have paid a high price during the conflict that has affected their
country during the past four decades. Today, they are rising to reclaim their rightful
place in all areas of society and are playing a central role in creating peaceful,
inclusive communities, as recognized in the National Action Plan on Women, Peace
and Security. Addressing the Council in July, the Deputy Secretary-General cited the
strong call from Afghan women for peace, specifically peace that safeguards their
hard-won rights and does not backtrack on what has been achieved. I reiterate her call
that Afghan women must enjoy full and meaningful participation in all phases of the
peace process and take part in decisions that will affect their future.
67. The economic development of Afghanistan must be underpinned by existing
funding commitments from its international partners and by steady progress towards
self-reliance by the Afghan State. Constructive discussions between the Government,
key donors and the United Nations were held at the Joint Coordination and
Monitoring Board meeting in July, and the commitment to reformulating reporting
mechanisms for the Geneva Mutual Accountability Framework is welcome. As the
Government has acknowledged, securing the economic future o f Afghanistan will
also require the incremental development of its private sector, improved investor
confidence and enhanced trade and infrastructure connectivity with regional partners.
Only by harnessing those factors will Afghanistan be able to provide employment
opportunities for the hundreds of thousands of young Afghans who enter the labour
force each year and create the conditions for sustainable prosperity.
68. Despite some progress, corruption remains a pernicious challenge in
Afghanistan, diverting valuable resources from where they are needed most and
eroding public confidence in State institutions. The slowing pace of anti -corruption
reforms, in particular in the domains of asset declaration and verification and the
prosecution of corrupt officials, is a source of concern. I encourage the Government
to redouble its efforts in those areas, which are crucial in the ongoing drive to combat
impunity for corruption offences and establish true equality before the law.
69. Civilian casualties decreased during the first half of 2019 compared with the
same period in 2018. However, I remain concerned about the high level of harm that
the conflict continues to inflict on civilians, including loss of life and injuries.
Anti-government elements continue to deliberately target civilians, mainly through
the use of suicide and non-suicide improvised explosive devices. I echo the calls of
Afghans to bring the number of civilian casualties down to zero. All parties to the
conflict must respect their obligations under international humanitarian law and
human rights law and take immediate measures to prevent civilian casualties.
70. The Government’s acceptance of most of the recommendations made during its
third cycle of the universal periodic review by the Human Rights Council in July,
including those calling for the prompt investigation of allegations of arbitrary
detention, torture, enforced disappearances and extrajudicial killings, as well as the
prosecution of perpetuators, is welcome. I encourage the Government to consider
acceding to the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from
Enforced Disappearance and to establish a moratorium on the use of the death penalty
with the aim of fully abolishing it, in accordance with relevant General Assembly
resolutions. The treatment of security- and conflict-related detainees, including
minors, requires additional renewed attention, especially in the fulfilment of
procedural protections.
71. Afghanistan remains one of the most dangerous countries in the wo rld for
humanitarian workers, who continue to face unacceptable risks as they carry out their
invaluable work. The rise in attacks on aid workers so far in 2019, as well as
19-14323

15/16

A/74/348
S/2019/703

continuing high levels of attacks against health and educational facilities, are
unacceptable. Such attacks represent a violation of international humanitarian law
and can deprive vulnerable communities of access to essential humanitarian
assistance. I call upon all parties to the conflict to refrain from attacking humanitarian
workers and disrupting humanitarian programming, and to ensure the safe access of
such workers to communities most in need. I also call upon donors to increase their
funding of the humanitarian response plan, which remains alarmingly underfunded.
72. I thank the United Nations personnel in Afghanistan and my Special
Representative for Afghanistan and Head of UNAMA, Tadamichi Yamamoto, for their
continued dedication under challenging conditions to fulfil our commitments in
support of the people of Afghanistan.

16/16

19-14323
