United Nations

A/RES/58/165

General Assembly

Distr.: General
4 March 2004

Fifty-eighth session
Agenda item 117 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 22 December 2003
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/58/508/Add.1 and Corr.1)]

58/165. International Covenants on Human Rights
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 56/144 of 19 December 2001 and Commission on
Human Rights resolution 2002/78 of 25 April 2002, 1
Mindful that the International Covenants on Human Rights 2 constitute the first
all-embracing and legally binding international treaties in the field of human rights
and, together with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 3 form the core of the
International Bill of Human Rights,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General 4 on the status of the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,2 the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights2 and the Optional Protocols to the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 5
Recalling the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and reaffirming that all
human rights and fundamental freedoms are universal, indivisible, interdependent
and interrelated and that the promotion and protection of one category of rights
should never exempt or excuse States from the promotion and protection of the
other rights,
Recognizing the important role of the Human Rights Committee and the
Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights in examining the progress
made by States parties in fulfilling the obligations undertaken in the International
Covenants on Human Rights and the Optional Protocols to the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and in providing recommendations to States
parties on their implementation,

_______________
1
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2002, Supplement No. 3 (E/2002/23), chap. II,
sect. A.
2
Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3
Resolution 217 A (III).
4
A/58/307.
5
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex, and resolution 44/128, annex.

03 50448

A/RES/58/165

Considering that the effective functioning of the Human Rights Committee
and the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights is indispensable for the
full and effective implementation of the International Covenants on Human Rights,
Recognizing the importance of regional human rights instruments and
monitoring mechanisms in complementing the universal system of promotion and
protection of human rights,
Reaffirms the importance of the International Covenants on Human
1.
Rights2 as major components of international efforts to promote universal respect
for and observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms;
2.
Welcomes once again the initiative of the Secretary-General at the
Millennium Assembly of the United Nations to invite heads of State and
Government to sign, ratify or accede to the International Covenants on Human
Rights, and expresses its appreciation to those States that have done so;
Strongly appeals to all States that have not yet done so to become parties
3.
to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights2 and the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,2 as well as to consider as a
matter of priority acceding to the Optional Protocols to the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights5 and making the declaration provided for in article 41
of the Covenant;
4.
Invites the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to
intensify systematic efforts to encourage States to become parties to the
International Covenants on Human Rights and, through the programme of advisory
services in the field of human rights, to assist such States, at their request, in
ratifying or acceding to the Covenants and to the Optional Protocols to the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights with a view to achieving
universal adherence;
Emphasizes the importance of the strictest compliance by States parties
5.
with their obligations under the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and,
where applicable, the Optional Protocols to the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights;
Also emphasizes that States must ensure that any measure to combat
6.
terrorism complies with their obligations under relevant international law, including
their obligations under the International Covenants on Human Rights;
Stresses the importance of avoiding the erosion of human rights by
7.
derogation, and underlines the necessity of strict observance of the agreed
conditions and procedures for derogation under article 4 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, bearing in mind the need for States parties
to provide the fullest possible information during states of emergency so that the
justification for the appropriateness of measures taken in those circumstances can be
assessed, and in this regard particularly takes note of General Comment No. 29
adopted by the Human Rights Committee; 6
8.
Encourages States parties to consider limiting the extent of any
reservations that they lodge to the International Covenants on Human Rights, to
_______________
6

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 40 (A/56/40), vol. I,
annex VI.

2

A/RES/58/165

formulate any reservations as precisely and narrowly as possible and to ensure that
no reservation is incompatible with the object and purpose of the relevant treaty;
9.
Also encourages States parties to review regularly any reservations made
in respect of the provisions of the International Covenants on Human Rights and the
Optional Protocols to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights with a
view to withdrawing them;
10. Welcomes the annual reports of the Human Rights Committee submitted
to the General Assembly at its fifty-seventh 7 and fifty-eighth 8 sessions, and takes
note of the General Comments adopted by the Committee; 9
11. Also welcomes the reports of the Committee on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights on its twenty-fifth, twenty-sixth and twenty-seventh sessions 10 and
on its twenty-eighth and twenty-ninth sessions, 11 and takes note of the General
Comments adopted by the Committee;9
12. Urges States parties to fulfil their reporting obligations under article 40
of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights on time and to attend and
participate in the consideration of the reports by the Human Rights Committee when
so requested, and in this regard takes note of General Comment No. 30 adopted by
the Committee;9
13. Also urges States parties to fulfil their reporting obligations under
article 16 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights on
time and to attend and participate in the consideration of the reports by the
Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights when so requested;
14. Further urges States parties to make use in their reports of
gender-disaggregated data, and stresses the importance of taking fully into account a
gender perspective in the implementation of the International Covenants on Human
Rights at the national level, including in the national reports of States parties and in
the work of the Human Rights Committee and of the Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights;
15. Strongly encourages States parties that have not yet submitted core
documents to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights to do so, and invites all States parties regularly to review and update their
core documents; 12
16. Urges States parties to take duly into account, in implementing the
provisions of the International Covenants on Human Rights, the recommendations
and observations made during the consideration of their reports by the Human
Rights Committee and by the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,
as well as the views adopted by the Human Rights Committee under the first
Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;
17. Invites States parties to give particular attention to the dissemination at
the national level of their reports submitted to the Human Rights Committee and the
_______________
7

Ibid., Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 40 (A/57/40).
Ibid., Fifty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 40 (A/58/40).
9
See HRI/GEN/1/Rev.6.
10
Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2002, Supplement No. 2 (E/2002/22).
11
Ibid., 2003, Supplement No. 2 (E/2003/22).
12
See HRI/CORE/1 and addenda.
8

3

A/RES/58/165

Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the summary records relating
to the examination of those reports by the Committees and the recommendations and
observations made by the Committees after the examination of those reports;
18. Urges all States to publish the texts of the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights and the Optional Protocols to the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights in as many local languages as possible and to distribute them
and make them known as widely as possible in their territories;
19. Urges each State party to translate, publish and make available as widely
as possible in its territory by appropriate means the full text of the concluding
observations on its reports to the Human Rights Committee and the Committee on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights;
20. Reiterates that States parties should take into account, in their
nomination of members to the Human Rights Committee and the Committee on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, that the Committees shall be composed of
persons of high moral character and recognized competence in the field of human
rights, consideration being given to the usefulness of the participation of some
persons having legal experience, as well as to equal representation of women and
men, and that members serve in their personal capacity, and also reiterates that, in
the elections of the Committees, consideration shall be given to equitable
geographical distribution of membership and to the representation of the different
forms of civilization and of the principal legal systems;
21. Invites the Human Rights Committee and the Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, when considering the reports of States parties, to
continue to identify specific needs that might be addressed by United Nations
departments, funds and programmes and the specialized agencies, including through
the advisory services and technical assistance programme of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights;
22. Stresses the need for improved coordination among relevant United
Nations mechanisms and bodies in supporting States parties, upon their request, in
implementing the International Covenants on Human Rights and the Optional
Protocols to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and
encourages continued efforts in this direction;
23. Welcomes the meeting held by the Human Rights Committee and States
parties in October 2002 and the meeting held by the Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights and States parties in May 2003 to exchange ideas on how
to render the working methods of the Committees more efficient, and encourages all
States parties to continue to contribute to the dialogue with practical and concrete
proposals and ideas on ways to improve the effective functioning of the
Committees;
24. Also welcomes the continuing efforts of the Human Rights Committee
and the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights to strive for uniform
standards in the implementation of the provisions of the International Covenants on
Human Rights, and appeals to other bodies dealing with similar human rights
questions to respect those uniform standards, as expressed in the general comments
of the Committees;
25. Notes the need for further consideration of the issue of justiciability of
the rights set forth in the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights and for further efforts towards developing indicators and benchmarks to
4

A/RES/58/165

measure progress in the national implementation by States parties of the rights
protected by the Covenant;
26. Takes note with interest of the establishment by the Commission on
Human Rights at its fifty-ninth session of an open-ended working group with a view
to considering options regarding the elaboration of an optional protocol to the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and making
specific recommendations on its course of action concerning the question of such an
optional protocol, and encourages all parties to participate actively in the first
session of the working group;
27. Encourages the specialized agencies that have not yet done so to submit
their reports on the progress made in achieving the observance of the provisions of
the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, in accordance
with article 18 of the Covenant, and expresses its appreciation to those that have
done so;
28. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to assist States parties to
the International Covenants on Human Rights in the preparation of their reports,
including by convening seminars or workshops at the national level for the training
of government officials engaged in the preparation of such reports and by exploring
other possibilities available under the programme of advisory services in the field of
human rights;
29. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights effectively assists the Human Rights
Committee and the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights in the
implementation of their respective mandates by providing, inter alia, adequate
Secretariat staff resources and conference and other relevant support services;
30. Welcomes the initiative of the Secretary-General, taking into account the
suggestions of the Human Rights Committee, to take determined steps, in particular
through the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat, to give more
publicity to the work of that Committee and of the Committee on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights;
31. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
sixtieth session, under the item entitled “Human rights questions”, a report on the
status of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocols to
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, including all reservations
and declarations.
77th plenary meeting
22 December 2003

5
