A/RES/60/236 B

United Nations

Distr.: General
23 May 2006

General Assembly
Sixtieth session
Agenda item 127

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 8 May 2006
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/60/601/Add.1)]

60/236. Pattern of conferences
B

1

The General Assembly,
Recalling its relevant resolutions, including resolutions 40/243 of
18 December 1985, 41/213 of 19 December 1986, 43/222 A to E of 21 December
1988, 51/211 A to E of 18 December 1996, 52/214 of 22 December 1997, 53/208 A
to E of 18 December 1998, 54/248 of 23 December 1999, 55/222 of 23 December
2000, 56/242 of 24 December 2001, 56/254 D of 27 March 2002, 56/262 of
15 February 2002, 56/287 of 27 June 2002, 57/283 A of 20 December 2002,
57/283 B of 15 April 2003, 58/250 of 23 December 2003, 59/265 of 23 December
2004 and 60/236 A of 23 December 2005,
Reaffirming its resolution 42/207 C of 11 December 1987, in which it
requested the Secretary-General to ensure the equal treatment of the official
languages of the United Nations,
Having considered the report of the Committee on Conferences for 2005, 2 the
relevant reports of the Secretary-General 3 and the report of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 4
Reaffirming the provisions relevant to conference services of its resolutions on
multilingualism,
I
Takes note of the report of the Committee on Conferences for 2005; 2

_______________
1
Resolution 60/236, in section VI of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session,
Supplement No. 49 (A/60/49), vol. I, becomes resolution 60/236 A.
2
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 32 (A/60/32).
3
A/60/93 and Corr.1 and A/60/112.
4
A/60/433.

06-34422

A/RES/60/236 B

II
A.

Utilization of conference-servicing resources

1.
Reaffirms the practice that, in the use of conference rooms, priority must
be given to the meetings of Member States;
2.
Requests the Secretary-General, when preparing budget proposals for
conference services, to ensure that the level of resources proposed for temporary
assistance is commensurate with the full demand of services, estimated on the basis
of current experience;
Notes with satisfaction that the overall utilization factor at the four main
3.
duty stations increased to 83 per cent in 2004 from 77 per cent in 2003, exceeding
the benchmark for the first time since 2000;
Recognizes the importance of the meetings of regional and other major
4.
groupings of Member States for the smooth functioning of the sessions of
intergovernmental bodies, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure that, as far
as possible, all requests for conference services for the meetings of regional and
other major groupings of Member States are met;
Notes with concern the continued decrease in the percentage of meetings
5.
held by regional and other major groupings of Member States that were provided
with interpretation services, at the four main duty stations, from 98 per cent during
the period from May 2001 to April 2002, to 92 per cent during the period from May
2002 to April 2003, to 90 per cent during the period from May 2003 to April 2004,
to 85 per cent during the period from May 2004 to April 2005, despite the fact that
the number of meetings requesting the provision of interpretation noticeably
decreased, by 15 per cent, during the period from May 2004 to April 2005;
Recalls that meetings held by regional and other major groupings of
6.
Member States are provided with interpretation services on an ad hoc basis, in
accordance with established practice;
Once again urges intergovernmental bodies to spare no effort at the
7.
planning stage to take into account the meetings of regional and other major
groupings of Member States, to make provision for such meetings in their
programmes of work and to notify conference services, well in advance, of any
cancellations so that unutilized conference-servicing resources may, to the extent
possible, be reassigned to meetings of regional and other major groupings of
Member States;
Notes that improvements in the utilization factor might entail a reduction
8.
in the availability of conference services for meetings of regional groups, and
requests the Secretary-General to explore innovative ways to address this problem
and to report to the General Assembly through the Committee on Conferences;
Welcomes the steps taken by those bodies that have adjusted their
9.
programmes of work in order to achieve the optimum utilization of conferenceservicing resources, and requests the Committee on Conferences to continue
consultations with the secretariats and bureaux of bodies that underutilize their
conference-servicing resources, in line with what was requested by paragraph 2 of
section II.A of its resolution 59/265;
10. Recalls its several resolutions, including resolution 59/265, section II.A,
paragraph 8, reaffirms that, in conformity with the headquarters rule, all meetings of
Nairobi-based United Nations bodies shall take place in Nairobi, except as
2

A/RES/60/236 B

otherwise authorized by the General Assembly or the Committee on Conferences
acting on its behalf, and requests the Secretary-General to report on the subject to
the Assembly at its sixty-first session through the Committee on Conferences;
11. Strongly discourages any invitation to host meetings that would violate
the headquarters rule at the United Nations Office at Nairobi and at other United
Nations centres with low utilization levels;
12. Welcomes the efforts undertaken so far to increase utilization of the
conference facilities at the Economic Commission for Africa, in particular the
introduction by the Commission of an integrated system for the management of its
conferences and the conducting of a fact-finding mission to identify best practices at
similar conference centres within the United Nations system;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to ensure that the
conference centre at the Economic Commission for Africa establishes and develops
linkages with other centres and bodies and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its sixty-first session through the Committee on Conferences;
14. Notes that the strict implementation of the headquarters minimum
operating security standards has compelled the Economic Commission for Africa to
restrict the utilization of its conference centre to organizations of the United Nations
family, foreign representatives accredited to Addis Ababa, the African Union,
recognized international non-governmental organizations and the Government of
Ethiopia;
15. Invites the Secretary-General to explore means to increase the utilization
of the conference centre of the Economic Commission for Africa, bearing in mind
the headquarters minimum operating security standards, and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its sixty-first session, through the Committee on Conferences;
B.

Reform of the Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management

1.
Reaffirms that the Fifth Committee is the appropriate Main Committee of
the General Assembly entrusted with responsibilities for administrative and
budgetary matters;
Also reaffirms that the major goals of the reform of the Department for
2.
General Assembly and Conference Management of the Secretariat are to provide
high-quality documents in a timely manner in all official languages, as well as highquality conference services to Member States at all duty stations, and to achieve
those aims as efficiently and cost-effectively as possible, in accordance with the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly;
Notes the ongoing efforts towards the attainment of integrated global
3.
management, recognizes the upgrading of the information technology capacity at the
United Nations Office at Nairobi, which is essential for the successful achievement
of integrated global management, and requests the Secretary-General to keep the
General Assembly apprised of progress made in this regard;
Also notes the initial measures taken so far by the Department to seek the
4.
evaluation by Member States of the quality of the conference services provided to
them as a key performance indicator of the Department, including through
language-specific informational meetings twice a year, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to ensure that such measures provide equal opportunities to Member States

3

A/RES/60/236 B

to present their evaluation in the six official languages of the United Nations and are
in full compliance with relevant resolutions of the General Assembly;
5.
Welcomes the progress achieved in the implementation of the Electronic
Meetings Planning and Resource Allocation System (e-Meets) and the electronic
documentation management concept (e-Doc);
Notes the ongoing efforts towards the establishment of the integrated
6.
global management system, and requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its sixty-first session on the outcome of the work of the task
forces through the Committee on Conferences;
Takes note of the conclusions of the departmental task force on workload
7.
standards, 5 and requests the Secretary-General, while reviewing the issue of
workload standards, which date from 1976, and performance measurement tools in
the context of the introduction of applicable information technologies, to take fully
into account the unique nature of the functions of the language services of the
Department;
Requests the Secretary-General to further explore the issue of offering
8.
information technology-related training (including keyboarding) and building basic
information technology skills requirements into vacancy announcements;
Recalls section II.B, paragraph 10, of its resolution 59/265, and in this
9.
regard looks forward to the submission of the proposal referred to in that paragraph;
10. Reaffirms section II.B, paragraph 10, of its resolution 57/283 B, and in
that context stresses the importance of maintaining the official records editing
function, as well as the importance of retaining the concordance principle in order to
ensure equally valid texts of resolutions in all six official languages;
III
Documentation and publication-related matters
1.
Emphasizes the paramount importance of the equality of the six official
languages of the United Nations;
2.
Notes with concern the continued high level of late submissions of
documentation by author departments, which, in turn, negatively impact the
functioning of intergovernmental bodies, and requests the Secretary-General to
report to the General Assembly, at its sixty-first session, through the Committee on
Conferences, on impediments, if any, to achieving full compliance with the tenweek and six-week rules for the issuance of pre-session documents, including,
where appropriate, proposed measures to address such impediments;
Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to ensure that the rules
3.
concerning the simultaneous distribution of documents in all official languages are
followed with respect to both the distribution of printed copies and the posting of
parliamentary documentation on the Official Document System and the United
Nations website, in keeping with section III, paragraph 5, of its resolution 55/222;
Notes with concern the non-compliance with rule 59 of the rules of
4.
procedure of the General Assembly, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure

_______________
5

4

See A/60/93 and Corr.1, paras. 60–62.

A/RES/60/236 B

the communication of resolutions adopted by the Assembly to Member States within
fifteen days of the closure of the session;
5.
Reaffirms its decision in section III, paragraph 9, of its resolution 59/265,
that the issuance of documents on planning, budgetary and administrative matters
requiring urgent consideration by the General Assembly shall be accorded priority;
Welcomes the efforts of the interdepartmental task force on
6.
documentation in addressing the problem of late issuance of documentation, and
requests the Secretary-General to develop a clear accountability mechanism within
the Secretariat for the submission, processing and issuance of documentation and to
submit a detailed report thereon to the Committee on Conferences for its further
consideration and analysis, in order to provide concrete recommendations to the
General Assembly at its sixty-first session;
Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to direct all departments
7.
of the Secretariat to include the following elements in their reports:
(a)

Summary of the report;

(b)

Consolidated conclusions, recommendations and other proposed actions;

(c)

Relevant background information;

8.
Encourages intergovernmental and expert bodies to include the abovementioned elements, where appropriate, in their reports to the General Assembly;
9.
Requests that all documents submitted to legislative organs by the
Secretariat, intergovernmental and expert bodies for consideration and action have
conclusions and recommendations in bold print;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take steps to improve the
quality and accuracy of meeting records in all six official languages through full
reliance in the preparation and translation of those records on sound recordings and
written texts of statements as they were delivered in the original languages;
11. Notes some improvement in the issuance of verbatim and summary
records, while recognizing that delay in their issuance still exists;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take appropriate measures
to ameliorate the delay in the issuance of verbatim and summary records, with a
view to issuing them in a timely manner;
13. Recalls section II.B, paragraph 14, of its resolution 59/265, and reiterates
its request to the Secretary-General to further elaborate on all options, including
those set out in paragraphs 59 to 63 of his report on the reform of the Department
for General Assembly and Conference Management, 6 in accordance with legislative
mandates, and to report on their practical and financial implications to the General
Assembly at its sixty-first session through the Committee on Conferences;
14. Recalls section II.B, paragraph 13, of its resolution 59/265, and takes
note of paragraphs 57 to 59 of the report of the Secretary-General, 7 and decides to
revert to this issue in the context of its consideration of the report referred to in the
paragraph above;

_______________
6
7

A/59/172.
A/60/93 and Corr.1.

5

A/RES/60/236 B

IV
Translation and interpretation-related matters
1.
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the highest quality of
interpretation and translation services in all official languages;
2.
Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to make sure that
terminology used in translation and interpretation services reflects the latest
linguistic norms and terminology of the official languages in order to ensure the
highest quality;
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to improve the accuracy of
3.
translation of documents into the official languages, giving particular significance to
the quality of translation;
Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General, when recruiting
4.
temporary assistance in the language services, to ensure that all language services
are given equal treatment and are provided with equally favourable working
conditions and resources, with a view to achieving maximum quality of their
services, with full respect for the specificities of the six official languages and
taking into account their respective workloads;
Also reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to address the
5.
question of the appropriate level of self-revision that is consistent with quality in all
official languages and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-first
session;
Notes with concern the disparities in interpretation and translation
6.
vacancy rates between the United Nations Office at Nairobi and other duty stations;
7.
Expresses deep concern at the high vacancy rates in the interpretation
and translation services at the United Nations Office at Nairobi, especially the
chronic difficulty in staffing the Arabic Interpretation Unit, and requests the
Secretary-General to address this through, inter alia, assistance from Member States
in advertising and facilitating the conduct of competitive examinations to fill these
language vacancies;
Requests the Secretary-General to address the problem of succession
8.
planning in order to fill emerging vacancies in language services in a timely manner
through outreach to eligible applicants;
Reiterates its request that the Secretary-General continue efforts to
9.
explore the use of new technologies, such as computer-assisted translation, remote
and off-site translation and speech recognition, in the six official languages, in order
to further enhance the quality and productivity of conference services, and to keep
the General Assembly informed of the introduction of any other new technology;
V
Information technology
1.
Notes with appreciation the progress achieved across duty stations in
integrating information technology into meetings management and documentationprocessing systems and the global approach to sharing standards, good practices and
technological achievements among conference services at all duty stations;

6

A/RES/60/236 B

2.
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the compatibility of
technologies used in all duty stations and to ensure that they are user-friendly in all
official languages;
Also requests the Secretary-General to complete the task of uploading all
3.
important older United Nations documents onto the United Nations website in all
six official languages on a priority basis, so that these archives are also available to
Member States through that medium;
Welcomes the strengthening of the Information Technology Unit at the
4.
United Nations Office at Nairobi, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to
address the issue of maintaining parity among duty stations in terms of information
technology capacity.
79th plenary meeting
8 May 2006

7
