A /68/PV.3

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-eighth session

3rd plenary meeting

Monday, 23 September 2013, 9 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ashe  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Antigua and Barbuda)

The meeting was called to order at 9.05 a.m.
High-level Meeting on the Realization of the
Millennium Development Goals and Other
Internationally Agreed Development Goals for
Persons with Disabilities
Agenda item 27
Social development
(b) Social development, including questions
relating to the world social situation and to
youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family
Draft resolution (A/68/L.1)
The President: I declare open the High-level
Meeting on the Realization of the Millennium
Development Goals and Other Internationally Agreed
Development Goals for Persons with Disabilities. This
meeting is held in accordance with resolutions 66/124
of 19 December 2011 and 67/140 of 20 December 2012.
Statement by the President
The President: I warmly welcome all participants
to this High-level Meeting, whose overarching theme is
“The way forward: a disability-inclusive development
agenda towards 2015 and beyond.” This meeting is
taking place in order to strengthen efforts and to ensure
access for and inclusion of persons with disabilities in
all aspects of development, and looks forward to the
contribution its outcome document could make towards
mainstreaming the rights of persons with disabilities
within the development agenda beyond 2015.

At the outset, I would like to thank the co-facilitators
of the outcome document, the Permanent Representative
of the Philippines, Mr. Libran Cabactulan, and the
Permanent Representative of Spain, Mr. Fernando
Arias, for their tireless efforts working with all
stakeholders to achieve the successful outcome we
have before us today (A/68/L.1), which we are about
to adopt. I would furthermore like to acknowledge the
Member States for their constructive role during the
negotiation process, and the Secretariat for providing
support. Today we are also joined by many members of
civil society organizations, particularly organizations
of persons with disabilities. I thank them for their
commitment to this agenda.
Disability-inclusive development is not a new
idea. Our guiding document, the Charter of the United
Nations, is based on economic and social progress,
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms
for all; while the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights begins with the timeless words “All human
beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights”.
During the past decades, the United Nations has been
promoting full participation and equality for persons
with disabilities. That commitment leaves no room for
their exclusion from society and development.
In an attempt to classify their physical and
mental differences, some have labelled the disabled
“differently abled”, but let us not forget that people
with disabilities — physical, sensory, mental and
intellectual — are the world’s largest minority,
numbering more than 1 billion. They are a diverse
and varied group, each with unique gifts and abilities

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U‑506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

13-48343 (E)

*1348343*

A/68/PV.3

23/09/2013

and each with unique challenges. Their lives are often
a constant struggle to achieve in every sphere of life,
but more so in the performance of daily activities that
many of us take for granted. In so doing, they teach
us not only lessons about love and respect but also
about perseverance against the odds. That is why it is
important for us to reflect purposefully on why we are
all gathered here today.

which was from its inception envisaged both as a human
rights and a development instrument. The Convention
is a strong symbol of the international community’s
commitment to include the disability perspective in all
aspects of society and development. While symbols are
no doubt important, that commitment now needs to be
fully integrated into all current and future development
frameworks and interventions.

Let us take note of the fact that the vast majority of
persons with disabilities live in developing countries
and experience disproportionately high rates of
poverty. In all parts of the world they are more likely
to experience discrimination and prejudice. Persons
with disabilities are subjected to a range of barriers,
and many are regularly denied the right to education,
social security, employment, health and other services
that are available to the rest of the general public. Far
too many are hidden from view by others and robbed
of any contact, dignity or joy because of poverty,
lack of support services and an unwarranted sense of
shame — all terrible ignorance.

This High-level Meeting comes at a critical
crossroads in the history of the United Nations,
particularly for this session of the General Assembly.
The theme of today’s meeting is inextricably linked to
the over-arching theme I have selected for the sixtyeighth session of the General Assembly, namely, “The
post-2015 development agenda: setting the stage”. I
hope that participants’ further deliberations today will
identify constructive ways to integrate the issue of
disability into the proposed agenda that is emerging.
We all agree that the core goals must be poverty
eradication and sustainable development, which can
only happen with greater opportunity for all, equality
and inclusive social development. A development
path that excludes the participation of persons with
disabilities in economic, social and political life can
neither be inclusive nor sustainable. In particular, our
efforts at the international level should be focused on
providing critical leadership to mobilize action and
support for specific policy commitments in national
and regional environments and harnessing best
practices and experiences and resources from effective
multi-stakeholder partnerships.

In the year 2000, the General Assembly adopted
the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). Efforts
towards achieving the Goals have led to a number of
successes in eradicating hunger and poverty, alleviating
the disease burden, improving access to water and
increasing primary education enrolment. However, the
unfortunate reality is that persons with disabilities have
not benefitted equally. In fact, all eight MDGs, with
attendant targets and indicators, there is no reference to
persons with disabilities.
Efforts to redress that imbalance are already on the
way. In the years since the adoption of the MDGs, the
General Assembly has promoted disability-inclusive
development as a priority issue. It has also called for the
inclusion of persons with disabilities in internationally
agreed development goals. The international community
has now come to the realization that, in order to achieve
other goals, including the MDGs, without incorporating
the rights, well-being and perspectives of persons with
disabilities, will be impossible, given the size of such
a marginalized group. The onus is on us all to ensure
that any future sustainable development goals include
the disabled.
In 2006, we saw significant progress when the
General Assembly unanimously adopted the Convention
on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. To date, 134
countries have ratified or acceded to the Convention,

2/7

One critical and urgent improvement would be to
ensure that all buildings, facilities and public spaces are
specifically designed to accommodate access and use
by those who are disabled and that more technologies
are created to improve their quality of life and to fully
integrate them into the mainstream of social and work
activity and life.
The draft outcome document before us stresses
the importance of giving due consideration to persons
with disabilities in the post-2015 development agenda.
It envisions a fully inclusive society and can guide our
efforts towards 2015 and future decades to come. I urge
Member States to spare no effort in implementing the
outcome document.
A post-2015 development agenda that benefits all
among us is the vision that we must pledge to achieve.
Our journey towards a post-2015 development agenda

13-48343

23/09/2013

A/68/PV.3

must envision a world that is just and equitable for all
persons, equally and without discrimination.

meeting the Millennium Development Goals and
shaping the post-2015 agenda.

I now give the floor to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon.

The landmark Convention on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities is a powerful tool for inclusive
development. I urge all countries to ratify it without
delay. I know that the Assembly agrees with me and
with Stevie Wonder that we need it signed, sealed
and delivered. And we need more. We must further
strengthen the international normative framework on
disability and development. We must build capacity and
improve data and statistics on persons with disabilities.
We must act now to remove barriers to access to physical
environments, transportation and information and
communications. And we must not only lift the physical
barriers, but also the barriers formed by attitudes that
fuel stigma and discrimination.

The Secretary-General: This is the most important
period of the year at the United Nations. Leaders from
around the globe are gathering to focus on peace and
security, development and human rights. I believe there
is no better way to begin this momentous week than
with this historic High-level Meeting.
I want to extend my warmest welcome to all
present — especially persons with disabilities and their
representative organizations — and to thank them for
bringing their strength and energy. Together, we are
here to break barriers and open doors. We are here to
forge the way forward and build a disability-inclusive
development agenda towards 2015 and beyond.
(spoke in French)
Disability is a part of the human condition; almost
everyone will be temporarily or permanently impaired
at some point in life. More than 1 billion persons live
with some form of disability — 80 per cent are of
working age; 80 per cent live in developing countries.
Yet far too many people with disabilities live in poverty.
Too many suffer from social exclusion. Too many are
denied access to education, employment, health care,
and the social and legal support systems they require.
Women and girls with disabilities often experience
double discrimination. That is why it is important to
emphasize the gender dimension under the disabilityinclusive development agenda.
All of us suffer when communities are divided, just
as all of us benefit when communities are united. The
International Labour Organization has found that the
exclusion of persons with disabilities from the labour
market in some low- and middle-income countries
costs those economies as much as 7 per cent of gross
domestic product. We must remove barriers to ensuring
equal opportunity so that all people can be free from
poverty and discrimination.
(spoke in English)
Let us proclaim, in the loudest voice possible, that
disability is not inability. As I have said in my report
“A life of dignity for all” (A/68/202), persons with
disabilities are integral to our forward march towards

All participants in this Meeting are here to do
more than to change laws or policies or regulations.
Ultimately, they are here to make sure that every
member of the human family has a chance to live
their life fully. I think of the director of a programme
for special needs children in Haiti who said, “You
should see the children’s faces when they put on
their uniforms — money could not buy that feeling
of happiness”. I think of the young football players I
met in Sierra Leone a few years ago. Their limbs had
been amputated during the civil war, and yet, there
they were, playing soccer. To my eyes, they were even
better than the World Cup soccer players. I think of the
Syrian mother in a refuge camp who finally received a
wheelchair for her daughter with disabilities. She said,
“Now we can take her to see the doctor; now we can
take her out. She has a right to see the sun.”
Everyone has the right to happiness, to score their
own goals, to see the sun and to expand their horizons.
That is why the General Assembly is here. That is its
message and mission. I am proud to be at the side of
everyone here. Together, let us turn a new page in the
history of the United Nations by giving full meaning to
the outcome document of this Meeting (A/68/L.1). Let
us work together so that everyone, everywhere has the
chance to live their dreams and use the gifts that they
have been given. Let us advance disability-inclusive
development, inspire change on the ground and ensure
a life of dignity for all.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.

13-483433/7

A/68/PV.3

Pursuant to paragraph 3 (b) of resolution 66/124,
I now give the floor to Ms. Maria Soledad Cisternas
Reyes, Chair of the Committee on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities.
Ms. Cisternas Reyes (Committee on the Rights
of Persons with Disabilities) (spoke in Spanish): On
behalf of the Committee on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities, I congratulate the General Assembly on
having organized this High-level Meeting stressing the
necessity of the indelible link between human rights
and social development.
Promoting, protecting and ensuring the full and
equal enjoyment of the rights of all persons with
disabilities in equal conditions, as well as respect for
their inherent dignity, is the purpose of the Convention
on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. It is the
lighthouse guiding our action in the twenty-first
century. It sets out the human rights framework for
persons with disabilities, in which we consider not only
the disadvantages faced by persons with disabilities,
but also their interaction with various barriers and how
the latter may impose limitations to their participation.
I note that with respect to dealing with barriers, States
parties, all of society and persons with disabilities
themselves have the primary responsibility to eliminate
such barriers and to adopt affirmative measures aimed
at ensuring equal opportunity to that section of the
population.
I would also note that restrictions to the full and
effective participation of persons with disabilities in
society can be seen in the manner in which they exercise
their human rights and fundamental freedoms. As the
Secretary-General mentioned earlier, some 80 per cent
of persons living with disabilities live in developing
countries. Twenty per cent of the world’s poorest
are persons with disabilities, constituting the most
disadvantage and poorest among the poor. For these
reasons, the link between the exercise of human rights
and fundamental freedoms and economic, cultural
and social rights — education, health, work and social
security, among others — may seem very obvious.
However, let us recall that persons with disabilities
still struggle for their civil and political rights, and
this cannot be forgotten in the context of social
development. It is crucial to bear in mind the need for
equal recognition as persons under the law and the full
exercise of legal capacities for all persons living with
disabilities, with the support and safeguards needed to

4/7

23/09/2013

ensure their ability to fully exercise their freedoms in
their civic and personal lives.
I wish to point out that there are further substantive
rights in the area of civil and political rights, including
the rights to public political participation, to elect
and to be elected, to form political parties and other
representative groups, to live independently and included
in their communities, to form a family, to live free from
violence and cruel, inhumane or degrading treating,
and to count on guaranteed and robust access to justice.
This means that persons living with disabilities today
must be given bridges to facilitate their exercise of their
rights — bridges such as universal accessibility and
the growing awareness that is permeating throughout
societies and across generations of the change that is
needed.
Likewise, I am sure — and I am speaking on
behalf of the Committee on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities — that the universal, indivisible and
interdependent keystone that is human rights provides
a strong backbone for social development, which must
now become inclusive, accessible and sustainable. Such
social development must be inclusive of persons with
disabilities, whose rights are entirely inalienable, must
be respected and cannot be ignored or neglected.
Today therefore a symbiosis is emerging between
human rights and social development that will build
on the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities, on the one hand, and on the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) and the post-2015 agenda,
on the other. It is on that illuminating basis that we
must continue to work.
In drawing to a conclusion, I wish to say that the
Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
hopes that the outcome document of this High-level
Meeting (resolution 68/3) will reflect the true meaning
of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities, which is a model for human rights in the
twenty-first century, with a firm basis on equality and
non-discrimination, and take into consideration the
diverse range of persons with disabilities, including
those living in the most vulnerable situations, such as
women, girls, boys, the elderly, indigenous persons
and those living in rural areas or under humanitarian
situations because of natural disasters or armed
conflict. We cannot forget those people.
Likewise, it is extremely important that States
parties comply with their legal commitments under

13-48343

23/09/2013

this international agreement with due accountability,
that data and statistics be collected regarding age,
gender, diversity, disability and regarding particular
factors, such as employment or violence. We are sure
that our efforts to defend human rights will help us
as we seek to implement and achieve the MDGs and
the post-2015 agenda. In that regard, it could be added
that international multilateral cooperation is absolutely
crucial, in particular in the light of the numbers I cited
earlier and of the fact that the majority of persons with
disabilities live in developing countries.
In conclusion, the Committee on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities will spare no effort and will
devote all of its expertise to assist this historic process
of linking human rights and social development, which,
I repeat, must be inclusive, accessible and sustainable.
We do so because without us, it is silence that will
resound today in this plenary Hall. We do so to ensure
that this Meeting will succeed in uniting all aspects of
the MDGs, the post-2015 agenda and social development
with persons with disabilities.
The President: Pursuant to paragraph 3 (b) of
resolution 66/124, I now give the floor to Mr. Yannis
Vardakastanis, President of the European Disability
Forum, which enjoys consultative status with the
Economic and Social Council.
Mr. Vardakastanis (European Disability Forum):
Today is a historic day. The international community
has gathered here at the Headquarters of the United
Nations to discuss the rights of persons with disabilities
worldwide. The expectations of this High-level Meeting
on disabilities and development are high. Expectations
are high that the decision-makers will tackle a chronic
structural problem that has not been a priority in national
and global political agendas — the mainstreaming of
disability rights.
However, with the presence of many high-level
representatives today, this has seemed to change. Today,
15 per cent of the world’s population, 1 billion persons
with disabilities, are looking to us, and in particular to
the decision-makers who take decisions at the national
and international levels affecting any aspect of our
lives. Those decisions affect all of us. Today is a day
of determination. Today should be the day when the
international community decides to move forward in a
way that will create a tremendous momentum.
The International Disability Alliance, a unique
world network of networks, which, through our

A/68/PV.3

members, extends to all States Members of the United
Nations, has joined this High-level Meeting to give a
voice to persons with disabilities worldwide who have
been excluded. But today we want to speak loudly and
clearly to all in the Hall.
It is widely accepted that people with disabilities
face exclusion and discrimination and experience
extremely high poverty rates. It has already been
mentioned that 80 per cent of persons with disabilities
live in developing countries and in unbearable situations.
The Chair of the Committee on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities just referred to the fact that 20 per cent
of the poorest of the world’s population — the poorest
of the poor — are persons with disabilities. They lack
access to health care, education and employment. In
many instances, persons with disabilities are the first
victims of violence and abuse.
The rights of persons with disabilities remain
minimally acknowledged, despite the fact that they
have been enshrined in international law. After the
adoption and ratification of the Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities, we expected more.
We do not wish to underestimate the progress achieved;
nonetheless, we demand that the Convention become the
driving force for all developments worldwide, and that
we work harder to implement the rights that it enshrines.
Persons with disabilities should be able to fully enjoy
their rights on an equal basis with all other citizens of
the world. I speak of women, men, children, the elderly
and indigenous peoples with disabilities, who expect to
be able to participate fully and meaningfully in society.
The Millennium Development Goals contain no
reference to persons with disabilities; persons with
disabilities have been invisible, indeed, forgotten.
That cannot be tolerated in the post-2015 development
agenda. Development at all levels, and in every
corner of the world, must include the rights of
persons with disabilities. That development must be
Convention-driven. In practice, that means that the rights
of persons with disabilities should be mainstreamed
into every aspect of development. Persons with
disabilities must be able to enjoy and have their share
of inclusive growth. Inclusion, non-discrimination and
equity must be the driving principles on which the new
global development agenda is established. The rights
of persons with disabilities should be mainstreamed
in development partnerships, and global partnerships
specific to persons with disabilities should be formed.
The inclusion of persons with disabilities in the

13-483435/7

A/68/PV.3

development agenda has been recognized as critical in
the reports of both the Secretary-General and the Highlevel Panel on the Post-2015 Development Agenda.
Those here in the Hall, the decision-makers,
together with organizations of persons with disabilities,
have the responsibility, and indeed the obligation, to
make that happen. The ways in which persons with
disabilities see their needs reflected in the new agenda
must be explored through appropriate implementation,
mechanisms and accurate monitoring of data. Persons
with disabilities must cease to be people who have lower
levels of education and higher levels of unemployment;
they must cease to be the victims of a system that, as
I said, lacks accessible transportation, health care,
information services and so forth. The post-2015
development agenda must aim to take persons with
disabilities out of the lowest income levels; poverty
eradication for persons with disabilities must be
made a major priority in Convention negotiations and
afterward.
The motto “Nothing about us without us” has been
a propelling force for progress and determination for
persons with disabilities and their families. Today,
those here in the General Assembly are listening to us;
tomorrow they will be listening to national, regional
and global disability movements. Development should
be inclusive of the rights of persons with disabilities.
That is a prerequisite and a precondition. Today we
ask not only that the Assembly express and declare its
commitment to the rights of persons with disabilities,
but that it also put in place the mechanisms necessary
for those commitments to be met and for practical
results to be delivered in partnership with organizations
for persons with disabilities, as the Convention states in
paragraph 3 of article 4 and paragraph 3 of article 33
(resolution 61/106, annex).
To conclude: the poet has said that
“Some there are who live in darkness/while the
others live in light./We see those who live in
daylight,/those in darkness, out of sight”.
Working all together, in partnership, to make our
societies inclusive of all, with development for all
that includes disability rights, we can bring those
out of sight — persons with disabilities around the
world — into the light.
The President: Pursuant to paragraph 3 (b) of
resolution 66/124, I now give the floor to Mr. Stevie

6/7

23/09/2013

Wonder, Grammy-award-winning songwriter and
musician and United Nations Messenger of Peace.
Mr. Wonder: It is a great honour to participate in
this High-level Meeting of the General Assembly on
disability and development. I am very happy to be here
today at this historic event. In 2009, I was appointed
a United Nations Messenger of Peace, with a focus on
persons with disabilities. In that role I have had the
opportunity to advocate internationally for the most
fundamental goals of the United Nations, namely,
peace, development and human rights for all. Today
at this High-level Meeting we have the opportunity
to focus on those goals for persons with disabilities in
communities around the world.
I have always been a man of dreams and hopes. I
know that by working together we can create a world
where persons with disabilities face no limits and can
freely live, work, enjoy life and contribute their talents
to society. We have already accomplished so much in
that regard.
Just two months ago, I traveled to Morocco to
participate in a diplomatic conference to conclude
a treaty to facilitate access to published works by
visually impaired persons and persons with print
disabilities. For society in development to include
persons with disabilities we need to have equal access
to education, knowledge and information; yet, out of
millions of publications each year, fewer than five
per cent are made available in accessible formats for
visually impaired persons. In developing countries, an
even smaller percentage of publications are available
in accessible formats. The Marrakesh Treaty, as it is
called, will greatly expand the availability of artistic
and literary works in accessible forms such as Braille,
large print text and audio books. That can make a
real difference in the lives of the world’s more than
300 million visually impaired persons.
One year ago, in October 2012, during the
commemoration of the sixty-seventh anniversary of
the United Nations, I gave a concert in the General
Assembly Hall. On that occasion we celebrated the
many achievements of the United Nations, but we also
recognized that more needed to be done. We need to
make sure that real participation and the voices of
persons with disabilities are included in everything we
do for peace and development around the world. As we
look to the future and the advancement of disabilities
and inclusive development, let us all in our own way

13-48343

23/09/2013

be messengers of peace. Many of us here are already
working to create that world that will be inclusive of all.
I want to share a personal story with the Assembly
that is kind of how I ended up here today. I was blessed
to have a mother who allowed me to discover the world.
From discovering the world around me, I took chances.
Some of those chances she was against, but she believed
that I would not be irresponsible. She always told me
that if I did something outside what she said, I would
get the belt. I am sure that everyone here knows what
the belt is. But, obviously, on one occasion I took a
chance that maybe turned out well in the end. I had a
little thing that I did with my friends, where I would
sing in an alley. I would sing different songs to a person
who was a very spiritual man. Every time he would see
me and my friends in the alley, we would be saying bad
words to each other and talking crazy. And every time
he would come and say, “Stevie, your voice is much
better than to be using it for bad things. You should sing
wonderful gospel songs.” And I would sing, “You’re so
right, Mr. Hines, life is so good to me, and I know I
should be singing to the Lord, yes I should!”
After that was all done, he would give me some
money and I would go to the store with my friends and
we would get candy. One particular time, I was hearing
some music from a few blocks away and I said to my
friend, “If you walk me across the street ...” — because
if I walked across the street by myself I would get the
belt, and he did not want to see me get the belt either
and I did not want to feel it. Therefore he walked me
across the street and we walked a few blocks and there
were two people playing the guitar. I so happened to
have my little bongo drums. As a result, I was able to
meet the cousin of one of the members of the group
Smokey Robinson and the Miracles, who obviously was
with Motown Records. From that, Ronnie White made
it possible for me to have an audition at Motown, where
Berry Gordy discovered me.
The truth of the matter is that, through my being
able to have that opportunity of being discovered at
Motown, and through people’s appreciation for the
music I have done and was doing, it became possible for
the dreams I had and the prayers of my mother to come
true. I was also able to have various things that were
not accessible and available to me to become available

A/68/PV.3

economically. Through travelling in the world, I was
able to see and meet various people of various countries
and discover the various technologies.
I wish for the day when there will be technology
available for the blind, for things to be accessible and
available for us to be able to do things by using various
technologies of synthetic speech and voice. We have
been very fortunate that things have moved to that
place, but I believe that we must make that technology
more available and accessible to every single blind
person or person with disability all over the world. For
me, there should be no one anywhere who has to live
without being able to have access to all the world.
I would therefore encourage everyone from all the
various nations to subsidize this technology, to make it
possible. Not only will there be fewer taxes, but more
importantly, every single person with a disability will
be more independent and feel freer.
I thank the President for allowing me to speak
today. I am looking forward to the day when I can write
a song about how great it is when not only one nation
but all of the nations of the world open up and handle
what they need to do to make the world accessible for
those with any disability at all.
The President: The Assembly will now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/68/L.1, entitled “Outcome
document of the high-level meeting of the General
Assembly on the realization of the Millennium
Development Goals and other internationally agreed
development goals for persons with disabilities: the
way forward, a disability-inclusive development
agenda towards 2015 and beyond”. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to adopt draft resolution A/68/L.1?
Draft resolution A/68/L.1 was adopted (resolution
68/3).
The President: I wish to express my sincere
appreciation to Ambassador Libran N. Cabactulan of
the Philippines and to Ambassador Fernando Arias
of Spain, who so ably and patiently conducted the
discussions and complex negotiations in the informal
consultations on the outcome document. Of course, I also
thank all Member States for their valuable contribution
to the successful completion of the outcome document.
The meeting rose at 10 a.m.

13-483437/7
