United Nations

S/PV.4325

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-sixth year

4325th meeting
Tuesday, 5 June 2001, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Chowdhury . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bangladesh)

Members:

China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ireland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jamaica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mauritius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Wang Yingfan
Mr. Valdivieso
Mr. Teixeira da Silva
Mr. Cooney
Mr. Ward
Mr. Toure
Mr. Neewoor
Mr. Kolby
Mr. Lavrov
Mr. Mantaha
Mr. Mejdoub
Mr. Kuchinsky
Mr. Eldon
Mr. Hume

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Letter dated 21 May 2001 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2001/511).

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

01-39877 (E)

*0139877*

S/PV.4325

The meeting was called to order at 11.20 a.m.
Expression of sympathy in connection with the
deaths of His Majesty King Birendra, Her Majesty
Queen Aishwarya and His Majesty King Dipendra of
Nepal, and other members of their family
The President: At the outset of this meeting, I
should like, on behalf of the Council, to express grief
and sorrow at the passing away of His Majesty King
Birendra and Her Majesty Queen Aishwarya of Nepal,
and of other members of the royal family. His Majesty
King Birendra contributed greatly to the social and
economic development of Nepal, promoted peace in
the region and was deeply loved by his people. I should
like also to express our heartfelt sorrow at the passing
away of King Dipendra.
On behalf of the Council, I should like to extend
our profound condolences to the bereaved family and
to the Government and the people of Nepal.
I invite the members of the Council to rise and
observe a minute of silence in tribute to the memory of
His Majesty King Birendra, Her Majesty Queen
Aishwarya and His Majesty King Dipendra of Nepal.
The members of the Council observed a minute of
silence.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Farhâdi
(Afghanistan) took a seat at the Council table;
Mr. Hosseinian (Islamic Republic of Iran),
Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan) and Mr. Vohidov
(Uzbekistan) took the seats reserved for them at
the side of the Council Chamber.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Council agrees to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Haile Menkerios, Chairman of the Committee of
Experts on Afghanistan appointed pursuant to Security
Council resolution 1333 (2000), and to his fellow
members of that Committee.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Menkerios and his fellow members of
the Committee to take the designated seats at the
Council table.
Also in accordance with the understanding
reached in the Council’s prior consultations and in the
absence of objection, I shall take it that the Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Ambassador Alfonso
Valdivieso of Colombia, Chairman of the relevant
sanctions Committee.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Valdivieso to take the designated seat
at the Council table to enable him to present the report.

Letter dated 21 May 2001 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2001/511)

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Afghanistan, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Pakistan and Uzbekistan, in which they request to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.

Members of the Council have before them a letter
dated 21 May 2001 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
transmitting a letter dated 18 May 2001 from the
Chairman of the Committee of Experts on Afghanistan
appointed pursuant to Security Council resolution 1333
(2000) addressed to the Secretary-General, enclosing
the report of the Committee regarding monitoring of
the arms embargo against the Taliban and the closure
of terrorist training camps in the Taliban-held areas of
Afghanistan, document S/2001/511.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

2

S/PV.4325

The first speaker is Ambassador Valdivieso, who
will speak in his capacity as Chairman of the sanctions
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) concerning Afghanistan. He will present the
report contained in document S/2001/511.
Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia), Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) (spoke in Spanish): In my
capacity as Chairman of the sanctions Committee on
Afghanistan, I warmly welcome the members of the
Committee of Experts on Afghanistan appointed
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1333 (2000),
who prepared the report submitted to the Council
several days ago. That report was prepared in
accordance with paragraph 15 (a) of resolution 1333
(2000) and appears in document S/2001/511.
The sanctions Committee met yesterday with the
members of the Committee of Experts for a preliminary
presentation. I should like to highlight some of the
elements aimed essentially at emphasizing the primary
purpose of proposing a sanctions monitoring
mechanism, as provided for by this Council in
resolution 1333 (2000) of 19 December 2000. At the
same time, I should like to stress at this public meeting
that, as established in the text of the report, the
participation and commitment of Afghanistan’s
neighbouring countries are essential to the efficacy of
the sanctions.
At the outset, I wish to say that the Committee of
Experts had the very concrete mission of presenting its
recommendations on the best ways of monitoring
effectively, first, the arms embargo and, secondly, the
closure of terrorist training camps. In its report, the
Committee of Experts has made recommendations as to
the best way to monitor compliance with the sanctions,
but I must say that members of the Council will find
express reference to other, related matters, such as
sources of funding — drug trafficking in particular —
trafficking in goods and illegal flights. The experts feel
that these are directly connected with the traffic in
arms and, undoubtedly, with the existence of the
terrorist training camps. The Committee of Experts was
not called upon to undertake an investigation or to
establish responsibilities or facts. I reiterate that its
mandate was very concrete and specific.
The Committee met several times here at
Headquarters in New York and in the various countries
that it visited. It analysed the information made

available by those countries and in official and
unofficial documents referred to in the report. It also
assessed various alternatives in drafting some of the
recommendations now before the Council.
The sanctions Committee and the Committee of
Experts have met three times: once at the beginning of
the work of the Committee of Experts; once upon its
return from its field trip, before the final draft of the
report was prepared; and at the meeting yesterday, to
which I have already referred.
From an operational point of view, the
recommendation of the Committee of Experts for the
establishment of a monitoring mechanism is innovative
and interesting. I wish to point this out because it has
also been discussed in the sanctions Committee,
without, of course, any country’s taking a definitive
position. The mechanism, I repeat, is a novel one that
has two parts.
First, it would involve the establishment of small
Support Teams designed to strengthen existing
mechanisms, as set out in the report, in each of the
neighbouring countries of Afghanistan. The Support
Teams would be entrusted with verifying allegations of
sanctions-busting. The other element would be the
establishment of an Office staffed with specialists in
arms-embargo issues, counter-terrorist activities, the
investigation of other international crimes — such as
drug trafficking — and legislative and legal support.
This Office would be headed by a Director and staffed
with those specialists, who would advise the
Committee of Experts and support the work of the
Teams responsible for activities in the field.
The Committee of Experts has also highlighted
the need to monitor movement of acetic anhydride, the
indispensable chemical precursor in refining heroin.
The Committee recommends closer scrutiny of the
granting of export permits for that chemical precursor.
It has also recommended that aircraft turbine fuel and
lubricants needed for use in armoured troop-transport
vehicles be specified in the embargo.
It is clear from the report that the six
neighbouring countries are committed to implementing
the provisions of resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1333
(2000). In every country we visited, it was stressed that
stability in Afghanistan is necessary and that there can
be no military solution to the conflict. These
considerations are set out in the report, which also
states that no monitoring mechanism will be effective

3

S/PV.4325

without the cooperation and commitment of the six
neighbouring countries. Moreover, it will be extremely
desirable to establish coordinating mechanisms among
the six countries. Compliance with sanctions must be
enforced in order for them to be effective and in order
to preserve the credibility of the United Nations. The
report also says that sanctions must be seen as a way of
encouraging the Taliban, primarily, to participate in
negotiations to find a political solution to the conflict.
The Council will therefore have to take a decision
on the proposal made by the Committee of Experts. I
would like to stress that the Council should do so as
expeditiously as possible, for almost six months have
already passed since sanctions were adopted through
resolution 1333 (2000). As everyone knows, those
sanctions are in force for a period of 12 months, and
we are still at this stage. There are various reasons for
that delay, but unfortunately I feel that there was an
excessive delay in appointing the Committee. With
regard to the Committee’s work, I would like to make it
quite clear that once the Experts were finally appointed
they met as quickly as possible, carried out their work
and provided their report within the deadline.
It is now up to us to work in a more speedy
manner. That is why this public meeting is important,
as it will enable us to hear the views of the countries
that are key elements of the proposed mechanism, as
the report clearly states. It is hoped that this will help
give impetus to all the actions required to take a
decision regarding the monitoring mechanism called
for in the report and envisaged in resolution 1333
(2000).
The President: I thank Ambassador Valdivieso
for his presentation of the report.
Before giving the floor to the members of the
Council, let me mention that, in addition to the
Chairman of the Committee, Mr. Menkerios, we also
have at the table Mr. Reynaldo Arcilla, Mr. Michael
Chandler, Mr. Mahmoud Kassem and Mr. Atilio
Molteni, who are here as members of the Committee of
Experts to join in the Council’s deliberations today.
Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): My delegation would
also like to thank the Committee of Experts for
preparing this excellent report pursuant to the Security
Council’s resolution. We note with appreciation that
the members of the Committee, who worked very
intensively, have fulfilled the Committee’s mandate

4

and provided us with a realistic and thought-provoking
document.
We feel certain that the specific recommendations
on the implementation of resolution 1333 (2000) that
are contained in the report will be of practical value to
the Security Council in achieving the full potential of
its decisions aimed at restoring peace and stability in
Afghanistan. We fully endorse the recommendation
that an international monitoring mechanism should be
established where the sanctions are in place in order to
ensure the credibility of the Security Council. Past and
current experience — specifically in some African
States — proves the importance of a well-designed
structure and terms of reference for such a monitoring
body to be effective and result-oriented.
We also believe that it is important to take into
account the views of the neighbouring countries. Their
cooperation is absolutely essential. Clearly, no
monitoring body will be successful unless there is full
commitment from the Member States involved in the
implementation of sanctions. My delegation welcomes
the fact that six neighbouring countries have confirmed
their full compliance with resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1333 (2000).
We believe that the question of strengthening
control on the borders of neighbouring States is central
to the monitoring process. From the standpoint of
future challenges in the area, they would benefit from a
greater level of coordination, which would be broadly
welcomed. In our view, consideration of this issue in
the “six plus two” group would be a logical step.
We think that the issue of an arms embargo is of
the utmost importance in the context of the ongoing
conflict in Afghanistan. As the report says,
“The flow of arms into ... and from
Afghanistan is a major long-term cause of
insecurity and instability in the central Asian
region.” (S/2001/511, annex, enclosure, para. 33)
We also believe that establishing an effective
mechanism to prevent illicit arms trafficking into and
from Afghanistan will be the most challenging task
before the Council. It is obvious that cooperation on
the regional and international levels will be crucial in
finding the solution to this problem. In that context, we
hope that decisions and recommendations of the United
Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, which will be

S/PV.4325

held at New York this July, will be of practical use in
our deliberations on the situation in Afghanistan.
The
report
also
includes
many
other
recommendations — regarding drug trafficking, the
closure of terrorist training camps, the establishment of
field teams, et cetera — that fall squarely within the
competence of the Security Council and that need to be
addressed promptly. The Chairman of the sanctions
committee, Ambassador Valdivieso, has elaborated on
this subject. I will simply state that we fully share the
views of the Committee in that regard.
Finally, I want to stress that we believe that the
establishment of a monitoring body in Afghanistan will
be an evolutionary process that will require continued
attention on the part of the Council. Here, I would also
like to reiterate once again my delegation’s full support
for the idea expressed by the Secretary-General in his
previous report, and which is also reflected in the
present report, that an integrated or comprehensive
strategy is needed to provide for a solution to the
Afghanistan problem.
Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation appreciates the work done by
the Committee of Experts headed by Mr. Menkerios.
China attaches great importance to the Committee’s
report. We will carefully study the report and its
specific proposals. We are very grateful to Ambassador
Valdivieso for the presentation he just made. We
believe that the sanctions committee that he heads will
conduct further discussions on the specific elements of
the report after today’s discussions in the Security
Council. I will therefore confine myself only to some
brief comments.
It is the obligation and duty of all Member States
comprehensively to implement Security Council
resolutions 1333 (2000) and 1267 (1999), on sanctions
against the Taliban. We have noted that the report of
the Committee of Experts proposes new measures, such
as the establishment of a new sanctions-monitoring
mechanism. The establishment of such a mechanism is
intended effectively to enhance monitoring. The
Security Council should therefore take actual results
fully into account after that mechanism is established.
The
border
between
Afghanistan
and
neighbouring States is more than 5,000 kilometres
long. We would like to know the size and scale
required of a monitoring mechanism in order for it to
be effective. We also wish to know whether the United

Nations will be provided with guarantees of sufficient
resources. China does not wish to see a situation
develop by which excessive haste in implementing
relevant measures leads to the failure to achieve their
objective. If that happens, it will be a monitoring
mechanism in name only, and that will damage the
credibility of the United Nations.
We also wish to point out that the establishment
of a new sanctions monitoring mechanism will require
the close cooperation of States neighbouring
Afghanistan. Before arriving at a decision, the Security
Council should carefully consider and respect the
opinions of those neighbouring countries.
The Committee of Experts has put a great deal of
work into this report, and its efforts should be
acknowledged. The report makes certain allegations,
however, without specifying its sources. Mere
allegations should not be used to prove a point, still
less serve as the basis for action. Greater efforts should
be made in this regard.
I should like to take this opportunity to provide
some information about the border region between
China and Afghanistan with which all Council
members may not be familiar. The border between
China and Afghanistan is located in a cold,
mountainous region. Its total length is 92 kilometres,
and its average elevation above sea level is more than
5,000 metres. The geography is varied and the climate
harsh. There is hardly any human presence in the
region, and access to it is extremely difficult. China
and Afghanistan have not established any travel routes
between the two countries in the border region. Given
these features of the border region between China and
Afghanistan, what does the Committee envisage
doing — indeed, what can it do — there? That issue
requires further clarification.
Mr. Mejdoub (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I
should like first of all to thank Ambassador Alfonso
Valdivieso, our colleague and the Chairman of the
Security Council sanctions Committee on Afghanistan,
and, through him, Ambassador Haile Menkerios, the
Chairman of the Committee of Experts, as well as all of
his colleagues, for the report that has just been
introduced. It is a comprehensive and exhaustive
document. The detailed supplementary information that
it contains, compiled from different sources, shows the
firm commitment of the experts to provide us with a
complete picture of the situation on the ground so that

5

S/PV.4325

we can draw appropriate conclusions and take the
necessary decisions.
I should like to make several comments and share
some
thoughts
about
the
conclusions
and
recommendations contained in the report.
First of all, My delegation welcomes the
commitment of the countries in the region to abide by
the provisions of resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1333
(2000) and to seek a political resolution of the conflict
in Afghanistan. Secondly, we share the opinion of the
experts that sanctions, the search for a political
solution and humanitarian and economic initiatives
must be seen as a package of elements in an integrated
strategy aimed at the achievement of a representative
Government in Afghanistan. Assistance may be
necessary for those among Afghanistan’s neighbours
that need concrete support in order to strengthen and
develop their monitoring mechanisms.
Thirdly, it is important to stress the fact that the
countries visited by the Committee of Experts showed
their commitment to cooperating and to accepting the
assistance of the international community. They made
it very clear that they would implement the provisions
of Security Council resolutions using their own border
control services.
That leads me to my fourth point, regarding the
recommendations of the Committee on the
establishment of a United Nations Office for Sanctions
Monitoring and Coordination-Afghanistan. The
Office — which, according to the Committee’s
recommendations, would have headquarters in
Vienna — would benefit from the support of Sanctions
Enforcement Support Teams working alongside the
border control services in the States neighbouring
Afghanistan. That is an interesting recommendation,
but there are practical difficulties involved. We believe
that setting up such a mechanism will depend to a
considerable
extent
on
the
cooperation
of
Afghanistan’s neighbours, who will have to
demonstrate their support for the Office.
In this regard, we believe that it will therefore be
necessary to discuss with the countries concerned all
the modalities involved and to gather their opinions on
establishing the mechanism so as to ensure its success
at the practical level. We truly need their cooperation
and support.

Fifthly, with regard to the conclusions of the
Committee on the implementation of the arms
embargo, as well as annex I of the report, which
contains a list of arms control measures to be
considered by the Office for Sanctions Monitoring and
Coordination, my delegation would like to recall that
certain issues relating to small arms raised by the
members of the Committee are still being considered
by States Members of the General Assembly. It would
therefore be useful to pay close attention to the United
Nations conference on the illicit trade in small arms
due to take place in July. In the view of my delegation,
we would be well advised to await the conclusions of
that conference.
Sixthly, with regard to the recommendations on
the imposition of a possible embargo on the chemical
substance used in the manufacture of narcotics, we
believe that it is important to impose strict controls so
as to prevent the production and sale of illicit drugs
coming from Afghanistan.
Finally, we believe that sufficient time must be
taken to carefully examine the report and assess the
impact of the recommendations made by the
Committee of Experts so that the most appropriate
decision can be taken regarding the establishment of a
mechanism to ensure that Security Council sanctions
are implemented.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I join in the words of gratitude expressed to
the Chairman of the sanctions Committee and to the
Chairman of the Committee of Experts, which prepared
the report in accordance with resolution 1333 (2000)
and made recommendations about the monitoring of
the arms embargo and the closure of terrorist training
camps in the territory of Afghanistan controlled by the
Taliban. We have studied the report and support its
main conclusions regarding the need to set up a
monitoring mechanism to control the implementation
of resolution 1333 (2000).
It is clear now that since the resolution’s adoption
half a year ago the Taliban have in no way tried to
comply with the Security Council’s demands. They
have not taken the least step to extradite Usama bin
Laden, nor to close those camps where international
terrorists are being trained in Taliban-controlled
territory.
In the broader context, the Taliban, relying on
external military assistance, are continuing to try to

6

S/PV.4325

resolve the Afghan conflict by force. In addition,
recently we have witnessed new Taliban activities that
go against all norms of human morality and ethics.
There continue to be gross violations of the rights of
women and girls. The Buddhist statues were destroyed.
Discriminatory measures, similar to those used in
ghettos in the past, have been imposed against
adherents of non-Islamic faiths who are living in
Afghanistan. As I said, no progress has been achieved
as regards the Taliban’s support for international
terrorism.
Given this situation, it is particularly important to
consistently implement resolutions 1333 (2000) and
1267 (1999). In our opinion, an important step along
this road should be Council support for the experts’
recommendations regarding the creation of a
monitoring mechanism.
Of course we understand that no sanctions
monitoring will be effective unless the States
neighbouring Afghanistan cooperate in the matter, first
and foremost the States bordering Afghanistan. We
welcome the proclaimed willingness of the six States to
comply with resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1333 (2000).
We believe that cooperation with them should continue
as we work further with the experts’ recommendations.
I support the appeal made by the Permanent
Representative of China regarding the importance of
cooperating with neighbouring countries.
We believe that initially the work of the
monitoring
mechanism
should
focus
most
fundamentally on the key requirements: ensuring
compliance with the arms embargo and closing the
terrorist training camps. I understand that these are
difficult tasks; however, we cannot afford to do
nothing. That would be worse. It seems to me that the
experts’ proposed plan will allow real progress to be
made. Perhaps all of the Security Council’s demands
will not be completely implemented as a result, but the
plan will, I repeat, promote real progress towards that
goal. I am referring in particular to the proposals to set
up the Office for Sanctions Monitoring and
Coordination and the Sanctions Enforcement Support
Teams in the region. We are prepared to use this plan as
a foundation. Of course we will still have to define the
plan’s specific parameters, including the functions of
each of the proposed elements, particularly with regard
to the teams to be set up in bordering countries. Of
course there should be the closest possible consultation
with the interested States on this matter.

With regard to the location of the monitoring
mechanism, we think it would be preferable for it to be
in New York. This is important for effective interaction
with the sanctions Committee, and also so as to have a
link with the Security Council. If the monitoring
mechanism is set up in a location other than New York,
this link would be weakened, which we think would be
a mistake. It is important to take a close look at the
possible options for financing the mechanism so that its
activities are properly funded.
The report contains many other practical
proposals, including on expanding the list of
embargoed goods and on unifying national legislation
as regards arms trading, customs policies and so forth.
We are prepared to review these proposals, many of
which will require careful study. But right now, I
repeat, we believe the Council should concentrate on
preparing and adopting a draft resolution that would
allow the monitoring mechanism to quickly begin
work. The recommendations requiring further study
can be considered at subsequent stages.
We support the view that sanctions against the
Taliban should be implemented in close connection
with other United Nations decisions that seek to ensure
peace and stability for Afghanistan. Most serious
attention should be given to retaining the targeted
nature of the sanctions: making sure that they continue
to be directed against the leadership of the Taliban,
rather than against the Afghan people.
On the basis of these principles we will be
cooperating with other Council members in the further
work on this report.
Mr. Hume (United States of America): I would
like to take this opportunity first of all to commend
Ambassador Valdivieso for the critical leadership he
has provided to the Council’s sanctions Committee. We
rely on him for his leadership and expertise. I would
also like to thank Ambassador Menkerios and
congratulate him and his Committee of Experts on the
extraordinary work that they have been able to do in a
very short period of time. They have given us a
significant and substantive report that merits our full
consideration.
The challenges and threats presented by
Afghanistan are immense and multifaceted. The
Council has addressed these issues many times and will
have to continue to do so. Today we are here to focus
on the report of the Committee of Experts on how to

7

S/PV.4325

monitor the arms embargo and the closure of terrorist
training camps that was demanded in Security Council
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1333 (2000).
This Council has stated repeatedly that the
Taliban must cease its support for terrorism. We have
taken an unambiguous stand in our resolutions. We are
prepared to back up words with action — primarily
through implementing an effective arms embargo
against the Taliban.
Now this Committee of Experts has informed us
that for our resolutions to have an impact we need to
establish a mechanism to monitor compliance. The
United States agrees with this recommendation and
would support a resolution to establish such a
mechanism. We support the conclusion of the
Committee of Experts that the proposed monitoring
mechanism should augment the ability and efforts of
Afghanistan’s neighbouring States to enforce the
Council’s resolutions, especially to cut off the flow of
weapons and to close down the terrorist training camps.
I would like here to note the cooperation that each of
Afghanistan’s neighbours provided to the work of the
Committee of Experts.
The mechanism will be useful in providing
information and assisting countries bordering Talibancontrolled areas of Afghanistan so that they can
improve the national enforcement of each nation’s
international obligations under resolution 1333 (2000).
The mechanism should also provide accurate
information to the sanctions Committee so that
suspected violators can be named and shamed. We
believe this action should also serve as a deterrent.
The mechanism, as we see it, should be put
together carefully. It cannot replace the work that has
to be done by the thousands of border police, customs
agents and other national officials responsible for
compliance with the arms embargo. Nor should it seek
to duplicate the efforts of other agencies such as the
United Nations International Drug Control Programme
(UNDCP), Interpol and the Wassenaar Arrangement.
We see this mechanism as a critical means to
assist Ambassador Valdivieso with his work as
Chairman of the sanctions Committee. Therefore, we
agree with the comment just made that the monitoring
mechanism should be established in New York, where
it can have close links with the work of the Council,
and that it should have the capacity to have some staff
in the field.

8

Although financing for the mechanism needs to
be discussed, the United States favours the immediate
establishment of a trust fund through which the
mechanism, whatever its exact final form, would be
financed. The United States Government is in the
process of identifying resources that will allow it to
make a substantial contribution to a trust fund, so that
an effective monitoring mechanism can be established
as soon as possible.
Finally, the United States congratulates
Ambassador Menkerios for his leadership and his
Expert Committee’s invaluable contribution. We also
thank Ambassador Valdivieso for his continuing and
critical leadership.
The United States looks forward to working with
all present to establish an effective monitoring
mechanism and to adopt a draft resolution later this
month to put this into effect.
Mr. Toure (Mali) (spoke in French): I should like
warmly to thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this open meeting of the Security Council to
discuss the report of the Committee of Experts on
Afghanistan appointed pursuant to paragraph 15 (a) of
Security Council resolution 1333 (2000), regarding
monitoring of the arms embargo against the Taliban
and the closure of terrorist training camps in the
Taliban-held areas of Afghanistan.
I should like also to thank the Committee of
Experts on Afghanistan, chaired by Ambassador Haile
Menkerios, for the outstanding work it has done in
such a short space of time and in rather difficult
conditions. This is a perfect opportunity for my
delegation to state how pleased we are at the
conclusions reached by the Committee. We would also
like to thank Ambassador Valdivieso, Chairman of the
sanctions Committee on Afghanistan, for having given
us a detailed introduction to the report.
The principle underlying my delegation’s view of
sanctions regimes is that the goal of sanctions should
not be to punish, but to modify behaviour. In order to
attain this goal of behaviour change, it is more than
ever necessary rigorously to apply sanctions imposed
against States. This can be done only through an
effective mechanism to monitor compliance with the
requirements set out in the relevant resolutions. That is
why we support the recommendations of the
Committee of Experts contained in the report before
us — recommendations that will make it possible to

S/PV.4325

improve the effectiveness of sanctions imposed, which
will lead to a change of behaviour.
We note the fact that Afghanistan’s neighbours
realize that there can be no military solution to the
conflict that has bloodied Afghanistan for two decades.
Those who are fuelling this conflict must put an end to
their behaviour and understand that there is a link
between stability in Afghanistan and their own
security.
As indicated in paragraph 88 of the report, my
delegation supports the creation of a United Nations
Office for monitoring the sanctions imposed by the
Security Council against the Taliban authorities in
Kabul. Efficiency and cost-effectiveness should be
taken into account when deciding on the location of the
office. In any case, the location that is chosen should
be able to provide the necessary administrative and
logistical support to the Office. In this way the
groundwork can be laid for exemplary cooperation
between the United Nations and Afghanistan’s
neighbours, in order to ensure total respect for the
international embargo on weapons destined for the
Taliban and to monitor activities in the terrorist
training camps.
To that end, we support the idea of sending small
teams of specialists, which would work closely with
the various border control services and anti-terrorist
teams in each of the six countries that are neighbours
of Afghanistan. Given the fact that the considerable
funds resulting from the opium and heroin trade are
being used to buy weapons and other war matériel and
to fund the training of terrorists, my delegation firmly
supports the recommendations of the Committee
contained in paragraph 61 of the report regarding the
interdiction of smuggled drugs from Afghanistan. The
international community should do everything in its
power to deprive the Taliban of the important funding
that it gets from the illicit drug trade.
Finally, I should like once again to congratulate
Ambassador Haile Menkerios and his team on the
excellent work done. We reiterate the fact that my
delegation is ready to take an active part in seeking a
consensus whereby this important document can be
followed up.
Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): I shall be brief, for
two reasons: first, because there has already been a
chance for an initial discussion of the report of the
sanctions Committee, and, secondly, because one of the

important functions of this meeting is to allow Council
members to hear the views of neighbouring States
before the Council itself moves to take action on the
recommendations of the monitoring report.
What I have to say today will not be exhaustive,
but will, I hope, give Council members and others in
this room a good feel for the way in which the United
Kingdom is approaching the discussion on the report.
But first, I think that congratulations are due both
to Ambassador Valdivieso and to Ambassador
Menkerios for the excellent work they have done. It is
good to see Ambassador Menkerios around the Council
table again, albeit in a slightly different incarnation
from last time. It is very good to have him here.
We regard the Committee of Experts’ report as a
very thorough, very inventive and very useful
document.
We
agree
with
most
of
the
recommendations, and in particular we agree with the
key recommendation that we should work towards
establishing a monitoring mechanism along the lines
the Panel recommended.
We also agree that there is benefit in having field
teams on the ground to support the efforts of the
neighbouring States. We welcome the commitment of
the neighbouring countries, as set out in the report, to
implement sanctions and cooperate with the monitoring
mechanism. I hope and believe that we will hear more
of that today.
The first step will have to be an evaluation of
what skills are required in each country — in other
words, how best the United Nations can help. It is also
important that the teams on the ground should have a
monitoring role in addition to an advisory role. This is
not just because this two-pronged approach accurately
reflects the main thrust of the problem; it is also
because it is one of the best ways, as we see it, to
achieve a truly cooperative effort, which, as a number
of speakers have already said, will be the key to
ensuring the success of this enterprise.
We have looked at the idea of having a central
headquarters in the light of the wider debate that is
going on on sanctions monitoring. As the Council is
aware, there are a number of proposals on the table for
establishing
a
centralized
global
monitoring
mechanism for sanctions. The establishment of a
monitoring mechanism for Afghanistan should not
preclude the development of such semi-permanent

9

S/PV.4325

global mechanisms encompassing all the monitoring
regimes.
We do, however, see benefit, in the Afghanistan
case, in setting up a light, flexible headquarters to
coordinate the work of the six teams and carry out
some of the centralized tasks, as described by the
Committee of Experts.
We believe that the team should be established
within, or closely related to, the existing sanctions
team of the Department of Political Affairs. That,
again, points to establishing it in New York. We hope
we can move as quickly as possible to establish the
monitoring mechanism. As the debate proceeds and as
the work continues on the details of establishing semipermanent global sanctions monitoring structures, we
will want to look at how the Afghanistan monitoring
mechanism and the other monitoring mechanisms can
be brought into such structures.
On funding, we are looking carefully at how this
can best be done. There are a number of bottom lines, I
think: to ensure that, whatever is done, the monitoring
mechanism is adequately and securely funded; to
ensure that it can be funded quickly; and to ensure that
we do not incur unnecessary expenditure. I have noted
in this context what Ambassador Hume has had to say
about the establishment of a trust fund.
I will leave it there. I hope my statement contains
the essence of the United Kingdom approach. We look
forward to hearing the views of others in this Chamber,
both members and non-members of the Council, and
we look forward to working in the Council to ensure
that the report is properly followed up.
Mr. Cooney (Ireland): I shall try to be brief. I
would like to begin by thanking Ambassador
Menkerios and the rest of the Committee of Experts for
their report (S/2001/511), which was compiled in
difficult circumstances and which contains many useful
recommendations. I would like also to take this
opportunity to recognize the energy and leadership of
Ambassador Valdivieso in his chairmanship of the
Afghanistan sanctions Committee.
As the wider issues of Afghanistan will be
discussed later this month, I shall restrict my comments
here to the report of the Committee of Experts. Ireland
supports the recommendation of the Committee of
Experts that an office for sanctions monitoring and
coordination be established in a central location with

10

sanctions enforcement support teams working with
border control services in the countries neighbouring
Afghanistan. The practical aspects of that structure,
including the modalities for cooperation with
neighbouring States, should now be discussed in the
sanctions Committee, which has the relevant expertise,
with a view to presenting recommendations to the
Council as soon as possible.
In order for such a mechanism to be effective, it
must, we believe, have sustainable and continuous
funding. When costings become available, Ireland will
consider offering assistance in the light of available
resources.
Many of the other recommendations of the
Committee of Experts are also worthy of consideration
and should be further examined by the sanctions
Committee. We appreciate the emphasis placed on the
significance of drug trafficking, and we fully agree that
this must be addressed as part of the overall problem.
We also agree with the two-pronged approach to the
closure of terrorist camps, as outlined in paragraph 52
of the report.
We note with interest the recommendation in
paragraph 32 regarding aircraft turbine fuel and fluids
for armoured personnel carriers. But on that point, I
would be grateful for clarification that this proposal
relates to military flights and that any restrictions could
be implemented without inadvertently affecting
humanitarian flights.
Mr. Teixeira da Silva (France) (spoke in
French): I join previous speakers in welcoming
Ambassador Menkerios and the other members of the
Committee of Experts and in congratulating them on
the quality of their report, which was submitted most
promptly. I also echo their praise for the leadership of
Ambassador Valdivieso as Chairman of the sanctions
Committee on Afghanistan. I have four comments to
make on the report and on its anticipated outcomes.
The prime merit of the report is that it emphasizes
the central role of neighbouring countries in the true
implementation of the arms embargo and the closure of
terrorist training camps. We note the confirmed
commitment of Afghanistan’s neighbours to implement
the embargo and to cooperate with the United Nations
to that end. The Committee of Experts itself
participated in an effort to increase awareness of this
issue. We must take the neighbouring States at their

S/PV.4325

word, and must help them overcome the obstacles
noted by the Committee of Experts.
Secondly, we support the overall structure of the
proposed monitoring mechanism. We feel that the
structure should be as light, flexible and adaptable as
possible. The first task would be to bring the national
forces of neighbouring countries up to standard. The
proposed general monitoring and disarmament
measures are of interest and should be considered in
greater depth. Similarly, it has been proposed that new
arms-control legislation be enacted and existing
legislation strengthened; that would be useful to
encourage work now under way in a number of
international bodies. That is true also of proposed
measures that are set out in the Protocol against the
Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms,
Their Parts and Components and Ammunition,
supplementing the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime, recently adopted by
the General Assembly. Most of the proposed measures
will be addressed at the forthcoming United Nations
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in all its Aspects. Clearly, there is a
great deal of work to be done here that lies beyond the
mandate of the Security Council but that still
complements the Council’s work.
Thirdly, we fully support the recommendation
that the monitoring mechanism could serve as the
nucleus for a more general mechanism to monitor
sanctions and the illicit trade in raw materials in armed
conflict. We would observe with interest that the
Committee of Experts has noted that arms embargoes
have inherent problems, irrespective of the sanctions
regime. Resolving these problems demands the
implementation of comprehensive measures at the
international level. It would obviously be useful to be
able to take advantage of the synergy among the
various sanctions mechanisms and panels of experts
that are put in place over time. In that spirit, and to
make reference to what Ambassador Eldon said, we
feel that the monitoring mechanism for Afghanistan
would best be established in New York, precisely to
foster synergy with sanctions committees and with
other existing mechanisms.
Finally, let me say a word about financing. Here,
predictability is important to enable the monitoring
mechanism to function well and independently. That is
why we would prefer funding from the regular budget
of the United Nations; that would also have practical

advantages with respect to the day-to-day operation of
the mechanism: we must ensure that there is no
interruption in the funding, because that would be
extremely damaging to the functioning of the
mechanism. To expand on my earlier remark, the
establishment of a general monitoring mechanism for
sanctions and illicit trade would not only facilitate
synergy in its work, but would also offer significant
budgetary savings.
In general terms, we share the views of the
Committee of Experts on the need to conceive and
make use of sanctions as part of a comprehensive
strategy for a political settlement of the Afghan
conflict. We hope that in coming weeks we will be able
to discuss that more general topic.
Mr. Ward (Jamaica): My delegation thanks the
Chairman of the sanctions Committee, Ambassador
Valdivieso, for introducing the report of the Committee
of Experts and extends its appreciation to the
Committee for its important work.
We have carefully reviewed the report and have
concluded that the ideas and recommendations provide
a basis for effective implementation of the measures
mandated in resolution 1333 (2000). It is our view that,
having adopted resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1333
(2000), we must seek to enforce the measures we have
approved. Responsible parties must take appropriate
action to prevent illegal flights and the entry of arms
and ammunition into the territory and ensure the
closing of terrorist training camps in Afghanistan.
The report addresses the steps that need to be
taken to give effect to these measures and we welcome
the opportunity to discuss effective measures to address
this problem. We feel that the report provides
guidelines for action at the national, regional and
international levels that require the commitment of the
concerned States if these provisions are to be
implemented.
At the regional level, neighbouring States must
coordinate their efforts and indicate the level of
assistance needed to effectively monitor their borders.
It is important that transit and supply States comply
with Security Council resolutions. It is commendable
that neighbouring States have expressed their
commitment to this process and it is left to us to
encourage them to put these words into action.

11

S/PV.4325

At the international level, it is important that
these levels be supported, in the short term, by the
provision of technical and financial assistance to those
countries. In the long term, the gains made and
decisions taken in other United Nations bodies must be
taken into account. In this regard, we note the
observation of the Committee, contained in paragraph
34 of the report, that
“any measures proposed for Afghanistan must be
seen in the wider context of arms control
measures targeted elsewhere”.
It is clear that we need to move quickly to
strengthen monitoring mechanisms in order to support
border arrangements. We look forward to further
discussions on the modalities and financing of these
mechanisms. We are also particularly interested in the
Committee’s
recommendations
regarding
the
inspection of shipments under the Afghan Transit
Trade Agreement. It is important that we examine
carefully how this recommendation can assist us in the
implementation process.
In closing, my delegation wishes to reiterate that
the Security Council must continue to seek a
comprehensive solution to the problem in Afghanistan.
The Committee of Experts, in its report, notes the
position of all concerned States in the region. We
concur with its conclusion that there can be no military
solution to the conflict in Afghanistan and that only a
political solution by the people of Afghanistan can
bring an end to its suffering. The international
community must continue its efforts to bring this about.
The effective monitoring of sanctions should be
undertaken as a means to this end. While we focus on
this issue, we should also remain conscious of the dire
humanitarian situation that prevails and make a
concerted effort to ensure that our decisions do not add
to this crisis.
Mr. Neewoor (Mauritius): I thank you, Sir, for
organizing this public meeting on Afghanistan, where
the situation on all fronts seems only to be getting
worse on a daily basis — the latest scenario being the
edict that the Taliban has issued against minority
communities.
We deeply appreciate the important briefing
provided to the Council this morning by Ambassador
Valdivieso and we felicitate Mr. Menkerios and
members of the Committee of Experts for their
comprehensive and important report.

12

Today’s discussion has to focus on the report, and
in that connection my delegation has noted the many
highly commendable suggestions that have been made
by the Committee. Among the important suggestions,
we note the following: publication of information
concerning
violations
of
end-user
certificate
provisions, including the names of companies,
countries and individuals involved, as well as cases of
unauthorized re-transfer of weapons to third parties, as
referred to in paragraph 39 of the report; the need for
assistance in providing data on aircraft movements in
and out of Afghanistan, which would help to monitor
illegal flights, as referred to in paragraph 40; the need
for neighbouring Pakistan to regulate the curricula at
the madrassas, as referred to in paragraph 43; the
return or repatriation of foreign terrorists under
international supervision, as referred to in paragraph
48; and the idea of creating a dual-control sanctions
monitoring mechanism, as referred to in paragraph 77.
My
delegation
strongly
supports
those
recommendations, which are in line with the mandate
of the Committee to deal with the growing problems in
Afghanistan. We believe that they are important
guidelines for the management of sanctions in general.
We agree with the observation made in the report that
the close cooperation of neighbouring countries is
imperative in resolving the Afghanistan problem. We
appeal to the neighbouring countries to cooperate fully
with the international community in this regard, and we
hope that they will.
The proposal for a sanctions monitoring
mechanism is very commendable, but we have to
assure ourselves that such a body will not become a
mere reporting panel for further action by others.
Instead, it must have a solid structure, with all financial
and human resources to effectively deal with sanctionsbusting cases. We believe that the monitoring body
should be financed out of assessed contributions and
supported by voluntary funds from donors. The body
should work in close cooperation with the sanctions
Committee and report its findings to the Committee for
action as appropriate.
Finally, we hope that, in the course of this month,
the Security Council will hold an open debate that will
allow the Members of the United Nations to express
their views on a more comprehensive basis on all
aspects of the Afghanistan question.

S/PV.4325

Mr. Kolby (Norway): First of all, I would like to
thank Ambassador Valdivieso for his introduction and
for his energetic leadership of the Committee.
Secondly, I would like to thank Ambassador
Menkerios and the Committee of Experts for providing
us with a thorough and thought-provoking report.
I would also like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, for holding this open meeting, which
enables the Council to hear the views of representatives
of countries whose efforts are crucial to the success of
our efforts to implement the sanctions against the
Taliban in the region.
My statement will be limited to the report before
us because later this month we are going to have a
discussion of the overall question of Afghanistan.
My Government regards the report and its
recommendations as an excellent basis for establishing
a monitoring mechanism with regard to the effective
implementation of resolutions 1333 (2000) and 1267
(1999). Norway supports the realistic approach taken in
the report. A mechanism should be based on
neighbouring States’ national border control efforts and
be supported by small international Support Teams of
experts that would also monitor and investigate
violations. In the report it is suggested that such
Support Teams should be based at existing United
Nations offices in the region. In that connection, my
delegation would like to ask the Committee whether
the Committee of Experts has considered any
potentially negative consequences of co-locating the
Sanctions Enforcement Support Teams together with
United Nations offices and agencies operating inside
Afghanistan, including those involved with the
provision of humanitarian assistance.
We have noted the arguments presented for
locating the headquarters office in Vienna. We find that
there are also sound arguments for locating the office
in New York, including the need for close and
continuous contact with the Security Council, the
sanctions Committee and the Secretariat.
It is also necessary to see a sanctions monitoring
mechanism for Afghanistan in connection with the
discussions on the establishment of a permanent
mechanism for monitoring United Nations sanctions
regimes, including arms embargoes. The report has
raised important issues in that regard that need to be
studied further.

As for the question of financing, Norway’s
position is that the mechanism needs secure and stable
funding and that it should thus be financed by assessed
contributions. We have also noted arguments in favour
of initial voluntary funding in order to ensure speedy
implementation of the recommendation. We are also
ready to consider that.
Norway is ready to consider the other
recommendations, including that aircraft turbine fuel
and special fuels for military use be specified in the
arms embargo, but with the provision that this does not
negatively affect the humanitarian assistance efforts in
Afghanistan.
The President: Before giving the floor to the
next speaker, let me review with the Council the
situation regarding the time and the number of speakers
we have. We still have three other Council members to
hear — Singapore, Colombia and Bangladesh. To help
the situation, I can forgo my national statement. But we
will still need at least 10 minutes for Singapore and
Colombia, five each. We also have four speakers under
rule 37. My initial contacts with them told me that the
four of them will need about 35 minutes. Thereafter we
will hear from Ambassador Menkerios, whom I believe
should be given at least 10 minutes to respond to many
of the questions raised. That makes a total of 55
minutes. It is my intention to close this meeting at 1.15
p.m. If we need to go beyond that, we will have to
come back at 3 p.m.
Mr. Mantaha (Singapore): Our thanks go to
Ambassador Valdivieso for his presentation. We look
forward to the presentation to be made later on by
Ambassador Menkerios.
My delegation would like to thank the Committee
of Experts for having provided the Council with a
comprehensive analysis of the subject and for having
made concrete and realistic recommendations to
strengthen the implementation of resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1333 (2000). We note that the Committee
has considered a whole spectrum of options on how to
monitor the implementation of the arms embargo, as
well as the closure of terrorist training camps in
Afghanistan. We are gratified that in making its
recommendations, the Committee has given emphasis
to the need for the proposed mechanism to be not only
effective but also affordable and realizable. We
therefore believe that the recommendations of the
Committee merit serious consideration.

13

S/PV.4325

We look forward to working with other members
of the Security Council to consider how we can take
the process forward, drawing from the Committee’s
recommendations. We also agree with the views
expressed by others that we should expedite that
process. My delegation would like to note, however,
that any decision of the Council emanating from the
report of the Committee should, insofar as this is
possible, be taken by consensus.
We will be commenting on the specific
recommendations of the Committee in greater detail in
subsequent discussions of the Council. But permit me,
at this juncture, to make a few general points.
First, like others, my delegation is of the view
that the Council cannot proceed with the
implementation of the recommendations of the
Committee without adequate consultations with the
countries that have specific involvement in the
implementation of the Council’s resolutions. Singapore
has noted with deep appreciation that the six States that
share borders with Afghanistan have stated their
intention to abide by the resolutions of the Council.
The Council will now have to work very closely with
them to find the best possible way of helping those
countries implement the decisions of the Council. The
Committee was right when it asserted that

Thirdly, on the proposal by the Committee that
the proposed monitoring mechanism for Afghanistan
serve as the nucleus for future sanctions-monitoring
requirements, we would counsel some caution. The
Council’s approach towards the issue of Afghanistan is
governed by a set of political and strategic
considerations that may not apply in other cases and
issues. We should be slow to regard the proposed
mechanism, if it is eventually adopted, as a general
template for other situations.
Fourthly, with respect to the Committee’s
recommendation on measures to enforce the arms
embargo, we agree with the views expressed by others
at the meeting held yesterday between the sanctions
Committee and the Committee of Experts that, where
relevant,
the
Council
must
consider
the
recommendations within the framework of existing
international mechanisms. The Security Council should
take into account the international debate on the control
of the illegal trade in small arms. The United Nation
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects will be held in New
York next month. It should give us an indication of the
extent to which there is an international consensus on
this issue.

As the Committee also noted, in paragraph 21 of its
report, those countries

Fifthly, my delegation is pleased that the
Committee has expanded the scope of its work to
investigate the connection between the illicit drug trade
and the financing of arms purchases and terrorist
camps in Afghanistan. This is a very important
dimension of the problem, and it deserves our
attention.

“stressed the fact that without a stable
Afghanistan their own stability and security was
threatened”.

Let me conclude by highlighting paragraph 89 of
the Committee’s report. I think it is important enough
for me to read it out to the Council.

Secondly, in creating the mechanism to monitor
the implementation of the resolutions against the
Taliban, the Security Council should not unwittingly
institute measures that would impede the ability of
humanitarian agencies to bring aid and relief to the
Afghan population. I note that the delegations of
Ireland, Norway and others have also made that point.
This applies in particular to the monitoring of flights in
and out of Taliban-controlled territories. The Council
should ensure that the frequency and viability of
humanitarian flights, which are crucial for dealing with
the humanitarian crisis in Afghanistan, are in no way
adversely affected.

“The sanctions imposed on the Taliban must
be seen and implemented as part of an overall
package pursued by the United Nations to ensure
peace and stability in Afghanistan. Thus, the
sanctions, the search for a political solution, and
the humanitarian and economic efforts all need to
be taken as a whole and pursued as parts of an
integrated strategy leading to a broad based and
responsible government in Afghanistan.”

“enforcing sanctions must rely on the will and
initiative, primarily, of the countries bordering
Afghanistan”. (S/2001/511, para. 90)

14

My delegation looks forward to future opportunities to
exchange views with Council members, and also with
Afghanistan’s neighbouring States, to see how we

S/PV.4325

could
best
find
a
well-defined,
long-term,
comprehensive strategy to bring peace to Afghanistan.
Mr. Franco (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): We
have given careful consideration to the report of the
Committee
of
Experts,
which
has
made
recommendations to the Security Council on how the
arms embargo and the closure of terrorist training
camps demanded in paragraphs 3 and 5 of resolution
1333 (2000) could be monitored. We also listened
carefully to the statement made by Ambassador
Valdivieso, in his capacity as Chairman of the
sanctions Committee, in which he summarized the
content of the report. Colombia concurs with many of
the recommendations contained in the report with
regard to setting up a monitoring mechanism.
I should like to highlight four preliminary issues
that are important to my delegation as starting points
for the discussions that will follow this meeting of the
Council. The first relates to the neighbouring countries.
It is essential for the Security Council to properly
involve all the countries neighbouring Afghanistan and
to obtain their cooperation in order to ensure that the
monitoring mechanism is effective. In this regard,
Colombia welcomes the willingness of all of those
countries to cooperate with this organ of the United
Nations. This is indispensable for ensuring the
effective monitoring of illicit activities taking place
along the borders. We believe that this is the right
approach — the recommendations should be aimed at
strengthening national capacities.
My second comment relates to the issue of
coordination — horizontal coordination among the
neighbouring countries and vertical coordination
among those countries, the Security Council and the
United Nations as a whole. This Organization could
contribute
to
establishing
greater
harmony,
coordination and compatibility among governmental
and security bodies in order to enhance both horizontal
and vertical coordination.

avoid any incompatibility with the efforts of the
international community to contribute to peace and
stability in Afghanistan. At the appropriate time, when
the Security Council carries out a comprehensive
review of the situation in that country, we will have an
opportunity to highlight and test that necessary
compatibility.
In conclusion, Colombia will participate in the
scrupulous
and
detailed
analysis
of
the
recommendations presented to the Council by the
Committee of Experts so as to ensure that appropriate
decisions are taken, including on the modalities of the
monitoring mechanism, its location, in either New York
or Vienna, and its funding.
This open meeting is the first step towards that
analysis and will enable us to hear the opinions of the
States concerned.
The President: In interests of better time
management, I will forgo making my national
statement at this point.
I will move on to the list of countries invited
under rule 37. The first speaker on that list is the
representative of Afghanistan, on whom I now call.
Mr. Farhâdi (Afghanistan): I should like first of
all to congratulate you warmly, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for June 2001. We are also grateful to the head of the
Mission of the United States to the United Nations for
presiding over the Council for the month of May. We
are also very grateful to you, Sir, for arranging this
meeting, which is taking place at such an important
time.

My third comment relates to border activities of
interest to the Security Council. In this respect, it is
important to have effective and comprehensive controls
on trafficking in arms and chemical precursors,
including acetic anhydride, on the smuggling of goods
and on other activities that might fuel or facilitate
terrorist activities.

As we have consistently and amply explained in
earlier statements to this Council and to the General
Assembly, foreign intervention in Afghanistan remains
the main cause of the present conflict and of all the
sufferings of the Afghan people. That is not mere
rhetoric or allegation, but a crystal-clear fact,
recognized in United Nations documents. In this
regard, I would like to draw the attention of the
Security Council to the observation made by the
Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human
Rights on the situation of human rights in Afghanistan
as early as September 1999. Paragraph 3 of his interim
report (A/54/422) states,

My fourth comment relates to the peace process.
In its decisions, the Security Council must be careful to

“the people of Afghanistan continued to be
victims of gross violations of human rights and

15

S/PV.4325

persistent breaches of international humanitarian
law. The basic cause of this was that the people of
Afghanistan continued to be virtual hostages in
their own land, where externally armed forces
seek to rule Afghanistan without the effective
participation or consent of the people.”
These externally armed forces referred to by the
Rapporteur, Ambassador Kamal Hossain, in his report
consist of an alliance of Pakistani military junta,
religious extremists groups from Pakistan, Usama bin
Laden’s groups, including the notorious Al Quaeda,
Central Asian extremist groups and the so-called
Islamic Emirate of the Taliban. This alliance is part of
a great scheme — let us call it a hallucination — for
the domination of Afghanistan and Central Asia by
Pakistan, which is seeking to secure “strategic depth”.
This is a new version of Lebensraum, cherished by
groups with an anachronistic ideological agenda. This
is not only a threat to Afghanistan but also a serious
menace to the peace and security of the region and of
the world.
The discrimination against women and girls, the
massacre of the civilian population based on ethnic or
religious origin, cultural vandalism, the stigmatization
of religious minority groups, raids on hospitals run by
humanitarian organizations and many other atrocities
are part of politico-social agenda of the PakistanTaliban-bin Laden alliance. All of these endeavours are
focused on establishing an Emirate of terror serving the
interests of Pakistan and achieving the dreams of dullwitted people of an “ideal Islamic society”. The
purpose is to establish in Afghanistan a so-called
Islamic regime which does not resemble any other
Islamic country of the world.
The pursuit of creating such an idealistic society
could be considered one of the main causes of the
humanitarian crisis in the country. This man-made
disaster has deprived more than one half of the Afghan
population of productive activities. There is no
infrastructural economic plan for the reconstruction or
rehabilitation of Afghanistan, due to the harsh policies
issued daily by the Taliban. The skilled workers,
intellectuals and knowledgeable people have already
left the areas occupied by the Taliban. This is part of
Pakistan’s scheme regarding Afghanistan, where
ignorant people remain in power and become
increasingly dependent on Pakistan and on Pakistani
military intelligence.

16

Despite the international community’s outcry
about Taliban policies and actions — including the safe
haven being given to international terrorists in the parts
of Afghanistan occupied by the Taliban — in spite of
the presence of thousands of Arab and Central Asian
fighters and their training camps in Afghanistan, and
given the drug trafficking by the Taliban, Pakistan
continues to cherish its infamous offspring and puppet,
called the Taliban. Pakistan encourages others to
recognize this strange entity as a legitimate
Government. The interview given by the head of
Pakistan’s military junta to the Russian daily Izvestia
on 31 May 2001, demanding the recognition of the
Taliban, is clear evidence of the continuing aggressive
policy of Pakistan in Afghanistan and in the region.
General Musharraf does not cease to repeat his litany
that “Pakistan supports the Taliban”. He believes that
this constitutes “the national interest of Pakistan”.
The history of the world in the past century has
shown that any policy of appeasement towards an
aggressor and turning a blind eye to the facts cannot
serve the interests of peace, justice and stability. A firm
and strong position against an aggressor can highly
serve the interests of peace, justice and stability.
Unfortunately, in the case of Afghanistan,
Pakistan’s direct involvement in Afghanistan and its
aggressive policies in the region, which are a threat to
international peace and security, are not addressed
properly in the Security Council. Thousands of
Pakistani fighters are recruited and openly sent to
Afghanistan from different segments of Pakistani
society, including its military. The United Nations has
confirmed this fact by a mere stereotypical phrase —
“deeply concerned” — which appears in United
Nations documents without the determination that this
action constitutes aggression, requiring appropriate
measures against the aggressor.
This indifference by the United Nations
encourages Pakistan to pursue its hegemonic adventure
in Afghanistan, and — in blatant violation of Security
Council resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1333 (2000) — to
continue to supply arms and ammunition for the armed
conflict there. Pakistan remains engaged in providing
the Taliban with support in the areas of planning,
mobilization, logistics and recruitment.
In this regard, I would like to quote from the
article written by Mr. Anthony Davis, the most famous

S/PV.4325

scholar and writer on Afghanistan. This article was
published on 30 May 2001 in Jane’s Defence Weekly.
“Intelligence sources understand Pakistan
has continued to provide logistic and advisory
support for the build-up of the Taliban despite
Islamabad’s earlier assurances that it would abide
by United Nations Security Council resolution
1333 that since January has prohibited provision
of material or advisory support to the Taliban.
The United Nations has no mechanism in place
that might monitor the implementation of the
sanctions regime by Pakistan, which has backed
the Taliban since the movement’s inception in
1994.
“In one week in early May two convoys of
about 15 trucks each were moving daily from the
Pakistan border at Torkham through Jalalabad to
Kabul, according to reliable sources. The
Mercedes-Benz trucks carried Pakistani AF
[applied for] plates [issued in advance of normal
registration plates], giving them a degree of
anonymity, noted the sources. Munitions are
understood to have been concealed under sacks of
wheat.
“Other munitions are understood to have
been moved across the southern borders at
Chaman between the Pakistani city of Quetta and
Kandahar in Afghanistan.”
Once again we would like to put on the record
that the Islamic State of Afghanistan is firmly
convinced that there is no military solution to the
present conflict in Afghanistan. The Pakistani military
junta should withdraw its military personnel and socalled volunteers from Afghanistan. All foreign
fighters should leave Afghanistan immediately. All
foreign fighters should leave Afghanistan immediately.
The Afghans should be left to resolve their problems
through negotiations.
The Islamic State of Afghanistan has already
expressed its readiness to attend the Japanese-proposed
peace talks, and also positively responded to the
Kazakhstan-proposed peace negotiations, to be held
under the auspices of the United Nations. It also
positively responded to the appeal by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Ruud
Lubbers, for a ceasefire. All these proposals were all
systematically rejected by the Taliban.

The Islamic State of Afghanistan strongly
believes that it is high time for the Security Council to
discharge its duty under the Charter of the United
Nations to save the people of Afghanistan, to end the
suffering of the Afghan nation and to maintain the
peace and security of the region. The Security Council
should determine the extent of Pakistani aggression in
Afghanistan and decide the measures to be taken to
maintain peace and security.
As my Government remains unwaveringly
committed to defending the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of the country, I would like to
reaffirm our strong belief in a peaceful political
settlement of the conflict and to reiterate our
wholehearted support for the pivotal mediating role of
the United Nations, aimed at the establishment of a
broad-based, multi-ethnic and fully representative
Government in Afghanistan.
In this context, the Ministry for Foreign Affairs
of Afghanistan already — last Friday — sent identical
letters to the Secretary-General and to yourself, Sir.
These letters are to be published as an official
document of the Security Council and the General
Assembly. We expect you will give great attention to
the text and its annexes. We thank the Ambassador of
Colombia, Alfonso Valdivieso, the Committee of
Experts headed by Ambassador Haile Menkerios and
all Ambassador Menkerios’ companions for their
efforts deployed to submit a report on how the arms
embargo and the closure of the terrorist training camps
could be implemented in accordance with resolution
1333 (2000).
Finally, let me endorse the conclusions of the
Committee of Experts, in particular the establishment
of a control mechanism and the ideas reflected in
paragraph 89 of the Committee’s report, which I wish
to read out:
“The sanctions imposed on the Taliban must
be seen and implemented as part of an overall
package pursued by the United Nations to ensure
peace and stability in Afghanistan. Thus, the
sanctions, the search for a political solution, and
the humanitarian and economic efforts all need to
be taken as a whole and pursued as parts of an
integrated strategy leading to a broad-based and
responsible government in Afghanistan.”
Paragraph 90 begins:

17

S/PV.4325

“No sanctions monitoring will be effective
unless there is total commitment of the Member
States involved with its implementation.”
We support the immediate funding of the
monitoring mechanism from the regular United Nations
budget, so that it can be both predictable and secure.

18

The President: In view of the lateness of the
hour, and with the concurrence of the members of the
Council, I shall suspend the meeting now until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.15 p.m.
