1254th

United Nations

PLENARY MEETING

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

Friday, 1 November 1963,
at 3.00 p.m.

EIGHTEENTH SESSION

NEW YORK

Official Records
CONTENTS

5. If the Assembly has no objection to the arrangement proposed by the representatives of Czechoslovakia and Malaysia, the election of Czechoslovakia
in the next ballot will be regarded as a confirmation
of this arrangement.

Page

Statement by the President. . . . . . . • . . . . • .

1

Agenda item 16:
Election of three non-permanent members of
the Security Council (concluded) . . . • • . • .

1

Agenda item 85:
Measures in connexion with the hurricane
which has just s truck the territories of Cuba,
the Dominican Republic, Haiti, Jamaica and
Trinidad and Tobago. • • • • • . . • • • . . . . .

2

Organization of work. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

9

6. As I have heard no objections, the Assembly will
now proceed to the election of one non-permanent
memb!3r of the Security Council. The ballot papers are
being distributed, and Members are requested to write
the name of only one State on each ballot paper; any
ballot paper containing more than one name will be
regarded as invalid.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Dashtseren
(Mongolia) and Mr. Lynch-Shyllon (Sierra Leone)
acted as tellers.

President: Mr. Carlos SOSA RODRIGUEZ

A vote was taken by secret ballot.

(Venezuela).

Number of ballot papers:
Invalid ballots:
Number of valid ballots:
Abstentions:
Number of members voting:
Required majority:

Statement by the President
1. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): In
accordance with the request made by a number of
delegations, the consideration of agenda item 12,
the first item on our agenda for today, will be postponed to a day next week. This was announced in the
Second Committee, and I am repeating it now for the
benefit of any members of the Assembly who may not
be aware of the change.

j
'I

,I

0
102
3
99
66

Number of votes obtained:

Czechoslovakia • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •• 89
Malaysia. • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • . •. 10
Having obtained the required two-thirds majority,
Czechoslovakia was elected a non-permanent member
of the Security Council.

AGENDA ITEM 16

I

102

7. Mr. HAJEK (Czechoslovakia): Wishing to facilitate
the proceedings of the General Assembly with regard
to the election of non-permanent members of the
Security Council, and in the spirit of understanding and
co-operation, the Czechoslovak delegation indicated
its willingness to adhere to the solution proposed by
you, Mr. President, before the voting took place. In
accordance with the agreement outlined by you, the
Czechoslovak Socialist Republic will submit its resignation at the end of the first year of its term as a nonpermanent member of the Security Council, that is,
at the end of 1964, in order that the seat may go to
Malaysia for the second half of the term, that is, for
the year 1965•.

Election of three non-permanent members of the
Security Council (concluded)*

2. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): Delegations will recall that we have already taken ten
ballots in order to elect a non-permanent member to
fill the remaining vacancy on the Security Council.
3. Because of the unlikelihood that further balloting
would solve the problem and in order to facilitate the
task of the General Assembly, the heads of the two
delegations directly concerned, that is to say,
Czechoslovakia and Malaysia, have informed me that,
in consequence of various consultations between the
delegations, they are prepared to come to an informal
agreement under which each of the two countries
would occupy the seat in turn. At the request of these
delegations, I have decided to submit the matter to the
General Assembly.

8. This agreement does not constitute any change in
Czechoslovakia's position on the consistent application
of the principle of geographical distribution of the seats
of non-permanent members of the Security Council,
nor can it be interpreted as a precedent of any kind.

4. If the Assembly accepts this arrangement,
Czechoslovakia will be the only candidate for election
at this time, but its seat on the Security Council will
fall vacant on 31 December 1964. In the election to
fill the vacancy for the remainder of the two-year
term, Malaysia will be the only candidate for the
period from 1 January to 31 December 1965.

. 9. I would like to extend my sincere thanks to all
those who, by their consistent efforts, facilitated the
attainment of an agreed solution which, though far
from being fully satisfactory, enabled us to overcome
the impasse. In particular, I wish to thank you, Mr.
President, and the representative of Jordan, Mr. Rifa'i,
for the good offices rendered in order to attain this
agreement. At the same time I would like, on behalf

*Resumed from the 1252nd meeting.

1

A/PV.1254
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library

2

General Assembly - Eighteenth Session - Plenary Meetings

of the Czechoslovak. delegation, to express my deep
appreciation to those who, by their consistent votes
during the whole. series of ballots, supported the
Czechoslovak Socialist Republic and thus contributed
to its election.
10. Mr. RAMANI (Malaysia): May I at the outset join
the representative of Czechoslovakia in expressing to
Ambassador Rifa'i of Jordan and the other friends who
helped, the deep appreciation of the Malaysian delegation for the part played by them in achieving this happy
result to which you, Mr. President, referred in·the
opening statement by which you announced the new
ballot for the election of the last remaining nonpermanent member of the Security Council.
11. My delegation is grateful to the representative of
Czechoslovakia for the statement he has just made,
in which he confirmed the arrangement by which
Malaysia withdrew from the contest so as to enable
Czechoslovakia to be elected, as it was elected today.
12. I thank him also for his statement that Czechoslovakia will vacate its seat on the Security Council
on 31 December 1964 so as to enable Malaysia to be
elected to that seat for 1965. My thanks are also due
to you, Mr. President, for your co-operation and help
in achieving this happy compromise.
13. I cannot let this occasion pass without rendering
thanks to the many delegations which consistently
cast their votes for Malaysia during the several
ballots that were held. May I conclude by also saying
that my delegation is indebted to the GeneralAssembly
as a whole for having ratified this arrangement.
14. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): The
General Assembly has heard the statements made by
the representatives of Czechoslovakia and Malaysia,
which will appear in the official records of the General
Assembly.
15. The representative of India has the floor to speak
on this item.
16. Mr. MISHRA (India): The voting that has just
taken place has made us happy because, after ten
ballots, we did expect some agreement. However, my
delegation would like to make it clear that this is a
private arrangement between two delegations and
that it cannot, under the Charter, bind the Assembly.
Having said that, I would repeat that we welcome the
settlement that has taken place today.
AGENDA ITEM 85
Measures in connexion with the hurricane which has
just struck the territories of Cuba, the Dominican
Republic, Haiti, Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago

17. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): In
connexion with this item several Member States
have submitted a draft resolution [A/L.430 and Add.l
and 2].
.L8. Mr. BOSSAY (Chile) (translated from Spanish):
When they agreed upon the Charter which brought our
Organization into being, the peoples of the United
Nations, with a deep understanding of that which
unites peoples and prepares the ground for the
strengthening of peace and international friendship,
provided in Article 1 of the Charter that one of the
fundamental purposes of the United Nations is "to
achieve international co-operation in solving international problems of a ••• humanitarian character".

"1l.
,..

19. This is indeed a lofty principle of the Charter
which in years to come will show historians who
analyse the work of this Organization that the master.
tool which enabled the United Nations successfully
to carry out its mission of friendship, peace and disarmament was its ability to act promptly and effectively
in a spirit of solidarity when suffering and tragedy
struck any of the peoples of the Organization. Chile
knows what such solidarity means.

I

f

I

20. Our people live in a land where the forces of
natUre periodically wreak suffering, destruction and
death, and we have received from the United Nations
and from most of the peoples of the world moral and
material support which has enabled us to rebuild
our cities, revive our courage and thus to continue
the task in which we are engaged: the development of
our economy and, side by side with this, the achievement of greater happiness for our people.
21. That is why my country always responds quickly
and with understanding when confronted with the
sorrow of others, when nature destroys man's works
and even man himself. In tragic circumstances such as
these, we have never made any political distinctions.
For this reason, when, towards the end of September,
hurricane "Flora" lashed Cuba, Haiti, Jamaica,
Trinidad and Tobago and a part of the Dominican
Republic-bringing destruction and death to peoples
differing in race, religion and political beliefs but all
living within the geographical area of Latin Americamy Government felt it necessary to call upon the
United Nations to assist these afflicted peoples [see
A/5566/Rev.l and Add.1].
22. On Wednesday, 30 September, with a velocity
which reached 110 miles an hour, the hurricane
struck the island of Tobago, levelling coconut plantations and, in less than four hours, leaving 17,000
people homeless-almost half the population of the
island. Some towns were completely Wiped out, and
in others more than 60 per cent of the buildings were
destroyed. In addition, 85 per cent of the crops and
plantations were ruined.
23. Then came the turn of Haiti, where the winds
reached a velocity of 140 miles an hour and the hurricane ploughed a path seventy-five miles wide across
the Tiburon Peninsula, destroying everything in that
area. We do not know how many persons were killed
in this region, and it is possible that we may never
know exactly, although the number is estimated at
about 4,000. The bodies of many of them will never
be found, for they were dashed to pieces and lost in
flooded fields or ruined villages.
24. From 4 to 8 October hurricane "Flora" raged over
Cuba. Much more than the total rainfall of a normal
year fell during those five days. The richest agricultural region in the country was totally devastated, and
it is estimated that more than 1,000 people lost their
lives. Thousands of dwellings were destroyed, besides
roads, railways, bridges, highways, electrical and
sewage facilities and other works. The agricultural
losses were extremely high, and in the Province of
Oriente alone-which with Camagiiey was hardest
hit by the hurricane-150 ,000 people had to be evacuated from the danger zone.
25. Although Jamaica and the Dominican Republic·
were not in the direct path of the hurricane, extensive
damage was done there also. In Jamaica seventeen
inches of rain fell in twelve hours, settingan all-time
record there. There was some loss of life; the damage
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library

I

[

I•

l
f

I
l

I

1254th meeting - 1 November 1963

:lr
b.o
:lr.
ly
sly
:ly
le

to roads and bridges is estimated at $6 million, and
the value of the houses and crops that were destroyed
at $1.5 million.
26. In the Dominican Republic there was also loss of
life, and many villages were isolated as a result of
floods and the destruction of roads and bridges. The
damage to crops was extensive. In certain areas
epidemics have broken out as a result of the destruction
of the water-supply installations. The total number of
persons who have suffered from the effects of the
hurricane is estimated at 9,000.

of
ld
:is
ld
Id
le
of
:lly
le
~s

:l.S
s.
r,
a,
m
~s

Lll
le
:le
ty
le
l-

)0

le
ld
re
ld
is

i-

3S
at
~d

lr
at
lr
in

I

./

I

lr
:l.l
L-

Ld
lr

lS
ld
:l.l
)f

;t
L.c .
e
:n
.e

:e

.~

27. On 9 October, after having caused such tremendous destruction in these areas, the hurricane blew
itself out somewhere over the Atlantic.
28. Thanks to the advances' in technology, it was
possible to announce the birth of this hurricane over
the northern part of South America in good time, and
the United States weather stations alerted the areas
which lay in its probable path. Technology has not,
however, advanced to the point where it can control
these natural phenomena, so that the destructive effects of the storm could not be limited.
29. Hence it is at this point, where technology can
do no more, that feeling and international solidarity
must come into play in this kind of tragedy in the
form of the moral support and material assistance
which everyone is anxious to give to neighbours
visited by misfortune. This was the case two years
ago when Chile was struck by one of the worst earthquakes in history. This was the case last year when
there was an earthquake in Iran. This 'was also the
case a few days ago when the General Assembly unanimously adopted a resolution to assist Yugoslavia in
rebuilding the city of Skoplje. And it should again be
the case now so that assistance can be given to Cuba,
Haiti, the Dominican Republic, Jamaica, and Trinidad
and Tobago.
30. Mr. ENCKELL (Finland): The delegations of
Denmark, Iceland, Norway and Sweden have asked my
delegation to express, together with ours, their feelings of deep sympathy with the Governments and
peoples affected by the catastrophic events of last
month in the Caribbean area. We have learned with
grief and consternation of the terrible destruction
caused by the recent hurricane and we deeply deplore the great loss of human lives, together with
the enormous material damage. This is indeed a
situation which has to call forth the co-operation
and solidarity of the Members of this Organization.
Urgent steps are needed in order to alleviate the
suffering and to restore normal living conditions in
the affected area, and these steps have to be taken
with the contribution of the international community
and its main organs.
31. Therefore we are particularly grateful to the
delegation of Chile [A/5566/Rev.1 and Add.!] for
having taken the initiative to have the present item
inscribed on our agenda and to the delegations of
Brazil, Mexico and Uruguay for having, as the original
sponsors, together with the delegation of Chile, submitted for consideration by the Assembly the draft
resolution [A/L.430 and Add.! and 2] now before us.
32. our five delegations would like to express their
complete understanding of and their full sympathy
with the motives and the aims of the sponsors of
this draft as well as their accord with the general
nature of the measures recommended in its operative
part.

3

33. A little more than two weeks ago the General
Assembly adopted a resolution on measures in connexion with the earthquake in Skoplje. Earlier the
Assembly and sometimes the Economic and Social
Council have adopted resolutions on assistance to
be rendered to the victims of major catastrophes
in other parts of the world: in Libya, Morocco,
Indonesia, Iran, and Chile, to mention only some.
The appalling magnitude of the destruction in the
Caribbean area calls undoubtedly for special efforts,
and it is to be hoped that an increasing awareness of
international solidarity allows us to render more and
more efficient our action in these tragic situations.
34. According to the draft resolution now before us
the Assembly would, ap.art from inviting Member
States and non-governmental organizations to furnish
assistance, request the Secretary-General and the
executive heads of the United Nations agencies concerned to bear in mind the needs of the affected
countries and to take action. This is, of course,
quite right and as it ought to be. But I think we have
to provide the Secretary-General with a clear guideline by defining, as clearly and precisely as possible, the framework in which we should like him to
take action. That will be even more necessary in
this special case as, in accordance with operative
paragraph 3 of the draft resolution we should expect
not only the Secretary-General but also the heads
of some specialized agencie's to deal with this situation. They will, of course, all want to know as much
as possible about our intentions, and we in the
Assembly should want them to interpret as adequately
as possible our wishes. Were we not to strive towards
attaining the greatest possible clarity in the language
of the resolution, we should be in fact-and, in my
view, rather unnecessarily-placing an additional
burden on the Secretary-General.
35. I feel, of course, entirely confident that what the
sponsors had in mind when phrasing operative paragraph 3 was that the Assembly would request the
Secretary-General to provide all possible emergency
relief and rehabilitation from available resources. At
the same time, I feel that the Assembly ought to take
great care to avoid, or at least limit, the possibility
of misconstr:u,ing or misinterpreting its resolutions,
even in cases 'where it may seem utterly unlikely that
any such misconception might arise, as in the present
case.
36. Therefore my delegation would like, in the interest
of precision and of the effective implementation of the
draft resolution on which we are going to vote, to appeal, together with the other Scandinaviandelegations,
to the delegations sponsoring the draft resolution to
replace in operative paragraph 3 the words placed between commas and now reading "and to make available
to them, in connexion with their rehabilitation plans, the
necessary resources" by the words Rand to provide
emergency relief and rehabilitation assistance from
available resources" or words to that effect. Such a
clarifica1Jon, which appears to be called for at least
in the English translation of the original draft,
would I believe, allow the Secretary-General and the
heads of the specialized agencies to make the fullest
use of all available possibilities to render assistance
in the great human tragedy affecting the Governments
and peoples of the Caribbean area.
37. Mr. TATTENBACH (Costa Rica) (translated
from Spanish): The delegation of Costa Rica
be
glad to vote in favour of the draft resolution submitted

will

Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library

4

Genera l Assem bly - Eightee nth Session - Plenar y Meetin gs

by twenty -three countri es [A/L.4 30 and Add.l and 2]
which refers to agenda item 85. It will do so as a
matter of conscie nce.
38. The press reports on the scope of the disaste r
which struck the area of the West Indies in the wake
of the recent hurrica nes leave no doubt that these
were very serious natural catastr ophes. Moreo ver,
the accoun t we have just been given by the repres entative of Chile and the conver sations we have had with
our colleag ues from the affecte d area have confirm ed
those reports . The raging winds unleash ed floods and
devasta tion and, what is even more seriou s, caused
seriou s loss of life.

Trinida d and Tobago , Jamaic a and the Domin ican
Republ ic.
45. My Govern ment has already expres sed the deep
sorrow and sympat hy of the Brazili an people to the
people and Govern ments of the countri es that suffere d
as a result of this catastr ophe. The stricke n countri es
are themse lves taking the first steps, the emerge ncy
steps to relieve and rehabil itate the victims and the
region s struck by the disaste r. But a vast task now lies
ahead. It will require great effort and substan tial
materi al resour ces, and, as was the case in other
recent , equally tragic, events the interna tional community cannot fail to render its effectiv e assista nce
throug h the United Nation s to the countri es affecte d. In
39. What can be done? We can share the grief of our
this spirit the Brazili an delegat ion has lent its most
neighb ours and expres s our. sympat hy to relieve at
sincere suppor t to the initiati ve of the delegat ion of
least their moral anguish , and what is still more imChile [A/556 6/Rev. l and Add.l] and has been given the
portan t, we can try to ease the situatio n in which they
privile ge of co-spo nsoring , togethe r with twenty- two
find themse lves by specifi c econom ic measu res and
other delegat ions, the draft resolut ion [A/L.4 30 and
direct assista nce.
Add.l and 2] now before the Assem bly. We are con40. That is the purpos e of the draft resolut ion before
vinced that it will be adopted unanim ously and that the
us. Conseq uently, we shall not only vote in favour of
appeal contain ed therein will meet with an immed iate,
it, but we appeal to all Membe r States to adopt it and
effectiv e and genero us respon se from all Membe r
then to implem ent it with the enthus iasm they should
States and the United Nation s agencie s concer ned.
reserv e for a matter in which politic al consid eration s
46. Mr. LEKIC (Yugoslavia): We were deeply moved
should have no part, since it is solely a matter of
when we heard the news of the catastr ophic consehelping countri es through the dark hours of advers ity
quence s of the hurrica ne which recentl y struck Cuba,
and sufferi ng. In the face of nature 's pitiles s violenc e
Haiti, Jamaic a, Trinida d and Tobago and the Domin ican
and the tremen dous losses it has caused we can have
Republ ic and which left enormo us human and materi al
only one thought: we must not look back; we must look
losses in its wake.
forwar d with determ ination to repair the damage
caused by the fury of the elemen ts. We must do what a
47. The Yugosl av delegat ion takes this opportu nity
certain King of Portug al advised sarcast ically when
once more to convey to the delegat ions of the stricke n
asked what should be done the mornin g after one of the
countr ies and to their people s the deepes t sympat hy and
great tidal waves had swept his country . He replied :
feeling s of solidar ity felt by the Govern ment and
"Bury the dead, and let us concer n ourselv es with the
people s of Yugosl avia.
living. "
48. Mankind is not yet able to preven t, or render
41. We feel the same way concer ning the tragic situaineffec tual, such elemen tal calami ties which from
tion of our neighb ours: that there is nothing to do but
time to time unhappily afflict various countri es and
to bury the memor y of this horribl e tragedy and our
their people. What men can do in such cases is to expetty preocc upation s as we bury the dead, and to see
tend aSSista nce, so that the afterm ath of such catato it that the help of those who are able to help reache s
stroph es can be mitigat ed as much as possib le. And
the living and further s their ideas andpla ns for living.
it is no wonder that, precise ly at such times, human
Althou gh the tragedy in the Caribb ean has been brough t
unders tanding transce nds nationa l bounda ries as well
about by the blind forces of nature which no human
as politic al and other differe nces and that human itarian
efforts can stop, the commo n efforts of all nations
feeling s of solidar ity and friends hip are forcefu lly
can still mitigat e the sufferi ng these forces have
expres sed.
visited upon us.
49. It has been our lot to havefe ltall this as our own
experie nce when, in July 1963, the capital of Macedo nia,
42. My delegat ion appeals for such a joint effort and
Skoplje , was devasta ted by an earthqu ake. This catawants to be part of it and, in that spirit, to co-ope rate
strophe was the subject of a debate in this very audito the best of its ability in making the difficul t situatorium . The helping hand extended to us on that occation now confron ting its sister nations in the Caribb ean
sion from all over the world not only bore witness to
area more tolerab le.
the friends hip and solidar ity of man for man, and the
43. Mr. BERNARDES (Brazil ): The Brazili an people
world family of nations for our country , but also
and its Govern ment have followed with grief and anxiety
helped , and is still helping , to allevia te the sufferi ng
the devasta ting passag e of the recent hurrica ne through
caused by the serious losses in men and materi al.
the Caribb ean, leaving a picture of destruc tion and
sufferi ng in Trinida d and Tobago , Jamaic a, Haiti, Cuba
50. We are aware that the Govern ments of Cuba,
and the Domin ican Republ ic. Thousa nds have perishe d
Haiti, Jamaic a, Trinida d and Tobago and the Domin ican
in its path, and terribl e damage has been wrough t to
Republ ic have already underta ken the necess ary
proper ty, crops and to the econom y of whole region s.
measu res to remove some of the conseq uences of the
Hundre ds of thousan ds have been left homele ss.
·calam ity, with the purpos e of creatin g the first indispensab le conditi ons of life for the stricke n areas.
44. In Haiti alone, damage was so heavy that it has
There is no doubt that the Govern ments of these counnot yet been possibl e to determ ine the exact propor tries will have to underta ke long-ra nge plannin g and
tions of the destruc tion. Four thousan d person s may
direct their efforts toward s the comple te elimina tion
have been killed. In Cuba the losses were tremen dous
of the painful conseq uences of this catastr ophe. The
in the most import ant farmin g areas. Equally disasmain burden , therefo re, will fall upon these countri es
trous were the conseq uences of the hurrica ne in
themse lves. We believe , howeve r, that it is the duty
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library

r
t

1254th meeting - 1 November 1963
of the whole world qommunity. and more especially
of the United Nations. its specialized agencies and
the other organizations in the United Nations family.
to extend the maximum possible assistance to the
efforts of the Governments concerned. The Yugoslav
delegation therefore sponsored the draft resolution
[A/L.430 and Add.1 and 2] Whose initiators were
Brazil. Chile. Mexico and Uruguay. and we hope that
this draft resolution. as has been the case in the past.
will be unanimously adopted. As such. it will be a
proof not only of the feelings of solidarity felt by the
world community for the stricken peoples. but will
also be a tangible contribution to the efforts directed
at overcoming the difficulties which the disastrous
hurricane unexpectedly placed before the Governments and peoples of these countries.
51. Mr. LICHTVELD (Netherlands): Although our
feelings of sympathy will always be awakened by
countries stricken by disaster. in this c!J.se when a
number of islands in the Caribbean area were ravaged
by the recent hurricane my delegation is particularly
moved to compassion for the victims of this calamity.
a calamity which shows us once again how little we
human beings can do against the powers of nature. in
spite of all our technological achievements.
52. Because of the fact that two of the three autonomous parts of the Kingdom of the N~therlands are
situated in the Caribbean area. namely. the Netherlands
Antilles and Surinam. it is indeed a matter of good
neighbourliness. not only that we identify ourselves
with the stricken people. but also that we are desirous
of helping them in every way in all attempts which
will be made to ease their. distress and to assist in
the reconstruction of their homes. Still most vivid
in our memory is the disaster, which. not too long ago.
struck one of the Netherlands Antilles. the island of
St. Martin. which was ravaged by a hurricane. Therefore. we fully share the .anguish of the recently
stricken populations of Hispaniola and the two newly
independent islands.

I
I

I

J
:1

.\

53. But just as the sorrow of children appeals more
strongly to our pity than that of grown-ups. so our
feelings are concerned especially with the small.
peaceful island of Tobago, which had to pay such a
heavy toll to nature. Apart from the close ties of
friendship which exist between the Government of
Trinidad and Tobago and the Governments of the
Netherlands Antilles and Surinam. we have ahistorical
tie with Tobago. which bore the name ,of "New
Walcheren" during a certain period in its history. a
name which one can still see on old maps. Like the
island of Walcheren in the Netherlands which. during
the last war. was totally devastated by floods but nevertheless surmounted this calamity in a very short time.
in accordance with the proud device of the province of
Zealand: Lucto et emergo-I struggle and rise againwe hope that the former Nieuw Walcheren. Tobago.
will likewise emerge and renew itself. assisted by the
organizations of the United Nations family.
54. Needless to say. this special sympathy does not
detract from our feeling of compassion for the other
stricken islands. Jamaica. Cuba. Haiti and the
Dominican Republic. We therefore support wholeheartedly the draft resolution [A/L.430 and Add.1 and
2] before us and recommend itfor unanimous adoption.
55. I am authorized to speak also on behalf of the
French Republic. whose sympathy for the people of the
Caribbean area fully equals that of the three parts of
the Netherlands.

5

56. Mr. TARABANOV (Bulgaria) (translated from
French): The General Assembly has before it a matter
which is of special urgency and importance for certain
countries since it involves a major disaster that has
struck a number of countries belonging to this
Organization. What we are witnessing seems a veritable repetition of the calamities with which we have
previously had to deal. It is. however. important that
the Organization should do all it can towards providing
the assistance needed in such cases.
57. Between 30 September and 8 October a terrible
hurricane. with torrential rains andexceptionallyhigh
winds. struck large parts of Cuba. Haiti. the Dominican
Republic. Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago. I think it
unnecessary to relate all the ravages and tragic
consequences of this natural disaster which caused the
death of several thousands of people and left hundreds
of thousands homeless. The representative of Chile who
was the first to speak on this item. has adequately described the events.
58. I wish to express here the profound feelings of
sympathy of the Government and delegation of the
People's Republic of Bulgaria. and. at the same time.
on behalf of the Hungarian People's RepUblic and the
Czechoslovak Socialist Republic. to express their delegations' deep sympathy with the afflicted countries.
59. The Governments of the countries concerned are
to be congratulated on their courage and their prompt
action to alleviate the plight of the victims and prevent
further damage.
60. It is also very heartening that many countries
hastened to offer generous and prompt assistance. I
would venture to say that international assistance
in such situations is becoming one of the finest traditions of the United Nations.
61. As we noted in connexion with the serious earthquake at Skoplje. Yugoslavia. this assistance. though
very valuable. is merely a form of emergency relief.
If such assistance is to be more effective. it clearly
must be prolonged and must be co-ordinated with
government plans for restoring normal conditions in
the countries concerned.
62. For all these reasons we feel certain that the
General Assembly will unanimously adopt the draft
resolution [A/L.430 and Add.1 and 2] that has been
submitted. This draft embo.dies a fervent appeal to all
Member States and to the United Nations and specialized agencies to continue their assistance to the
devastated countries in order that they might overcome
the tragic consequences of the disaster as soon as
possible. In performing its duty. the GeneralAssembly
of the United Nations will be effectively helping these
unfortunate countries to cope with the difficulties now
confronting them. We feel certain. I repeat. that the
draft resolution will be adopted unanimously. indeed
that it will be adopted by acclamation.
63. Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): In the General
Committee [157th meeting] the Soviet Union delegation
wholeheartedly supported the initiative taken by the
delegation of Chile [A/5566/Rev.1 and Add.!] for the
inclusion in the agenda of the eighteenth session of the
General Assembly of an additional item entitled
"Measures in connexion with the hurricane which has
just struck the territories of Cuba. the Dominican
Republic. Haiti. Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago"
[A/L.430 and Add.1 and 2].
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library

6

General Assembly - Eighteenth Session - Plenary Meetings

64. The Soviet Union is one of the sponsors of the
draft resolution on this item. We were all deeply
shocked when hUrl'icane nFlora n swept over the territories of Cuba, Trinidad and Tobago, the Dominican
Republic, Haiti and Jamaica at the end of September
and the beginning of October, causing wide-spread
destruction and a heavy. loss of life and inflicting
enormous damage.
65. May I again express our deep sympathy and sincere condolences to the peoples of the States in the
Caribbean region which have suffered from this
natural calamity. Unfortunately, mankind has not yet
succeeded in gaining fuU control of the elements, and
it is therefore particularly important to exert our
joint efforts without delay in order to overcome the
tragiC consequences of this natural disaster.
66. The peoples and Governments of many countries
throughout the world have hastened to the assistance
of the Caribbean States whose peoples have been hit
by this tragedy. The Soviet Government in particular
has decided to give disinterestedandnon-reimbursable
aid to the stricken people of Cuba-to whom it is bound
by ties of friendship-in addition to the drugs and food
sent earlier as an emergency measure. Construction
equipment, machinery and materials are being dispatched from the Soviet Union to Cuba. A complete
plant for the construction of prefabricated housing
will be sent to Cuba from the Soviet Union.
67. It is the duty of the United Nations to extend
every kind of assistance to the stricken countries in
the CaribbeaD region from the resources of the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance and the
United Nations Special Fund in order to repair as
qUickly as possible the damage inflicted by hurricane
nFlora".
68. The delegation of the Soviet Union has every confidence that the draft resolution on this item will be
unanimously adopted by the United Nations General
Assembly.
69. Miss GROZA (Romania) (translated from French) :
Permit me to reiterate the sincere and profound feelings of sympathy which the Romanian delegation expressed two weeks ago from this rostrum [1240th meeting] and in the Assembly's General Committee [157th
meeting] at the great loss of life and damage caused
by the hurricane which recently struck the Caribbean
area. In so doing I also convey the sentiments of the
Mongolian People's Republic.
70. In expressing his deep feelings of compassion to
the Cuban people for the ordeal through which it was
passing as a result of this natural calamity, the
Chairman of the State Council of the Romanian People's
Republic, in a cable addressed to the President and
Prime Minister of the Revolutionary Government of
the Republic of Cuba, conveyed to them the fraternal
sympathy of the Romanian people and its sincere
condolences to the stricken families.
71. The Romanian Government and the Governments
of other countries have joined in the efforts of the
Cuban State to aid the victims and to rebuild the areas
which were partiCUlarly affected by the hurricane. We .
believe that assistance to the afflicted population in
Cuba, the Dominican Republic, Haiti, Jamaica and
Trinidad and Tobago is a profoundly humanitarian
undertaking to which the international community cannot fail to give its wholehearted support. We appreciate the prompt initiative of the delegations of
Brazil, Chile, Mexico and Uruguay, and we think that

the draft resolution submitted to the General Assembly [A/L.430 and Add.1 and 2] properly reflects
the international solidarity with which this tragic
situation has been met. Individual and collective
assistance to the affected areas by the United Nations,
non-governmental organizations and the Governments
of all States, as provided in the draft resolution, will
be particularly welcome as the affected countries are
in the midst of trying to achieve their economic recovery. Such assistance will contribute to the rapid
rehabilitation of the devastated areas and thus to the
continuation of the general development effort which
these countries have undertaken.
72. It is for this reason that the Romanian delegation has asked to be included among the sponsors of
the draft resolution that has been submitted to the
Assembly.
73. Mr. TARAZI (Syria) (translated from French):
Speaking for my own delegation, for all the Arab
delegations and for the delegation of Afghanistan,
I should like to express our deep sympathy to the
victims of the hurricane which has ravaged CUba,
the Dominican Republic, Haiti, Jamaica and Trinidad
and Tobago.
74. As one natural disaster succeeds another, man
seems to stand helpless before the unleashing of the
elements and the spectacle of the misfortunes that
follow. Yet his helplessness is not complete, for in
the face of misfortune mankind stands united, as we
have been able to observe in this very hall.
75. Our Organization, which is a universal one,
must devote its attention to affliction and misfortune,
and we are therefore indebted to the Chilean delegation and to the delegations which have joined it in
requesting the inclusion of this item in our agenda.
We are well aware that the damage done can never
be entirely repaired. Yet, if nothing else, the expression of our solidarity is a token of the indestructible ties between the different parts of our
world; such ties can only bring us closer together,
so as to make of mankind an indivisible whole.
76. By adopting the draft resolution before us
[AIL .430 andAdd.1 and 2] unanimously and by acclamation we shall simply be fulfilling one of the essential
and basic tasks which places the United Nations in
the front ranks of international activity. This task is
an exalted one, and it is quite real.
77. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): On behalfoftheGovernment and people of Cyprus, I wish to express our deep
sorrow at the disaster which has befallen the countries
of Cuba, the Dominican Republic, Haiti, Jamaica, and
Trinidad and Tobago, and to convey to the Governments and the peoples of those countries the expression of our profound grief. This is another instance
of the solidarity which emanates from the General
Assembly in the sense of the interdependence of
peoples, which has already been shown in the case of
Yugoslavia and is now being extended here. We hope
that this same spirit will preVail on all similar
occasions.
78. Mr. CHANDERLI (Algeria) (translated from
French): My delegation is one of the sponsors of the
draft resolution on measures in connexion with the
hur:ricane which has just struck the territories of
Cuba, the Dominican Republic, Haiti, Jamaica and
Trinidad and Tobago [A/L.430 and Add.1 and 2]. I am
sure that the Assembly is aware of the ieelings which
prompted my delegation to co-sponsor the draft
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library

1254th meeting - 1 November 1963
resolution submitted by Chile and other South American
countries, and I shall not revert to them. The Assembly clearly shares these feelings with us, for all
of us here want to express our solidarity and our
sense of humanity in the face of this catastrophe which
has struck certain Members of our Organization.
79. At this stage of our proceedings I merely wish to
indicate that my delegation and the other sponsors of
the draft resolution listened with great interest and
respect to the statement made by the Finnish delegation on behalf of the Scandinavian countries. The
representative of Finland was good enough to make a
suggestion which would in fact clarify the operative
part of our draft resolution. Since he indicated that he
was not wedded to the specific words he put forward
but could accept a similar form of words, I should
like to propose to him and to the Assembly, having
consulted with the other sponsors of the draft resolution and with a number of other delegations-and I
might add that I have spoken with the Finnish representative and he has given his agreement-that the
following wording should be accepted. In operative
paragraph 3 of the draft resolution, the words "and
to make available to them, in connexion with their
rehabilitation plans, the necessary resources". in the
third and fourth lines. would be replaced by a text
which I have only in English and which I would not
venture to translate myself but shall read out for the
benefit of the Secretariat:
[The speaker continued in English.]

"and to provide assistance, in connexion with their
rehabilitation plans, from available resources".
[The speaker resumed in French.]
1

With this rectification. which incidentally is not an
amendment and which I hope will be agreeable to the
Assembly, we can, I am sure, close the debate on
this item and adopt by acclamation, as I earnestly
hope we shall. a resolution which will once again
demonstrate the humanity, the universality and the
international solidarity which inspire the thoughts
and actions of the Members of our Organization.
80. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): The
Assembly has just heard the proposal made by the
representative of Algeria on behalf of the sponsors of
the draft resolution [A/L.430 andAdd.1 and 2] to amend
the wording of operative paragraph 3 as he indicated
in his statement.

r
r

s
1
[l

s

P
s
d

\

81. If there is no objection, I shall consider that the
Assembly accepts the amendment to operative paragraph 3 suggested by the representative of Algeria.
The amendment was adopted.

e
J.
If
,f
e
r

82. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): We
shall now vote on the draft resolution [A/L.430 and
Add. 1 and 2] as amended. I understand that the
Assembly is prepared to adopt this draft resolution
as amended by acclamation. If I hear no objection, I
shall consider it adopted by acclamation.
The draft resolution was adopted by acclamation.

n
e
e
,f
d
n
h
Et

83. Mr. LECHUGA (Cuba) (translated from Spanish):
The Cuban delegation takes pleasure in expressing
its deep gratitude for the Assembly's manifestation
of sympathy with the people of my country. Cuba is
mourning the irreparable loss of over a thousand of
its people and bravely facing an economic loss of
several hundred million pesos as a result of a hurricane which. striking with savage fury. caused rivers

7

to overflow their banks. inundated crops. destroyed
vast expanses of homes, sweeping whole towns before
it, and demolished bridges. railways, highways and
roads in the eastern part of the island.
84. We wish to take this opportunity to express our
special gratification to the delegation of Chile, which
proposed the inclusion of this item in our agenda
and introduced the draft resolution. and to the either
delegations which, by endorsing the latter, brought
about the agreement which we so deeply appreciate.
85. The hurricane, which raged for ninety hoUrs.
affected a little over half the country's territory
comprising a population of some 3 million people
and containing many of the most important agricultural areas.
86. The two provinces which bore the brunt of the
hurricane are the principal producers of sugar-cane
and constitute the area in which there is the greatest
concentration of cattle and the greatest production of
coffee and cocoa. It is estimated that out of an anticipated coffee crop of 850.111 quintals in Oriente
Province, from 300.000 to 500.000 quintals have been
lost. Eighty per cent of the minor crops were rendered
unusable; rice and cotton suffered severely; agricultural and transport equipment, crops which had already
been harvested and stored, seed and fertilizer were
under water for a whole week. Tens of thousands of
farmers have lost everything: homes, animals. farm
implements, clothing and furniture. Many hospitals
and schools and many businesses and warehouses
have been destroyed.
87. The swift mobilization of the Government and the
people, which made it possible to evacuate almost
175.000 persons by using all available means. prevented the casualties from being ten or fifteen times
higher. The emergency care given to the evacuees in
the very first hours and the care they have been receiving since have prevented any outbreak of epidemics although, of course, the circumstances were
highly favourable for such outbreaks.
88. Our people made a tremendous effort to cope
with the forces of nature, and the Government has
pledged that no family will be deprived of what it
has lost; no child will be deprived of aid and guidance;
no home will remain without help; and everything that
has been destroyed will be rebuilt and be rebuilt
better.
89. The Assembly's manifestation of sympathy for
our people will certainly be a source of encouragement in the task of reconstruction which has already
been started. Factories and workshops are working
overtime; the sowing of crops has been intensified;
and the community is offering its unstinted assistance
to its neighbours in the disaster areas. Cuba is relying on the help of many Governments and peoples
and of United Nations bodies. It is receiving messages
of sympathy and encouragement from all over the
world.
90. We wish~ before concluding, to express our appreciation for the words of sympathy, on the occasion
. of the hurricane, addressed to Cuba at this and previous meetings by many representatives, and to convey
our sympathy to the peoples of Yugoslavia, Haiti.
Trinidad and Tobago, Italy. Jamaica and the Dominican
Republic on account of the similar hardships which
they have suffered in recent days and months.
91. I wish once again to express our thanks for this
agreement, which will be of great value to us in reDigitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library

8

General Assembly - Eighteenth Session - Plenary IVleetings

habilitating the disaster areas, relieving the distress
of the victims and restoring normal living conditions
which, we are confident, will be much better than they
were before the disaster strUCk.
92. Mr. RICHARDSON (Jamaica): The Jamaica delegation gladly takes this opportunity to express our
Government's profound gratitude to the delegation of
Chile and to the original sponsors of this resolution,
the delegations of Brazil, Mexico and Uruguay, for
their initiative in seeking the inclusion of this item
on the agenda of this session. My delegation wishes
also to express our appreciation to all the other cosponsors of the resolution and all the representatives
who have spoken in this debate for their sincere expressions of sympathy, and to the whole Assembly
for adopting the resolution by acclamation. We value
this action as further eloquent testimony to the general
goodWill which we know is felt towards the people of
our country and as a further striking manifestation of
the true understanding and sympathy which binds us
together in this international community.
93. Nature, which dealt with a lavish hand in giving
to our island of her treasured gifts-physical beauty,
a balmy climate and warm, clear seas-can also be
Unkind. Sometimes she chooses to issue a dramatic
reminder that life is not always sunshine. Once in at
least every ten years the people of Jamaica must
look on· helplessly while in a few short hours the
physical capital accumulated over years of painful
effort is wiped out.
94. The recent hurricane in the Caribbean did not
pass over Jamaica. Compared with our neighbours
Cuba and Haiti, therefore, our losses were not
heavy; but for four whole days while the hurricane
approached us and while it remained over Cuba and
Haiti, our island was deluged with torrents of rainfall combined with high winds which converted our
rivers into raging torrents and caused us damage
which we estimate at some $17 million.
95. Even while suffering from the effects of the
hurricane, one of our neighbour Governments readily
extended not only its sympathy but gave tangible
evidence of its true concern by an. immediate ·offer
of financial .assistance. I am pleased to take this
opportunity to acknOWledge this generosity and aiso
to express my Government's appreciation of the
offers of help we have received from Member States
outside the region.
96. We in turn gave what help we could to others
whose tragedy was greater than ours-we gave help
in food, medical supplies and cash-but the amounts
we can afford amongst ourselves are necessarily
small.
97. We have already taken care of immediate relief
and our reconstruction programme is now· being
prepared. At present it appears that we might not
find it necessary to seek technical assistance in order
to carry out the rehabilitation of the ravaged areas,
but we shall not hesitate to do so should it prove to
be necessary. We shall certainly need financial aid·
towards that programme and it is our hope tb,at one
or another of the specialized agencies which the resolution has so kindly requested to extend us assistance
will be able to provide it.
98. Again, I wish in the name of the Government arid
people of Jamaica gratefully to acknowledge the condolences for the loss of human life that we sustained

and to thank the whole Assembly for this kind and
considerate resolution.
99. Mr. AUGUSTE (Haiti) (translated from French):
The typhoon which swept across the Caribbean struck
the south of Haiti with particular force, adding an unprecedented disaster to the chain of calamities of
this kind which the southern part of the RepUblic of
Haiti has suffered. Owing to its geographical position,
this area is particularly exposed to hurricanes. Its
coast extends for many miles and seems to invite all
that passes to enter, which is all the more easy as
nature in these parts displays all its riches without
offering the slightest protection. Shaped by this environment, man in this region is also essentially of
kindly temperament, sober, calm and hospitable, and
is endowed with a remarkable sensitivity, which he
derives from the extremely agreeable and beautiful
tropical surroundings. One quarter of the Haitian
population is concentrated in this area around the
coastal towns, in the valleys, in the gorges of the
hills and on the mountains which rise along the
horizon.
100. As elsewhere in Haiti, the economy in this part
of the country is largely agricultural. Coffee, cocoa,
sisal, sugar-cane, fruits and vegetables are drawn
from a generous soil, but the population pressure in
this area of small, excessively cultivated farms gives
rise to some very complex problems for production.
It is these problems which the present Government is
attacking as best it can with the country's meagre
resources but also with a courage and determination
that will ultimately bring success.
101. As you know, in less than a few hours this
peaceful region which I have described, with its
simple ways and modest agricultural economy, saw
its fields ravaged, its cattie and poultry carried away
and its homes destroyed, as coastal towns were
pounded by a furious surf and swollen rivers flooded
their banks sweeping everything before them.
102. For days, with all the means of communication
in the area destroyed, the towns, villages andhamlets
were completely isolated. The loss of life was the
worst we have ever suffered in catastrophes of this
kind: over 5.000 dead, accordingtothe most optimistic
statistics. In addition, 125,000 families were left
homeless; 60 per cent of the coffee crop was destroyed; food crops, in the areas where not totally
destroyed, suffered losses of about 85 per cent; and
all cattie and poultry have ceased to exist.
103. Faced with this situation, which without any
doubt represents an unprecedented ordeal for Haiti,
the Government immediately did Whatever it could
to aid, to heal and to repair. It received moral support
in the form of the many expressions of sympathy that
came spontaneously from all over the world, and it
was further supported by the spontaneous relief
kindly given and offered to Haiti by its many friends.
I apologize for not naming them, but I do not wish to
offend anyone's sense of discretion or modesty.
104. Nevertheless, as regards the appeal which has
just been addressed to the United Nations, I should

be gravely remiss if, on behalf of the Haitian people,
the President of the Republic, the Government and
myself personally, I did not thank, first of all, the
twenty delegations which took the initiative in sponsoring the draft resolution just submitted to the General
Assembly.
Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library

f
(

~

r

r

1254th meeting - 1 November 1963
105. I also thank, for my country and its Government,
all those who have supported this draft resolution in
the name of human solidarity. The Haitian people,
which cultivates gratitude as one of the finest virtues
which can flower in the heart of man, will, I am sure,
never forget this memorable gesture which takes its
place among the grandest actions taken in the General
Assembly by acclamation. In concluding I should like
to renew our expressions of sympathy to our brothers
in misfortune.
106. Mr. VELAZQUEZ (Dominican RepUblic) (translated from Spanish): The Dominican Republic is
deeply grateful for the resolution which has just been
adopted by the General Assembly. It alleviates to
some extent the hardships visited upon the Dominican
people, in particular the inhabitants of the south,
south-west and nort;h-west of the country, as a result
of hurricane "Flora", which ruined crops, sowed death
and destruction and had so relentless an impact on
the nation's economy that the affected regions were
declared disaster areas. The burden of the catastrophe
which has struck the country, leaving thousands of
families destitute and plunging countless farmers
into ruin, will be partly lightened by the resolution
that has been adopted.
107. In this house of anguish, the Dominican people
will feel morally, even more than materially, relieved
by the assistance which the United Nations has
promised. The Government of my country will provide the Secretary-General with the relevant information in due course, so that the assistance may be
furnished as urgently as the circumstances require.
108. Sir Ellis CLARKE (Trinidad and Tobago): I
should like, on behalf of the Government and people
of Trinidad and Tobago, to express our sincere
thanks to, first of all, the delegation of Chile for
the initiative which it showed in suggesting the inclusion on the agenda of this item, in connexion with
which a resolution has just been adopted by acclamation. We also express our thanks to all those who
sponsored the resolution, to all those who spoke in
favour of it and to the entire Assembly, which has
given its wholehearted and generous support to the
resolution.
109. The island of Tobago is a very tiny one, and
perhaps for that reason the death-roll there was not

Litho in U.N.

9

as large as it unfortunately was in the case of some
of our neighbours. But Tobago, with its population of
35,000 and an area of some 116 square miles, was
more devastated, in proportion to its size, than any
other territory. The damage to crops was about 85
per cent and the destruction and irreparable damage
to buildings, mainly houses, was 80 per cent. In other
words, the economy of Tobago has been not only
disrupted, but virtually destroyed.
110. Fortunately, Trinidad suffered only the side
effects of this dreadful hurricane and has come to
the help of the devastated part of the combined
territory of Trinidad and Tobago. Efforts are being
made to restore Tobago, in the way envisaged by
the representative of the Netherlands, who expressed
the hope that Tobago would rise again. I am happy to
be able to say that we have already received certain
assistance from the Secretary-General, from the
specialized agencies and from other Governments.
particularly the Governments of the United States
and the United Kingdom. We have had messages of sympathy and promises of assistance from many other
Governments. and we are sincerely grateful to them
as well.
111, We would stress that, despite the ravages of
the hurricane, we have begun the work of rehabilitation. We hope that those who in the past considered
Tobago a place worthy of a visit will continue to think
so and that, in the forthcoming season, they will not
fail to come to see what has been done to restore
Tobago to its pristine condition.
112. Again, let me say how much we appreciate both
the moral and material assistance already received
and, this evening, so generously promised.
Organization of work

113. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish):
Before adjourning the meeting, I should like to recall
that the next plenary meeting of the General Assembly
will be held on Wednesday, 6 November, in the morning and will deal with items 75,20 and 61 of the agenda.
Subsequently, perhaps at that same meeting or at another held the same week, we shall take up item 12,
which we deferred today.

The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

77001-May 1965-2,175

Digitized by Dag Hammarskjöld Library
