A /71/PV.71

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-first session

71st plenary meeting

Friday, 10 March 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Thomson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Fiji)

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda item 138 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/71/764/Add.1,
A/71/764/Add.2, A/71/764/Add.3 and A/71/764/Add.4)
The President: I should like, in keeping with
established practice, to draw the attention of the General
Assembly to documents A/71/764/Add.1 through Add.4,
in which the Secretary-General informs the President
of the General Assembly that, since the issuance of
his communication contained in document A/71/764,
Cabo Verde, Djibouti, Dominica, the Marshall Islands,
Papua New Guinea and Yemen have made the payments
necessary to reduce their arrears below the amounts
specified in Article 19 of the Charter.
May I take it that the General Assembly duly
takes note of the information contained in documents
A/71/764/Add.1 through Add. 4?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 123 (continued)
Strengthening of the United Nations system
Draft resolution (A/71/L.59)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt to introduce draft resolution
A/71/L.59.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt): I have the honour of
delivering this statement on behalf of the following

countries: Bangladesh, China,
Morocco, Nigeria and Pakistan.

Ethiopia,

At the outset, I would like to thank you, Sir, for
organizing this important meeting. Let me start by
quoting the Secretary-General from his latest report,
issued yesterday, on measures for protection from
sexual exploitation and abuse:
“The men and women who serve the causes
of the United Nations do so with selflessness and
pride under challenging conditions — always
difficult, sometimes remote, often austere and
dangerous. Together, we promise to protect the
weak, aid those in need, uphold the dignity of every
human being and serve the cause of peace. We who
take this promise seriously will not be complacent.
We will not allow the behaviour of anyone who
exploits the vulnerable and destroys lives to soil
our reputations, diminish our contributions, sow
disillusion among our champions or undermine our
values.” (A/71/818, para. 4).
The draft resolution presented to the Assembly
today represents a first milestone towards a systemwide approach for the implementation of the zerotolerance policy for sexual exploitation and abuse.
It represents an opportunity to support the efforts of
the Secretary-General to prevent impunity. The draft
resolution also presents a genuine opportunity for
this membership to collectively unite to prevent and
combat sexual exploitation and abuse. It places victims
at the core of the United Nations efforts by providing
them with justice and assistance in combating such

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-06393 (E)

*1706393*

Jordan,

A/71/PV.71

acts, and calls on those responsible to end impunity
and to ensure accountability, while also calling for
strengthening and enhancing transparency within the
United Nations system.
While acknowledging that the actions of a few will
not be allowed to tarnish the achievement of the whole,
the presenters of this draft resolution, being major
troop and police contributors, for the first time since
its adoption, recognize Security Council resolution
2272 (2016), which authorizes the Secretary-General
to repatriate troops who have not taken appropriate
measures to prevent and hold accountable their
personnel. In that regard, it requests the SecretaryGeneral to work with troop- and police-contributing
countries to implement this decision.
Finally, I would like to thank the general
membership, which has worked tirelessly over the past
week to agree on this consensual document. This indeed
proves that when women and children are victims of
sexual exploitation and abuse. The membership will
spare no effort to bring them justice and to collectively
act to protect those who rely on the United Nations
for protection. The troop- and police-contributing
countries presenting this draft resolution took it upon
themselves to lead this effort in order to send a strong,
unequivocal message that it is our responsibility to
combat sexual exploitation and abuse, not just among
uniformed personnel but also across the United Nations
system. We owe it to the international community and
to the world to adopt this draft resolution.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/71/L.59.
Before giving the floor to the speaker in explanation
of vote before the voting, may I remind delegations
that explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Philippines.
Mr. Nayan (Philippines): We recall that SecretaryGeneral António Guterres, who as early as April
2016, when he was still then a candidate for the post,
called for eradicating once and for all the exploitative
and abusive conduct of those United Nations agents
who do not represent what the Organization stands
for. Yesterday the report (A/71/818) of the SecretaryGeneral on special measures for protection from sexual
exploitation and abuse was issued, representing a new
2/11

10/03/2017

approach that focuses on the imperative to address the
issue through a system-wide approach that seeks to
build a strong partnerhsip with Member States. Today,
we have draft resolution A/71/L.59 before us on this
very issue, which if not addressed will continue to
tarnish the image of the Organization.
While the Philippines supports the draft resolution
and recognizes the initiative of some of our fellow troopcontributing countries as main sponsors of the draft
resolution, we wish to convey the following concerns.
First, on the process, the draft resolution, while
presented as a consensus text, was not formulated
through a more transparent and inclusive process of
consultations with Member States that would have
allowed all views to be heard and considered. A very
tight timeline and a rush to adopt the draft resolution
did not allow us to consider fully the just-issued report
of the Secretary-General, which could have enriched
our discussions and the draft resolution.
Secondly, on substance, we would have wanted the
draft resolution to highlight the protection of children,
the most vulnerable and most in need of protection from
sexual exploitation and abuse, especially in conflict
situations. It is an inherent priority within the broader
obligations of the United Nations to protect civilians.
Today, six peacekeeping missions and three special
political missions have child-protection mandates.
More than 100 child-protection staff are deployed to
these missions. This clearly illustrates that children are
extremely vulnerable members of communities where
peacekeeping missions operate, and that peacekeepers
have an obligation to both promote and adhere to
international norms and standards developed by
Member States on child protection.
We all agree that the issue of sexual exploitation
and abuse not only undermines the values and principles
of the United Nations but also erodes the trust of the
peoples we have vowed to protect. It is inexcusable; it
is unacceptable; it has no place in the United Nations
system. The Philippines stands in solidarity with
the community of responsible nations and remains
steadfastly committed to ending sexual violence
whenever and wherever it occurs. We will continue to
hold our Philippines troops accountable to the highest
standards of conduct.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/71/L.59, entitled “United
Nations action on sexual exploitation and abuse”.
17-06393

10/03/2017

I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Ms. Pollard (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of draft
resolution A/71/L.59: Belarus, Benin, Djibouti, Eritrea,
Indonesia, Nepal, the Niger, the Russian Federation,
Sierra Leone, Sri Lanka, Suriname and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/71/L.59?
Draft resolution A/71/L.59 was adopted (resolution
71/278).
The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of vote on the resolution just adopted,
may I remind delegations that explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations
from their seats.
Mr. Iguanez (Malta): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States. The candidate countries of the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with
this position.
The EU promotes collective action to maintain
and implement the highest standards of conduct and to
prevent and combat sexual exploitation and abuse. We
strongly support the Secretary-General’s leadership in
dealing with this difficult challenge, which calls for a
system-wide response based on the pillars of prevention,
enforcement, victim support and accountability.
The EU welcomes the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral to work closely with Member States on
structural, legal and operational measures to make
zero tolerance a reality, and advocates a victim-centred
strategy rooted in transparency, accountability and
ensuring justice. The establishment of the task force
on United Nations response to sexual exploitation
and abuse is a clear sign of the Secretary-General’s
determination to develop an ambitious new approach
to preventing and responding to sexual exploitation
and abuse committed by those serving under the

A/71/PV.71

United Nations flag. The EU and its member States
look forward to studying in detail the report (A/71/818)
submitted by the Secretary-General yesterday.
Almost exactly one year ago, the adoption of
Security Council resolution 2272 (2016) was an
important step, on which the General Assembly should
build and develop further actions for a system-wide
approach. General Assembly resolution 70/286, on
peacekeeping cross-cutting issues, addresses this
issue in a comprehensive and transparent way and
provides for the necessary tools to effectively enforce
a zero-tolerance policy and represents another major
step forward in the fight against sexual exploitation
and abuse. Security Council resolution 1325 (2000),
on women and peace and security, recognizes that
women and girls are more often the targets of sexual
exploitation and abuse, due to the embedded gender
inequality in societies, which is yet another important
aspect of our common efforts.
There must be no backsliding on what we have
agreed; we owe it to the victims and our own contingents
to set high standards and stick to them. We must stand
by the objective of enhancing the credibility and
effectiveness of the United Nations in delivering. In
that spirit, the European Union would have preferred to
undertake collective efforts to upgrade our action in a
consistent and inclusive manner, in the framework of due
and equitable consultation with all stakeholders. Added
value can be achieved only through a collaborative
and trustful atmosphere aimed at providing a
comprehensive response to a comprehensive problem
within an appropriate time frame. Instead, partners
were forced into a distracting and rushed process that
could have potentially jeopardized the integrity of our
results achieved so far.
Even if consensus were eventually achieved due to
flexibility on all sides, the path leading to it missed an
opportunity to explore the full potential of our efforts,
including the results of ongoing discussions in the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations (Committee of
34). We missed an opportunity to take important steps
forward on this issue, which is regrettable. In addition,
this came at a time when we have a clear signal from
the Secretary-General and there is need for the General
Assembly membership to unify around the objective of
achieving the highest standards.
While we are not opposed in principle to discussing
sexual exploitation and abuse in the plenary, we wish

17-063933/11

A/71/PV.71

to underline that this cannot preclude the mandates of
governing structures such as the Committee of 34, the
Fifth Committee and the Sixth Committee. We will
continue our work to strengthen the United Nations
response to sexual exploitation and abuse in the
competent committees.
The European Union and its member States have
consistently expressed their principled position on the
policy of zero tolerance, and therefore the approach
of zero impunity for all United Nations personnel and
personnel serving under United Nations mandates, as
advocated by the Secretary-General. The European
Union encourages enhanced coordination and
collaboration across the United Nations in this regard,
and will spare no effort to build a system-wide approach
to sexual exploitation and abuse through genuine
consultation and cooperation.
The European Union and its member States are
committed to working in the long term with the
Secretariat and in a spirit of genuine cooperation with
all troop-contributing countries and all stakeholders
in combating and preventing sexual exploitation and
abuse, including through the training of all personnel,
ensuring that allegations are duly investigated and that
justice is served by the countries that contributed the
personnel, and in providing victims with the assistance
they require.
Ms. Wilson (Australia): I have the honour to speak
today on behalf of a broad group of countries, including
Canada, New Zealand and Switzerland, in addition to
the Philippines and Liechtenstein.
We welcome this opportunity for the General
Assembly to take a strong position against sexual
exploitation and abuse. We condemn in the strongest
terms all forms of sexual exploitation and abuse by United
Nations peacekeeping personnel and staff, including
against children, who are often the most vulnerable.
Not only is sexual exploitation an egregious betrayal
of trust, but it undermines the ability of United Nations
staff and representatives to effectively carry out their
mission, including on peacekeeping missions. In that
regard, Security Council resolution 2272 (2016) was a
milestone and a positive step in the right direction.
We have mixed feelings about the adoption of
resolution 71/278 today. We feel that we have a resolution
that is far from what it could have been in terms of
its ambition, and we firmly believe that the General
Assembly is capable of so much more. Nevertheless, the
4/11

10/03/2017

group welcomes the inclusion of language that affirms
the application of the zero-tolerance policy across the
whole United Nations system, the recognition that a
culture of impunity can lead to more sexual exploitation
and abuse being committed, the centrality of victims in
all our efforts and the request for the Secretary-General
to immediately inform Member States concerned about
any allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse. We
hope that this is interpreted by the Secretary-General
to ensure much greater transparency.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium), Vice-President,
took the Chair.
On the other hand, we also feel that, in many ways,
this was a missed opportunity, and we are left with
the feeling of concern and frustration with the rushed
process. The importance of taking a strong stand against
sexual exploitation and abuse means that this critical
issue, which is of such fundamental importance to the
United Nations, deserves strong and due consideration
across the full membership. We do not believe that the
process allowed for the broadest possible consultation.
For a process that aimed at increasing the transparency
of the United Nations in addressing sexual exploitation
and abuse, it is regrettable that the facilitators chose
working methods that did not encourage it.
Looking ahead, let us challenge ourselves to truly
work together and concretely move the issue forward to
engender a system-wide approach to sexual exploitation
and abuse. We must build on the positive momentum
of Security Council resolution 2272 (2016) and this
resolution. We commend the Secretary-General’s efforts
thus far to achieve not just a zero-tolerance policy,
but a zero-case reality. We welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s report (A/71/818) on sexual exploitation and
abuse that was released yesterday and, again, are very
supportive of the victim-centred strategy that is rooted
in transparency, accountability and justice. We look
forward to discussing it further.
Ms. Connelly (United States of America): The
United States welcomes this opportunity to reaffirm
its commitment to effectively addressing the scourge
of sexual exploitation and abuse and to reaffirming its
collective support for the United Nations zero-tolerance
policy and the Secretary-General’s efforts to strengthen
its implementation.
Sexual exploitation and abuse inflict significant
harm on vulnerable communities — the very
communities that look to the United Nations for
17-06393

10/03/2017

protection and assistance in some of the world’s most
dangerous places. It also undermines the legitimacy
and effectiveness of the United Nations, in particular,
when those responsible are not held to account for
their deplorable acts. The United States will continue
to welcome future engagement with Member States
on preventing and addressing sexual exploitation
and abuse.
The General Assembly has adopted two recent
resolutions on sexual exploitation and abuse. First,
resolution 70/286 was adopted in June 2016, following
consideration of the Secretary-General’s report
(A/70/729) on special measures for protection from
sexual exploitation and sexual abuse. In December,
the Assembly then adopted resolution 71/134, on the
criminal accountability of United Nations officials and
experts on mission. In both resolutions, the Assembly
welcomed the Secretary-General’s determination to
fully implement the zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse, reaffirmed the need for
enhanced coordination for victim support and agreed to
increase transparency measures regarding allegations
of sexual exploitation and abuse. Furthermore, annual
and ongoing discussions in the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations on conduct and discipline
address aspects of that important issue.
My delegation commends the Assembly for working
constructively towards a resolution. That consensus
reflects Member State support for the SecretaryGeneral in implementing the sexual exploitation and
abuse zero-tolerance policy. It is the result of many
delegations’ hard work, flexibility and commitment to
addressing the issue.
We would like to align ourselves with the statement
made on behalf of Canada, Australia and New Zealand.
While we welcome this agreement by consensus,
we believe that this process and its related timelines
could have been more broadly consultative, taking
into account the level of interest of many different
delegations to positively contribute to its outcome.
The United States firmly supports the authority of
the Secretary-General to implement the United Nations
zero-tolerance policy. We reaffirm his particular
obligation to repatriate any peacekeeping units that
engage in a pattern of systematic sexual exploitation and
abuse and replace contingents whose Governments fail
to properly investigate allegations or hold accountable
those found responsible. Sexual exploitation and abuse

A/71/PV.71

are a problem throughout the United Nations, including
the funds and programmes, and Member States and the
United Nations, through all of its relevant organs, must
work together to prevent acts of sexual exploitation and
abuse, hold perpetrators to account and help victims
receive the assistance that they need.
Today we affirm that we must all continue to do our
utmost to address this cancer wherever it may exist in
the United Nations system and promote accountability
for perpetrators of those unacceptable acts.
Mrs. Carrión (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish) First,
I would like to reiterate that, as a State Member of
the Organization and a troop- and police-contributing
country with a long history of participating in various
peacekeeping operations, Uruguay attaches the utmost
importance to combating cases of sexual exploitation
and abuse. In that regard, Uruguay is extremely
committed to the zero-tolerance policy in addressing
such cases. Similarly, I would like to underscore that, in
confronting such incidents, Uruguay has made steady
progress in that area by ensuring greater prevention
through predeployment training, appropriate oversight
in the field and adequate leadership at all levels. There
has not been a single case of sexual exploitation and
abuse in which a Uruguayan has been involved that
has not been properly and expeditiously resolved
through due process with the maximum guarantees
afforded to the accuser and accused and through taking
the appropriate measures with regard to those found
responsible for the alleged acts.
Uruguay expresses its satisfaction following the
adoption of resolution 70/286, which sends a strong and
clear message of condemnation of sexual exploitation
and abuse, as well as its support for the efforts of
the Secretary-General in combating this scourge.
However, my delegation would like to align itself with
various other delegations in expressing its concern and
frustration at the way in which the negotiation process
of the resolution was conducted.
The negotiation and adoption of a General Assembly
resolution require a reasonable amount of time to
conduct consultations among all States Members of the
Organization to achieve a quality and consensus-based
product. Uruguay believes that the process imposed
by the facilitators of the resolution did not take place
in a constructive spirit and seriously undermines the
transparency and inclusivity that negotiations within
the framework of the General Assembly must have.

17-063935/11

A/71/PV.71

Since the submission of the first draft on Friday,
3 March, numerous delegations, including Uruguay’s,
had called for more time in order to receive instructions
from their capitals, and those requests were ignored
by the facilitators. Moreover, we note that the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, which is
discussing the topic of exploitation and sexual abuse,
has been meeting simultaneously on a daily basis
with several working subgroups, and the overlap of
those negotiations with negotiations on this resolution
has affected many Permanent Missions’ ability to
participate in both processes — an undesirable situation
that could have been avoided by agreeing to postponing
its adoption for a later date. Similarly, extending the
deadline for the adoption of the resolution might
have enabled us to have some information relevant to
the negotiations, such as the report (A/71/818) of the
Secretary-General on sexual exploitation and abuse,
which was issued only yesterday.
In conclusion, my delegation believes that, while
this resolution is a positive step towards dealing with
sexual exploitation and abuse, it has not fulfilled all of
its potential, and as States Members we must do more.
In that regard, Uruguay will work actively with the
rest of the membership and the Secretariat to unite our
efforts in combating this scourge.
Mr. Guimarães (Brazil): Brazil supported the
adoption of resolution 71/278, on United Nations action
on sexual exploitation and abuse, because we firmly
believe that the General Assembly should be at the
forefront of United Nations efforts to strengthen the
system-wide implementation of the zero-tolerance
policy towards sexual exploitation and abuse, through
prevention, enforcement and remedial action. My
delegation is encouraged by the provisions in the
resolution that seek to ensure that the zero-tolerance
policy is respected equally by all categories of
United Nations personnel, as well as those provisions
that address the significant gaps regarding sexual
exploitation and abuse practiced by non-United Nations
forces operating under Security Council authorization.
As a country firmly committed to the zerotolerance policy of the United Nations, however, Brazil
regrets that the text of the resolution does not place
stronger emphasis on prevention. The fundamental
rights and dignity of victims are better respected
by creating conditions that help to prevent sexual
exploitation and abuse from occurring in the first
place. The effective prevention of sexual exploitation
6/11

10/03/2017

and abuse requires more than enhanced predeployment
training. It is also necessary to reinforce in-mission
training, community outreach, awareness-raising and
the vetting of personnel. In our experience, objectively
identifying and firmly addressing risk factors has
proved essential. Increasing women’s participation in
preventive strategies is also key. All of those elements
should have been addressed in today’s resolution.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): The delegation of
Ukraine aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the representative of Malta on behalf of the
European Union. We would also like to make some
comments in our national capacity.
At the outset, my delegation welcomes the
consensus that members reached today on resolution
71/278, despite the limited time allowed for conducting
negotiations. We firmly believe that it is vital to address
the issue of sexual exploitation and abuse in a just,
effective and timely manner.
As a troop-contributing country, Ukraine reaffirms
its determination to strictly implement a zero-tolerance
policy where its peacekeepers are concerned. We
acknowledge our responsibility to strengthen the fight
against sexual exploitation and abuse and create a system
of accountability for perpetrators. We also believe that,
apart from protecting local populations from sexual
exploitation and abuse, it is also particularly important
to ensure that United Nations policy in this area is
focused on prioritizing the security and well-being of
the victims. In that regard, we are pleased that today’s
resolution focuses on and tackles the issue of victims.
We pay tribute to the Secretary-General’s efforts
to implement the zero-tolerance policy of the United
Nations on sexual exploitation and abuse, and welcome
all the activities planned for prevention, enforcement
and remedial action, including support to victims. My
delegation firmly believes that the resolution will serve
as a clear political signal to all parties concerned on the
urgent need to implement a more aggressive approach to
United Nations policy on sexual exploitation and abuse.
Ms. Stener (Norway): Norway welcomes the
Assembly’s adoption today of resolution 71/278, on
sexual exploitation and abuse. From the beginning
of the process leading up to the adoption, Norway
supported the idea of a strong and comprehensive
General Assembly resolution on sexual exploitation and
abuse. As we expressed clearly during the negotiations,
my delegation would have preferred to see the
17-06393

10/03/2017

A/71/PV.71

timeline extended in order to allow for more thorough
deliberations. That would have enabled us to consider
the Secretary-General’s report (A/71/818) on special
measures for protection from sexual exploitation and
abuse, issued yesterday, and would have contributed
to a strong, concerted effort to combat this scourge.
We also believe that more time would have helped
us to agree on a stronger text with a clearer focus on
prevention. For that reason, we chose not to be a sponsor
of the resolution.

made some proposals for alternative language, one of
which was accepted.

The time has now come to look forward and work
together on a basis of the consensus that has been
expressed today, and on the basis of the new report of
the Secretary-General. Only by standing together and
overcoming our differences will we be able to make the
zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse
a reality on the ground, and to uphold the rights and
dignity of the most vulnerable people whom the United
Nations is mandated to protect.

Thirdly, El Salvador attaches importance to the
right of any country or group of countries to submit
draft resolutions to the General Assembly. This is an
inalienable right that is accorded us by the Charter
of the United Nations and is one of the democratic
foundations of the Organization.

Mr. Barro (Senegal) (spoke in French): My
delegation joins in today’s consensus adoption of
resolution 71/278. We reiterate our support for the
Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse. It is being implemented in
various ways, through training and awareness-raising
but also by enforcing standards of conduct, conducting
investigations and imposing punishment, and by
assisting the victims of sexual exploitation and abuse
committed by United Nations personnel. That is why
we continue to believe that, in order to be effective,
any resolution on this important issue should be based
on a balanced approach that enables us to take due
account of the various aspects of the issue. Above all,
we believe that a transparent and inclusive negotiation
process would have allowed us to dedicate more time
and energy to achieving a result.
Mr. Zamora Rivas (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, I would like to emphasize the
importance that my country, as a Member of the United
Nations and a troop-contributing country, attaches to
the issue of preventing sexual exploitation and abuse
by any troops or personnel of our Organization. El
Salvador has consistently spoken out on this issue in
the various forums where it has been discussed, but in
the framework of the consensus adoption of resolution
71/278, we would like to make the following comments.
First, we were invited to the negotiation process
and were able to participate in the discussions. We

Secondly, looking at the resolution’s provisions, we
find that it does not contradict what has been agreed
on in previous Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions, and is therefore essentially a reaffirmation
of those resolutions. We therefore decided to join the
consensus. However, we, too, would like to say that this
resolution does not represent any progress on an issue
that so urgently needs to be dealt with creatively.

But the fact that this resolution has been adopted
in no way, shape or form excludes the possibility of
the issue being discussed in the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations and in the Fifth and Sixth
Committees, which must continue their discussion
and carry out an in-depth analysis of the issue. In that
connection, the report (A/71/818) of the SecretaryGeneral and other relevant documents that contribute to
such analysis, one of which has just been released, take
on the utmost importance owing both to their content
and proposed actions, as well as the change in the
approach to sexual abuse, which is a first in the history
of our institution. Such reports must be carefully
analysed and supplemented with new proposals to
ensure that we can move forward and institutionalize
the policy of zero tolerance for sexual exploitation and
abuse, something that we all support.
Fourthly, we wish to express our concern at the
fact that the process of consultations on this resolution,
on the one hand, was not sufficiently inclusive and
transparent, as required by the issue, and, on the
other, it received only a very brief time for discussion
and consultation. Sexual exploitation and abuse is so
complex an issue that the various forms often require
weeks of consideration, which makes possible a seriousminded assessment of the issue. For this reason, our
delegation decided not to co-sponsor the resolution.
In conclusion, I reiterate that El Salvador is
committed to improving the mechanisms for prevention
and ensuring accountability in all cases of sexual
exploitation and abuse in the United Nations system.
We will work hard to help the Organization adopt

17-063937/11

A/71/PV.71

decisive measures for the implementation of its zerotolerance policy.
Finally, I ask that my statement be made part of the
records of this meeting.
Mr. Dalo (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): Argentina
joined the consensus on the adoption of this important
resolution — resolution 71/278 — as we fully support
the zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and
abuse and the measures implemented by the SecretaryGeneral to that end.
My country welcomes the comprehensive treatment
of this issue by the General Assembly condemning all
forms of sexual abuse and exploitation. Nevertheless, we
would like briefly to state our agreement in connection
with the concerns voiced by other delegations regarding
the process used in the adoption of the resolution.
My delegation believes that, in negotiating such an
important issue, we should have had enough time for
greater consultation with our capitals so as to enable the
greater participation of delegations, particularly since
there were simultaneous discussions of this issue in the
framework of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations.
Moreover, we believe that the report of the
Special Committee, as well as the annual report of
the Secretary-General on sexual exploitation and
abuse and of the task force set up to come up with a
strategy for the Organization on this issue, should have
served as sufficient relevant inputs for the negotiations
without resorting to an artificially adjusted schedule
of meetings.
Argentina will continue to support the measures
adopted by the United Nations to bolster the fight
against sexual exploitation and abuse, with a focus
on prevention and assistance to victims, as well as
the Organization’s consideration of this issue in all its
relevant bodies beginning today here at the General
Assembly. We hope in future to count on a negotiation
process that is more conducive to the quest for consensus
on this issue.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote after the voting.
I shall now give the floor to those delegations that
wish to make statements following the adoption of
the resolution.
8/11

10/03/2017

Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China congratulates the General Assembly on its
adoption by consensus, a short while ago, of resolution
71/278, on sexual exploitation and abuse by United
Nations staff. This is the first resolution on the
response of the United Nations system to the issue
of sexual exploitation and abuse and demonstrates
the determination of the membership to combat this
scourge. It will also help the United Nations to take
more comprehensive measures to deal with this
problem, and better help protect the overall reputation
of the Organization.
China thanks Egypt for its initiative. We, too,
sponsored the resolution and commend the other
sponsors for their very positive stance on this issue.
Sexual exploitation and abuse is an issue that must be
taken very seriously by all departments and agencies
of the United Nations system. There is very extensive
consensus on this.
United Nations staff, including in the Secretariat,
funds and programmes, peacekeepers and the civilian
component on the ground have made great contributions
to the promotion of world peace and development.
Many have lost their lives for the cause. But the
negative actions of some have harmed the reputation of
the Organization and have compromised the hard-won
achievements of United Nations staff.
China firmly supports the fight against acts of
sexual exploitation and abuse and supports the zerotolerance policy adopted by the United Nations system.
We welcome the efforts made by Secretary-General
Guterres and support the international community’s
taking of comprehensive measures from the perspective
of prevention, accountability, personnel management
and protection of victims.
China will continue to work with the wider
membership in supporting United Nations management
capacity so as to effectively uphold the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
press ahead with the work of the Organization.
Ms. Hailu (Ethiopia): Ethiopia is pleased to
co-sponsor resolution 71/278, on United Nations action
on sexual exploitation and abuse. We believe that the
General Assembly is the appropriate forum for the
discussion of this serious issue.
The involvement and active participation of all
Member States, including troop-contributing countries,
17-06393

10/03/2017

A/71/PV.71

is indeed critical to finding a comprehensive solution
to this scourge, which is tarnishing the image of the
United Nations and of the thousands of peacekeepers
who continue to risk their lives every single day in the
field while executing their mandates on behalf of the
international community.

carefully. That is why we welcome the adoption of
resolution 71/278 today, which underscores the need to
ensure accountability, to prevent and combat impunity
and to promote credible reporting of allegations with
a view to improving the effectiveness of the United
Nations in combating sexual exploitation and abuse.

We therefore welcome the adoption of the
resolution. We commend Egypt for spearheading the
efforts and fully associate ourselves with its statement
on behalf of the sponsors. We would like also to
express our appreciation to all delegations for their
active participation in the negotiation process, as well
as for showing flexibility and compromise in order to
achieve consensus.

In our view, there is an urgent need to review and
standardize procedures for verifying allegations of
sexual exploitation and abuse before informing the
troop-contributing countries concerned, prior to public
reporting — which should uniformly apply to both
United Nations personnel and non-United Nations forces
operating under a mandate of the Security Council. If,
after a proper investigation of allegations, no evidence
has been found, all mention of such allegations should
be cleared from reports.

We wish to seize take this opportunity to reiterate
our strong condemnation of all acts of sexual exploitation
and abuse throughout the United Nations system and
to reaffirm our commitment to and support for the
implementation of the United Nations zero-tolerance
policy on sexual exploitation and abuse. We welcome
the Secretary-General’s commitment to preventing and
combating sexual exploitation and abuse and support
the measures he is undertaking, including through
the appointment of the Special Coordinator and the
establishment of a high-level task force to develop a
strategy for improving the United Nations response.
As a major troop-contributing country, we deem
the protection of civilians, particularly children and
women, who usually find themselves in situations
of vulnerability, of the utmost importance. We fully
recognize our obligation to ensure that our peacekeepers
respect applicable international humanitarian and
human rights law. We also provide them with the
necessary and adequate predeployment training and
civilian protection, including on the issue of sexual
exploitation and abuse.
We are fully aware of our primary obligation to
investigate allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse,
and we have done so whenever we have seen reports
of such allegations against our own peacekeepers.
However, what we have seen from our own experience
is that some of those allegations do not even meet the
minimum evidentiary standards. Allegations that are
not properly verified and substantiated will not only
undermine the credibility of the troop-contributing
countries concerned, but also of the United Nations
peace operation as a whole. Therefore, we believe that
there is an absolute need to handle the matter very

Finally, we welcome the Secretary-General’s
commitment and readiness to engage and consult with
member countries and, most important, with troopcontributing countries, in addressing the issue of sexual
exploitation and abuse. We must recognize that there is
indeed a lot of room for improvement in dialogue on
that issue. Let me conclude by expressing our sincere
hope that the Secretary-General will demonstrate
the necessary leadership in mobilizing all Member
States towards the common objective of fighting this
scourge, which has tarnished the image and reputation
of the Organization.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, we would like to express our
gratitude to the States that initiated the adoption of
today’s resolution 71/278, as well as to all delegations
that constructively participated in its drafting.
Despite certain positive developments in recent
months regarding statistics on sexual offenses
committed by the personnel of various United Nations
peacekeeping mission units, it is still a pressing issue
that irreparably undermines the authority of the United
Nations. I believe that the United Nations and its States
Members must do everything possible to prevent and
fully eradicate such acts.
Equally disturbing is information about egregious
cases of sexual exploitation and abuse committed by
military personnel from foreign non-United Nations
contingents deployed in conflict areas under a Security
Council mandate. The mission of those contingents,
like that of the Blue Helmets, is to bring peace and
security to countries. Therefore, the same standards of

17-063939/11

A/71/PV.71

zero tolerance must be applied to them, regardless of
country of origin, identity of the perpetrators or their
role in those missions.
Security Council resolution 2272 (2016) has
contributed to the discussion of this topic in the United
Nations as a whole. However, we maintain that it was
adopted by the Council as an exception, given that
matters of peacekeeper discipline are not related to
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Hence, we welcome the resumption of discussions on
that issue in the General Assembly, where those matters
have been considered for a number of years — both in
its Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and
in the Fifth and Sixth Committees.
Preventive and precautionary measures have also
been included in the resolutions regularly adopted by
the General Assembly on the criminal accountability
of United Nations officials and experts on missions.
For instance, the Assembly was actively involved in
introducing the practice of predeployment preparation
and induction training carried out by States, alongside
peacekeeping operations and special political missions.
Those measures have yielded concrete results. Indeed,
it is the General Assembly that receives the relevant
reports of the Secretary-General. We firmly advocate
the continuation of that practice, which has proved
effective. We believe that it is the involvement of
all Member States in developing relevant measures
that determines the effectiveness of their practical
implementation, and troop-contributing countries
should have a particular say in the matter because they
possess the full measure of information on why it has
so far been impossible to eradicate the phenomenon
underlying those deplorable statistics.
Without in any way minimizing the gravity
of sexual offenses, we believe that the idea being
promoted by a number of States and the Secretariat
regarding collective responsibility for such actions is
questionable. In our view, the focus should be on goodfaith efforts to identify actual perpetrators, establish
their guilt and bring them to justice. Another important
objective is to adopt measures to prevent such crimes
and to properly train and screen uniformed and civilian
personnel to be deployed on United Nations missions.
The main burden, in the case of troops and police,
falls on troop-contributing countries and, in the case
of civilian personnel, the responsibility lies with
the Secretariat.
10/11

10/03/2017

Ms. Sayed (Pakistan): We thank you, Sir, for
this opportunity to discuss a subject that is of critical
importance to us. Today’s meeting is part of efforts that
began last September to address the issue of sexual
exploitation and abuse collectively and holistically,
with the aim of finding practical solutions to the
problem. We had talked about an overarching General
Assembly resolution that would address that issue
comprehensively — combining the efforts made in
various committees, including the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations and the Fifth Committee.
Resolution 71/278, adopted today, sends a clear
message that we all stand strong to root out this scourge
from the United Nations system. It is a reaffirmation
of the commitment to a zero-tolerance policy of sexual
exploitation and abuse, and to strengthened preventive,
reporting, enforcement and remedial action measures.
The resolution that we just adopted, which Pakistan
co-sponsored, looks holistically into the issues that
need to be addressed in order to implement the zerotolerance policy. They include strong support and
assistance for victims; genuine accountability to
be exercised by Member States as it relates to their
personnel; the importance of prevention; combating
impunity among non-United Nations forces authorized
under a Security Council mandate; strengthening and
enhancing transparency within the United Nations
system; and including the subject on the agenda of the
General Assembly for further discussions.
We appreciate the Secretary-General’s proactive
approach on the issue and his efforts for ensuring
greater transparency and accountability. The resolution
is also an expression of our support of the SecretaryGeneral’s efforts, strengthening his hands for future
endeavours in combating the problem. We look forward
to working with him and forming a strong partnership
between the Member States and the Secretariat.
The principal sponsors of the resolution include
major troop- and police-contributing countries. It is
also a reaffirmation that we take our responsibilities
as a troop contributor very seriously. We fully support
the policy of zero-tolerance and strongly believe that
protectors of the vulnerable must not be allowed, under
any circumstance, to become the abusers. That would
be a travesty of justice and morality and, above all,
of the sacred covenant that peacekeepers take upon
themselves. We cannot allow the exemplary work of
thousands of brave men and women to be sullied by the
abhorrent acts of a few.
17-06393

10/03/2017

Our sense of urgency on the subject is clearly based
on our collective aim to root out a problem that seriously
affects the functioning of the United Nations system.
We are ready to work with the Secretary-General on the
implementation of a system-wide strategy to respond to
sexual exploitation and abuse issues. As mentioned in
his report (A/71/818), united in common purpose, we
can together become a positive force for change.
Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): Bangladesh welcomes
the consensus adoption of resolution 71/278, entitled
“United Nations Action on Sexual Exploitation and
Abuse”, and wishes to thank all Member States for
their active cooperation and support. We recognize the
stewardship role played by the delegation of Egypt.
Bangladesh contributes to United Nations peacekeeping
missions to uphold at the international level certain
values and principles we cherish as a nation. Allegations
of sexual exploitation and abuse by peacekeepers
and other United Nations personnel run contrary to
those values and principles and cannot be tolerated.
We therefore fully support the urgency attached to
prevention, reporting, enforcement and remedial action
in relation to sexual exploitation and abuse by those
serving under the banner of the United Nations.
It is only logical that the rights of victims
should remain at the core of the United Nations
response to sexual exploitation and abuse through the
implementation of its zero-tolerance policy. Bangladesh
commends the Secretary-General for demonstrating his
unstinting commitment to this overarching objective.
We take note of his comprehensive report contained in
document A/71/818 and feel encouraged at seeing a range
of constructive and forward-looking recommendations.
We acknowledge the work done by the high-level task
force set up by the Secretary-General for this purpose
and recognize in particular the seminal contributions of
his Special Coordinator, Ms. Jane Holl Lute.
We believe the resolution adopted by the General
Assembly today has created an opportunity for
inclusive, well-calibrated discussions in the plenary
on implementing the recommendations made in the
Secretary-General’s report in tandem with discussions
in the relevant committees. This resolution also
coincides with the first anniversary of the adoption of
Security Council resolution 2272 (2016) and brings to
closure a proposal put forward by a group of troop- and

A/71/PV.71

police-contributing countries at the General Assembly
meeting held on 7 September 2016 (see A/70/PV.115).
We consider today’s resolution to be a work in progress
and look forward to further enhancing its contents in
the coming years.
Bangladesh joins others in underscoring the need
for addressing sexual exploitation and abuse in a
decisive and sustained manner through a United Nations
system-wide approach. The various layers of screening,
oversight, monitoring, reporting, investigation and
accountability being introduced throughout the United
Nations system should help further strengthen the
firewall against such aberrations. Disciplinary and
criminal justice measures, in line with corresponding
national laws and systems, need to be enforced and
reported on with due diligence. Remedial action in
support of victims in case of credible allegations is a
non-derogable responsibility. The potentials of the trust
fund set up for victims must be optimized in a fair and
transparent manner.
In his latest report, the Secretary-General identifies
some of the best practices from Bangladesh in
conformity with our zero-tolerance policy with respect
to sexual exploitation and abuse. The trust, confidence
and respect that our peacekeepers have earned over
the decades cannot be compromised by the scourge of
sexual exploitation and abuse, for those hosting our
peacekeepers must not experience any erosion of faith
in those they have turned to for protection. The image,
credibility and effectiveness of the United Nations
must be preserved and given primacy over any vested
interest or short-term gains.
We have shared with the United Nations our
readiness to further expand the possible areas of
cooperation and engagement in case of any allegation.
We remain firm in our resolve to arrive at and maintain
zero allegations and combat impunity to uphold the
ethos that underpins our participation in United Nations
peacekeeping operations. We are hopeful that, through
a game-changing approach by the United Nations and
its States Members, sexual exploitation and abuse will
be effectively addressed across the system.
The Acting President (spoke in French): The
General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 123.
The meeting rose at 4.15 p.m.

17-0639311/11
