V.

(h) Developing manpower training in the developing
countries, in particular for women and youth, according
to national requirements for industrial development;
4. Emphasizes the need to facilitate the restructuring
of world industrial production through, inter alia:
(a) Support for increased industrial production in
developing countries;
(b) Special and differential treatment in favour of
developing countries where feasible and appropriate in
the context of a general effort to liberalize world trade,
particularly in their favour;
(c) Trade liberalization relating to increased market
access;
5. Invites the Conference to consider the mechanisms and institutions that should be strengthened or
established within the United Nations Industrial Development Organization for the implementation of its
decisions, taking into account, inter alia, the recommendations and proposals contained in the study entitled
Industry 2000-New Perspectives; 36
6. Requests the Secretary-General and the Executive Director of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, in the light of that organization's
experience in developing technical assistance programmes for the least developed as well as land-locked
and island developing countries, to expand and develop
the current programmes;
7. Agrees that the system of consultations has become an important and established activity of the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization, that it
should be continued as an ongoing activity of the organization and be strengthened so as to provide the greatest
possible benefit to the developing countries and contribute effectively to the achievement of the objectives
and targets set out in the Lima Declaration and Plan of
Action, and that participation from each country in the
system of consultations might include officials of Governments as well as representatives of industry, labour
and consumer groups, for example, as deemed appropriate by each Government;
8. Stresses that the co-operative programme of action on appropriate industrial technology being undertaken by the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization should be implemented in full accordance
with the development priorities and needs of developing
countries;
9. Requests that the industrial development field
advisers programme should be strengthened and extended, in the light of the review being carried out jointly
by the United Nations Industrial Development Organization and the United Nations Development Programme;
10. Invites all States that have not yet done so to
take early steps to sign and ratify, accept or approve the
Constitution of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, adopted on 8 April 1979 at the
second session of the United Nations Conference on the
Establishment of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization as a Specialized Agency; 37
11. Urges all countries, in particular the developed
countries, to contribute to the United Nations Industrial
pevelopment Fund or to raise their contributions, taking
1~to account ~he need for maximum flexibility, with a
view to reachmg the agreed desirable funding level of
$50 million annually;
12. Urges developed countries and the international
financial institutions concerned, including the World
86
37

ID/237.
A/CONF.90/19.

99

Resolutions adopted on the reporfB of the Second Committee

Bank, to consider ways and means of responding adequately to requests by developing countries for financial
resources in the industry sector on favourable terms, in
accordance with their established procedure, and, in this
context, invites serious consideration of the proposal to
set up a long-term facility in the World Bank for financing
the purchase of capital goods by developing countries;
13. Emphasizes that industrialization should receive
a due share of the resources transferred to developing
countries from developed countries and international
institutions, taking into account the development priorities of developing countries;
14. Requests the Secretary-General and the Executive Director of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization to ensure that the necessary
arrangements, including the requisite financial provisions, are made for the conclusion of national, regional
and interregional preparations for the Third General
Conference of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, including arrangements for interregional and other meetings in the later stages of the
preparatory process for the Conference;
15. Requests the Secretary-General and the Executive Director of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization to seek extrabudgetary resources for
the effective participation in the Conference of the representatives of the least developed countries, including
the requisite financial provisions for the travel expenses
and daily subsistence allowances of two representatives
from each of those countries.

102nd plenary meeting
13 December I 979
34/104.

United Nations Fund for Population Activities

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3019 (XXVII) of 18 December 1972, in which it decided to place the United Nations
Fund for Population Activities under the authority of
the General Assembly and established the respective
roles relating to the Fund of the Economic and Social
Council and the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 1763 (LIV) of 18 May 1973, in which the Council
called upon the United Nations Fund for Population
Activities to play a leading role in the United Nations
system in promoting population programmes,
Recalling further its resolution 31 / 170 of 21 December 1976, in which it endorsed the general principles to
be applied by the United Nations Fund for Population
Activities in allocating resources,
Expressing its appreciation of the role which the
Economic and Social Council and the Governing Council
of the United Nations Development Programme have
played in furthering the aims of the United Nations
Fund for Population Activities,
Noting with satisfaction that the United Nations Fund
for Population Activities has become a fully viable entity
within the United Nations system in the population field,
owing in particular to its level of resources and its increasing assistance to the developing countries,
Taking note of the fact that the Colombo Declaration
on Population and Development, adopted on 1 September 1979 by the International Conference of Parlia-

General Assembly-Thirty-fourth Session

100

mentarians on Population and Development, calls, inter
alia, for the strengthening of the role and functions of the
United Nations Fund for Population Activities, 38
l. Affirms that the United Nations Fund for Population Activities, placed under the authority of the General Assembly by resolution 3019 (XXVII), is a subsidiary organ of the Assembly in terms of Article 22 of
the Charter of the United Nations, without prejudice to
section V of the annex to Assembly resolution 32/197
of 20 December 1977 or to the mandates of other organizations of the United Nations system concerned with
population;
2. Invites the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme to consider devoting a
specific period of time during its sessions to adequate
and separate consideration of items relating to the
United Nations Fund for Population Activities;
3. Invites the Secretary-General to arrange, in consultation with the members of the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination, for the United Nations Fund
for Population Activities to participate in all aspects of the work of that Committee and its subsidiary
machinery;
4. Reaffirms that the United Nations Fund for Population Activities should continue to avail itself of the
~ervic~s of the Unit~d Na!ions Development Programme,
mcludmg those of its resident representatives;
5. Invites Governments to continue and increase
their contributions to the United Nations Fund for Population Activities in view of the rapidly growing needs of
developing countries for population assistance;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session on the implementation of the present resolution.
104th plenary meeting
14 December 1979
34/105.

United Nations Children's Fund

The General Assembly,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution 1979/53 of 2 August 1979,
Having considered the report of the Executive Board
of the United Nations Children's Fund on its session
held at Mexico City from 21 May to 1 June 1979,39
Having in mind its resolution 34/4 of 18 October
1979 on the International Year of the Child, in particular paragraphs 6, 7, 8 and 12 thereof,
1. Commends the policies and activities of the
United Nations Children's Fund;
2. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution 1979/53;
3. Fully appreciates the enlarged responsibilities of
the U~i!~d Nations Childre~'s Fund and the broad range
?f ach~tles on beh~f of children to be undertaken by it
m the hght of the still enormous unmet needs of children
in developing countries and the importance of maintaining and enhancing the new impetus to activities on their
behalf generated by the International Year of the Child;
4. Commends the United Nations Children's Fund
for its elaboration and implementation of the basic services approach for children as part of a comprehensive
8 BSee A/C.2/34/6,,ara. 31.
39 Official Records o the Economic and Social Council, 1979,

Supplement No. 11 (E/1979/41).

development strategy and emphasizes the importance of
co-ordinating, in connexion with that approach, the activities of the Fund with those of other organs and specialized agencies in the United Nations system;
5. Expresses its appreciation to all Governments that
are contributing to the United Nations Children's Fund
and appeals, with a sense of urgency, to all Governments, especially those not contributing at a level commensurate with their capacity, to increase their contributions, if possible on a multiyear basis, so that the Fund
may reach its revenue target of $290 million for 1981,
as projected at the session of the Executive Board held
at Mexico City from 21 May to 1 June 1979; 10
6. Expresses its deep appreciation to Mr. Henry R.
Labouisse for his distinguished service, dedication and
personal involvement in the work of the United Nations
Children's Fund for almost fifteen years as its Executive
Director.
104th plenary meeting
14 December 1979
34/106.

United Nations Development Programme

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme on
its twenty-sixth session, 41 the statement made by the Administrator of the Programme 42 and the views expressed
during the debate,
Noting the increasing level of activities of the United
Nations Development Programme and the requests of
the Administrator for renewed support to achieve the
objectives set for the second development cycle, 19771981,
1. Takes note of the report of the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme on
its twenty-sixth session;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Administrator
for his continuing efforts to strengthen the activities of
the United Nations Development Programme;
3. Appeals to all Governments to renew their efforts
to. provide the United Nations Development Programme
with the necessary resources to enable it to achieve the
targ~t set for the 1977-1981 development cycle, which is
predicated on an annual growth rate of 14 per cent.
104th plenary meeting
14 December 1979
34/107.

United Nations Volunteers programme

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2659 (XXV) of 7 December
1970 and 33/84 of 15 December 1978,
Noting with appreciation the positive remarks made
by the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme regarding the satisfactory progress of
the activities of the United Nations Volunteers programme, 43 which currently has over five hundred volunteers serving in some sixty developing countries,
40

Ibid., para. 183.

41 Ibid.,. Supplement No. 10 (E/1979/40 and Corr.I).
42 Official Records of the General Assembly Thirty-fourth

Session, Second Committee, 29th meeting, paras. '1-18· and ibid.
Second Committee, Sessional Fascicle, corrigendum. •
'
48 I bid., para. 11.
