TWENTY-FIFTH

YEAR

nd
MEETING:

NEW

19 MAY 1970

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

Page

agenda (S/Agenda/lS42/Rev. 1) . , . . . . , , . . . , , . , , . . , . . . , . . . . . , , . 1

Adoption of the agenda
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 May 1970 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/9794) . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . , , . , . , . . . . * . . . . . . . * * . . . . I . . . . . * . . * * . . . . * 1
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 May 1970 from the Permanent Representative of Israel to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/9795)

SlPV.1542

NOTE
Symbols of United Natiorzs documents am composed of capital letters combined with jig~ues. Mention of such a symbol indicates a ~.eference to a Uflited
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published
in quarterly Supplerncnts of the Of$cial Records of the Security Council. The
date of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutiorzs and
Decisions of’ the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

FIFTEEN

HUN

FORTY-SECOND

MEETING

Held in New York on Tuesday, 19 May 1970, at 3 p.m.
Prcsi&zt:
(France).

Mr.

Jacques

KOSCIUSKO-MORIZET

reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber
on the understanding that they will be invited to sit
at the table when it is their turn to address the Council,

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Burundi, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Spain, Syria, Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britainand Northern Ireland, United States of America
and Zambia.

At the invitarion of the President, MY. E. Ghomz,
representative of Lebunort, and Mr. Y. Tekotrh, representative oflsrael, tookplaces at the Security Council table, and Mr. A. T. Benhinza, representative of
MOTOCCO, and Mr. J. M. Baronrly, representative of
Saudi Arabia, took the places reserved for them.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l542/Rev.l)
1.

Adoption of the agenda

2.

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated I2 May 1970 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/9794)

3.

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation $orn French):
The first speaker on my list is the representative of
Morocco, and I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to address the Council.
3. Mr. BENHIMA
(Morocco) (interpretation j?onz
French): The Council will recall that at the end of
the 1540th meeting, in a short statement, I drew its
attention to the fact that the debate that had taken
place during the previous meeting warranted some
comments from my delegation because of certain statements that had left a.misunderstanding,
if not confusion, regarding the concept of a cease-fire and of
territorial integrity. In the course of that same statement I said that I wished, on behalf of all the Arab
delegations, to make a communication
of the greatest
importance to the Council. I shall begin this statement
with the last of these comments, in view of the gravity
and urgency of the communication,
because in the
meantime the development of the situation has confirmed the reasons that called for our first concern.

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 May 1970 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/9795)

Adoption of the Agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 May 1970 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council

4. The Council will recall that for some months now
the problem of the shipment of weapons by the Government of the United States to Israel has been at the
very centre of the grave situation in the Middle East.
A number of Heads of State, a number of friendly
Governments and a number of delegations here have
reiterated the gravity of such a step. President Nixon,
at one point, took a decision to suspend the shipment
of part of Israel’s order as promised by the Government
of the United States during the recent visit of the Israeli
Prime Minister, Mrs. Golda Meir, to this country.

(S/9794)

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 May 1970from the Permanent Representative of Israel to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Sedurity Council
(S/9795)
1. The PRESIDENT
(irzterpretation fionz French):
In accordance with decision taken previously by the
Council 11537th meeting], I invite the representatives
of Lebanon, Israel, Morocco and Saudi Arabia to participate in the debate without the right to vote. In
accordance with the practice followed in the past I
propose to invite the representatives of the parties
directly concerned, that is the representatives of Lebanon and Israel, to take seats at the Council table. The
oiher representatives will be invited to take the seats

5. We wanted to place the greatest possible confidence in that decision by President Nixon. Indeed we
did so. But the conditions surrounding that suspension
kept alive the concern and disquiet that we felt, because
the arguments put forward for suspending that decision
were fragile and left to President Nixon complete discretion himself to determing, on the basis of considerations of domestic policy or of bilateral relations with
1

Israel, the possibility of choosing the moment-or
of
letting Israe choose it-for the delivery of the rest
of the order in question.

“The first hint that the United States might be
giving secret aid to Israel leaked out of the President’s closed-door conference last week with the
nation’s Governors. During his report on the Middle
East, he confided guardedly that the United States
was helping Israel in ways he couldn’t talk about,

6. In the contacts established by the Washington
Government with a number of Governments concerned
over this situation, we have become convinced that
efforts were made to draw the attention of the United
States Government to the situation. Unfortunately, a
series of press releases, certain official declarations
and a number of unofficial comments by persons,
perhaps not in the United States Government but having a certain public position which adds to their personal repute, have led to the belief that that decision
might possibly be subject to reconsideration. We have
been subjected recently, in accordance with the usual
pattern, to an intensification of IsraeIi propaganda, on
the one hand, and, on the other hand, of the propaganda
of the Israeli media of information in their annexe in
New York and elsewhere, preparing world public opinion for the delivery of these weapons.

“He didn’t mention the bomb shipments or otherwise indicate what secret help the United States
might be furnishing. However, this column has
learned from the most reliable sources that Israel
urgently needed bombs and the United States agreed
to supply some.“’
10. There are means to get bombs to Israel and later
to announce this fact to world public opinion in aPress
conference; but we have reason to believe that that
Press conference was called not to discuss the Middle
East, but to discuss domestic affairs in the United
States following the evolution of the Cambodia
situation, and that by a very pertinent coincidence the
circles that are ready to support the decisions of the
American Government and of President Nixon regarding Cambodia are the same circles in the Congress
and the American public opinion that are also supporting the aid to Israel.

7. An attempt has been made to invoke the argument
that there had been new elements in the Middle East
situation. I shall return to that, but I want to take
this opportunity,
when the Security Council is considering another aspect of the use made by Israel of
the weapo,ns it possesses for the commission of aggression against one country or another in the Middle East,
solemnly to draw the attention of the Council to the
danger indicated by reports which unfortunately are
constantly being confirmed. We would like the attention of the Government of the United States to be
drawn to the serious and inevitable consequences that
could not fail to take place certainly on the international
level, but basically in the Arab world, because, in the
light of an attitude of this kind, in the light of the deliberate strengthening of the military potential of Israel by
a great Power, it is not possible for the Arab world
-whose leaders, in accordance with political wisdom,
continue to hold back and be moderate in the expression of their opinions, but who also, in accordance
with another aspect of the wisdom of their policy, must
take account of the demands and attitudes of their own
public opinion-not
to considei this decision as particularly grave and one such as seriously to prejudice
the quality of the relations that the majority of Arab
States still maintain with the United States Government.

11. This information from a valid newspaper accords
well with the logical conclusion drawn from the communications made to the Governors that Mr. Nixon
would like to have peace in Cambodia but on the other
hand, leaves to American opinion the question of support for Israel.
12. In the last twenty years the Middle East has
shown that very often decisions whose import seemed
short-term have nevertheless had ramifications that
changed the destiny of the region and have also altered
the international
context. I am sure everybody will
recall that in 1954 when the Egyptian Government
asked for weapons from the United States and from
the United Kingdom, their refusal forced it to seek
weapons elsewhere. That was a first modification
within the framework of the Middle East. When the
Egyptian Government asked for financial assistance
from an international institution to build the Aswan
Dam, the point of departure for a great economic and
social development programme for the welfare of the
region, the “no” of Foster Dulles created a series of
events whose sequels we are still witnessing-and they
are far from exhausted. I should hope that one day
an historian will dwell upon the consequences that flow
from that “no!” of Mr. Foster Dulles and consider
what would have happened in the Middle East and
in the Arab world if Mr. Foster Dulles had said “Yes”
on the Aswan Dam instead of otherwise, We would
ask President Nixon, who was in a very good position
at that time, to round out his political experience and
prepare himself for leadership, to weigh the consequences of the decisions adopted by his predecessors
and to show that one of the first lessons that one learns
in politics is to profit from such experience.

8. We have to draw the attention,of President Nixon
to assess the ramifications in present circumstances
of such adecision, for in the Middle East we can already
actually read their consequences and effects.
9. In an English for which I will ask my Anglo-Saxon
friends to forgive me, I shall read out some passages
of an article appearing this morning in The Wcdzingtm
Post, a serious and important source, by Mr. Jack
Anderson, who is usually well informed:
“President Nixon has taken pains to hush up the
fact that the United States, in the strictest of secrecy,
has made bombs available to the Israeli Air Force.

’ Quoted in English by the speaker.

2

13. This covers the first point that I wanted to make
and which basically consibL<d in the communication
that I felt that I had to make to the Council on behalf
of all the Arab countries which incidentally have taken
the necessary steps in the last few days to keep the
Government of the United States infortied and also
the Secretary-General of the United Nations.

belligerents Israel defied it until it had arrived at the
Canal, until it had occupied the entire Golan Heights,
and until it had reached the banks of the Jordan. Thus
within that very context the reactions of the countries
concerned are legitimate according to the Security
Council resolution.
17. If Israel were ready today to go back to the lines
on which it stood on 6 and 9 June 1967, then the situation would be compietely different and we might speak
of the cease-fire in other terms and within a different
context. However, if we asked the Arab countries concerned to abstain from any action, we fear that three
years after such a situation Egypt, Jordan or Syria
tnight soon submit their case to the Committee of
Twenty-Four* or the Fourth Committee of the General
Assembly, since they would have completely lost their
independence and would merely be territories under
foreign administration.

14. Now, Sir, I go back to the debate held at our
last meeting. I am happy that I heard the representative
of the United States reaffirm, or perhaps state for the
first time in so many words and without any circumlocutions, certain principles to which this Council is
deeply attached and stress their validity. I am happy
for that constructive and positive side of his statement,
which endorsed the principle of the inadmissibility of
acquisition of territory by aggression which clearly
recalled the attachment to the United States Government to resolution 242 (1967) of November 1967 and
which, for the first time and quite correctly, me:ltioned
the “Palestirzim
fact” which, whether we like it or
not is one of the determining factors of the situation
in the Middle East and the failure to mention which
merely spells a desire not to find adequate solutions
to the problem. I was very happy for once to hear
the representative of the United States refuse to use
the words “Palestinian
refugees” and call things by
their true name and talk about the “Palestinian fact”.
Because in the new dictionary of the Middle East there
are no Palestinian
refugees. There are Palestinian
fighters.

18. As for territorial integrity, we should like to know
what kind of integrity we are speaking about here.
There is, within the definition of a State, a fundamental
element: namely, the territorial limits of that State.
To the extent that Israel owes its very birth to the
United Nations-that
is, to that which we agreed at
the time to be the International conscience-we would
expect that that country’s limits-should
correspond
to the frontiers set by the United Nations. In 1948
there was a truce in the Security Council kesolulion
46 (1948)] which allowed Israel, in the space of a few
days, to acquire 22 per cent more territory. We do
not know what kind of a State it is that speaks as
a State, which speaks of security and sovereignty, but
which totally ignores the elementary and basic concepts of a State: namely, precise frontiers. That vague
notion proves that Israel does not intend to put an
end to international
opportunism or to its successive
occupations until the day it feels that Israel has become
the whole Middle East.

15. I must express my concern over the fact that when
the representative of the United States in a large picture
referred to the global situation of the Middle East,
he went back to the concept of cease-fire and territorial
integrity but in an ambiguous way. I think that matters
should be spelled out so that the weight of habit will
not lead us by our silence to acquiesce in interpretations
which are devised in certain capital:. What I mean
is that the notion of “cease-fire” since it existed, has
never meant during a truce or armistice that one of
the belligerents, when agreeing to the cease-fire, by
the same token agrees that he must fold his arms,
renounce all military activities of any sort for the restoration of his military potential, for the continuation
of the military training of his soldiers and the restocking
of his arsenals. The notion of a cease-fire certainly
does not mean that the aggressor can continue to act
as he wishes while the occupied countries, in turn have
nothing to do but sit back and await his goodwill. That
would lead us to ask Syria, Jordan and the United
Arab Republic to sit back while Israel occupies their
territory. I should like to recall, because this involves
a basic concept, that when the Security Council
ordered the cease-fire on the Egyptian and Syrian
fronts, Israel occupied alittle more than 150 kilometres
of Egyptian territory, the Golan ileights, and part of
Jordanian territory-all
after the cease-fire.

19. I know that the United States Government,
together with France and the United Kingdom in 1950,
issued the famous Tripartite
Declaration,
which
guaranteed the territorial integrity of the Middle East.
But since then there have been so many encroachments
upon the territorial integrity embodied in the Tripartite
Agreement! The United States Government has nevel
felt constrained to respect territorial integrity. The 1967
aggression was a violation of that solemn declaration
which three of the great Powers of the period considered to be the territorial charter of the Middle East.
If we examine the present-day map as it is, we may
rightly remind those three great Powers of the moral
obligation which they assumed before the Council
when they said that they would guarantee the territorial
integrity of the Middle East as it stood at that time.
But it is this flexibility,
this possibility of territorial
extension according to international circumstances,
that concerns us. We should like, once and for all,
to abide by the strict definition of territorial integrity

16. Therefore, even considering the present ceasefire lines, the position of Israel is still illegal-if I may
SO put it-because
when the cease-fire order was given
by the Security Council [resolution 233 (1967)] to the

2 Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples.

3

as guaranteed by the Security Council and as three
of the great Powers had seen fit to embody it in thei]
Tripartite Declaration.

2.5. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation *from Frencj~):
I call on the representative of Israel.

20. I know that in other parts of the world the will
of the Government
of the United States to ensure
respect for territorial integrity has at times led the world
to the very brink of the abyss and to the very brink
of war. The commitments
assumed by the United
States after the war to ensure respect for the stnfus
quo in Europe led the international
community
a
number of times to the very threshold of a possible
international
atomic war, because the United States
affirmed that respect for what had been decided upon
internationally
forced it to assume its responsibilities
as far as it was necessary so that there would be no
alteration in what had been considered in Europe as
territorial integrity, as defined in the Potsdam and other
agreements that followed the end of the Second World
War.
21. The United States Government justified its 1960
intervention in Viet-Nam as a moral obligation to redress what it called a violation OF the status quo in
the Far East, as defined in the 19.54 Geneva Accords.”
The American Government at that time showed the
meaning it could attach to a commitment on its part
when it was a question of not modifying certain international commitments.
22. Perhaps in the course of the last few years those
concepts have disappeared, but we refuse to be the
victims of those modifications of vocabulary, and we
call upon the Council, since the language of the Charter
has not been subjected to those American modifications of terminology,
to adhere to the language of the
Charter itself.

26. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel) 1 have only one observation to make on the remarks we have just heard from
the representative of Morocco. I should simply like
to draw the Council’s attention to the interpretation
of the cease-fire given at this meeting by the Moroccan
representative on behalf of all Governments of Ar&
States.
27. The representative of Morocco has again submitted the thesis that the cease-fire in fact means to the
Arab Governments the continuation of fire. That is,
of course, not new: President Nasser of Egypt made
this attitude even more explicit and unequivocal when,
a year ago, he repudiated the cease-fire and openly
proclaimed the so-called war of attrition against Israel.
28. That is the situation in which Israel finds itself
today-a situation of continued war against it, a situation in which Israel is time and again compelled to
defend itself against acts of aggression. Surely it is
in this context that Israel’s defensive action on 12May
directed against bases of aggression on Lebanese territory must be considered.
29. Unfortunately, we are not in a situation of peace
and not even in a situation of a cease-fire recognized
and respected by the Arab States, but in a situation
of warfare waged against us.
30. What might be wrong, or questionable, in conditions of peace or effective cease-fire may surely be
right in circumstances of war when the attacked finds
it necessary to strike back at the attacker. The eyes
of the world are undoubtedly on this CounciI to see
whether it will take cognizance of this basic fact.

23. In Korea, when General MacArthur-wanted
to
go into the sanctuaries, I remember that L&-d Attlee
telephoned President Truman to draw his attention to
the gravity of the right of pursuit. We are grateful both
to the United Kingdom Government for the energy
it showed at that time and to President Truman, whose
decision In that matter changed the world’s judgement
of him and made him one of the best Presidents of
the United States. At that time the United States considered as a temptation ofthe devil any urge to go beyond
the River Yalu arid to draw the world into a war with
China. Does the certainty of impunity when the Arabs
are involved-because
they lack the power of Peking
or because certain great Powers do not feel directly
involved in that conflict-justify
the modification of
the most elementary concepts of international
law
today on the pretext that immediate interests lie in
another direction and coincide with other international
interests?

3 1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
I have no more speakers on my list. I understand that
certain delegations are on the point of submitting a
draft resolution and that they need to have further consultations. In any case, the Secretariat of the Council
needs time to print and distribute the draft resolution
in question. *
32. Consequently, if the Council agrees, I propose
to suspend this meeting until 5.15 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 4.20 p.m. d
resumed at 5.40 p.m.

33. Mr. MWAANGA (Zambia): During my intetvention on 14 May [1540th medng], I made it clear that
my Government would not accept Israel’s arrogant Llse
of power against its Arab neighbours, not only because
of the consistent position we have maintained on the
matter since 1967 but also because of the dangerous
precedent Israel’s attacks on Lebanon create for all
weak nations and indeed for mankind as a whole, we
are still of the opinion that unless there is a strict observance of the cease-fire by all the parties directly con-

24. Before the Council continued its discussion, I
wanted to draw its attention to these remarks and,
in the friendliest, but also frankest way-and the two
go together--I
wanted to invite the United States
delegation to consider the elements I have mentioned.
-’ Agreements on the Cessation of Hostilities in Indo-China.

4 Subsequently circulated as document S/9807.

4

cerned, the situation in the Middle East will continue
to deteriorate with unpardonable loss of life on both
sides.

sible, but before embarking upon the voting procedure
I shall of course call on those who wish to speak,

34. T believe that all of us are distressed by the Israeli
militnry attacks against Lebanon and I equally believe
that we should all like to see peace reign in the Middle
East. To this end consultations have ‘been held among
members of the Security Council concerning a draft
resolution the purpose of which is to arrest this deplor:
able trend of aggression on the part of Israel. I must
emphasize that this draft resolution has be :n negotiated
in a spirit of give-and-take and its doeJ reflect to a
very large extent the views which the members of the
Security Council expressed in the course of these consultations. As the draftresolution
is straightforward
I shall merely read it out. It reads as follows:

pretation

37.

ARBELAEZ
(Colombia) (interI had hoped that the conversations preceding the vote might have led to an
agreement that would have shown unanimity in the
Council, in spite of the fact that in my statement last
week [15#1st meeting] I announced that Colombia
would refrain from following the path of academic
resolutions which do not lead to peace and that it was
necessary that we find a new road. At that time I suggested some possible ways and I stated also that in
the past Colombia had always supported proposals to
condemn all acts of violence which might shatter the
hopes for peace. Here again Colombia censured the
action of Israel when it committed an act of violence
on the frontier.

“The Secstrity Council,
“Swing
considered the agenda contained in docu-

Mr. VALLEJO
from

Spanish):

38. At the same time we noted that that act by Israel
had been preceded by other acts of violence perpetrated by the Palestinian guerrillas and that at some
time it was necessary to condemn them too or to issue
a warning that these frontier operations must be ended
since they must inevi lably lead to violence and revenge,
which the Secuiity Council cannot accept.

ment SIAgendall537,
“Hclving rzoted the contents of the letter of the
Permanent Representative of Lebanon (S/9794) and of
the letter of the Permanent Representative of Israel
W9795),
“Havirzg herrrcl the statements of the representatives of Lebanon and of Israel,
“Gravely concerned about the deteriorating situation resulting from violations of resolutions of the
Security Council,
“Recalling
its resolutions 262 (1968) of 31
Decenrber 1968 and 270 (1969) of 26 August 1969,
“Corwincecl
that the Israeli military attack against
Lebanon was premeditated and of a large scale and
carefully planned in nature,
“Recalling its resolution 279 (1970) of 12May 1970
demanding the immediate withdrawal of all Israeli
armed forces from Lebanese territory;
“ 1. Deplores
the failure of Israel to abide by
‘esolutions 262 (1968) of 31 Decembe: 1968 and 270
:1969) of 26 August 1969;
“2. Go17ckrnns
Israel for its premeditated military
iction in violation of its obligations under the Charter;
“3. Declares that such armed attacks can no lon:er be tolerated and repeats its solemn warning to Israel
that if they were to be repeated the Security Council
would, in accordance with resolution 262 (1968) and
this resolution, consider taking adequate and effective
steps or measures in accordance with the relevant articles of the Charter to implement its resolutions;
“4. Deplores the loss of life and damage*to propxty inflicted as a result of violations of resolutions
of the Security Council.”

39. However, Colombia was ready to go along with
the rest of the fourteen members of the Security Council if they had come to an agreement, but since a unanimous agreement was not arrived at, my delegation finds
itself in the unfortunate position of having to abstain
and not voting together with the undoubted majority
that will support the draft resolution. It is not that
the draft resolution is in any way contrary to the views
of Colombia. Generally speaking, the resolution contains elements all of which Colombia might support
but perhaps there is a certain imbalance in the sanctions
contained in the draft resolution which Colombia might
be willing to accept also. Yet that is not the reason
that dictates the attitude of Colombia.
40. The argument that Colombia has adduced is that
with this type of document we shall not achieve peace.
Since the Security Council has not taken a new and
entirely different way-as in my statement I hinted
might be worthy of study but unfortunately did not
itself for Council consideration-my
commend
delegation will have to abstain from the vote on this
draft resolution. This is an explanation bf the vote
that we shall cast.
4 1, Mr. MALIK

35. We are hopeful and indeed confident that the
Security Council will act in unanimity-as
it did on
12 May 1970-by adopting the draft resolution I have
j iust read out. It is further the hope of my delegation
‘hat this draft resolution will be voted upon without
Clelay.

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
Russian):
The Soviet delegation
would like at today’s meeting of the Security Council
to make the following brief comments on the subject
under discussion. The first is a general statement Of
principle concerning the essential element of a peaceful
political settlement in the Middle East, in other words,
the elimination
of the consequences of the Israeli aggression against the Arab countries in June 1967.

16. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation j?onz French):
Fo meet the wishes expressed by very many members
f the Council, I intend to take a vote as soon as pos-

42. The second relates directly to the draft resolution
which has just been submitted in connexion with the
Council’s discussion of the new act of aggression committed by Israel against Lebanon.

(translated

5

flom

47. What does this mean? It means in fact that &cl
United States is opposed to the complete MlithdKl\viil
of Israeli troops from all occupied Arab territories and
is supporting Israel’s imperialist and predatory policy-.
the aim of which is to annex a considerable portitin
of the occupied Arab territories.
It means that the
United States has adopted a policy and practice, condemned by international law and by the United Nation<
Charter, of rewarding aggression by leaving the AC&
territories in the hands of the aggressor who bar
invaded and occupied them.

43. The lengthy and thorough discussion of this new
act of aggression has made it even clearer and more
obvious to everyone, and particularly to the Security
Council as a whole, that the fundamental and crucial
precondition for a peaceful political settlement in the
Middle East and for the establishment of a just and
lasting peace in the area, on the basis of Security Council
resolution 242 (1967), is the withdrawal of Israeli
troops from all occupied Arab territories to the positions they held prior to 5 June 1967. It has also become
even clearer and more obvious to everyone that it is
precisely the absence of agreement on this crucial and
fundamental aspect of the problem of working out a
settlement in the Middle East which is the main obstacle to progress towards an agreement in the meetings
between the four Powers which are permanent members of the Security Council, the purpose of which,
as everyone knows, is to promote by every means
the implementation
of Security Council resolution 242
(1967).

48. Ofcourse no peace-loving State which is sincereI>
seeking a just and lasting peace in the Middle Ea\t
can accept such a position or such an approach w
the implementation
of the Security Council resolution
242 (1967).
49. Consequently, the conclusion is inescapable thirt
the statement made by the United States represrntative, Ambassador Yost, in the Security Council concerning the alteration of boundaries holds out no pr~tmise ofprogress on the all-important question on which
a Middle East settlement hinges, namely, the withdrawal,of Israeli troops from all the territories occupied
by Israel to the positions they held prior to 5 June.

44. At the 1540th Security Council meeting on 14
May, the Soviet delegation was somewhat encouraged
by the statement of the United States representativ:,
Ambassador .Yost, in which, as we understood from
the interpretation, he seemed to ‘be speaking of agreement by the United States to the complete withdrawal
of Israeli troops from the occupied Arab territories.
However, our hopes proved illusory; they were quickly
dispelled when exposed to the facts. When we referred
to the text of this statement of Ambassador Yost’s,
as contained in the verbatim records of the Security
Council meeting of 14 May, it immediately became
clear once again that the United States representative
had merely confined himself to a repetition of his usual
stereotyped formula, i.e. “the United States supports
the principle of withdrawal of Israeli forces from territories occupied in June 1967” [1540th meting, pnrn.
321. He even made reference in that connexion to the
words of United States Secretary of State Rogers.
However, he took great care, as usual, to avoid any
reference to the need for the complete withdrawal-I
repeat, the complete withdrawal-of
Israeli troops
from all occupied Arab territories.

50. There can likewise be no doubt that this negnlivta
and unjust pro-Israeli position taken by the Unircd
States has been and is having, and will continue to
have until it is changed, a negative effect not on!>,
on the progress of discussion
concerning the questitin
of a political settlement in the Middle East, but alstj
on the development of the whole situation in the Middle
Eastern region.
51. As a result of the adoption by the United Statt”i
of this position with regard to the question of a Midllt~
East settlement, and of the considerable financiill ;rnJ
military assistance-to
say nothing of moral and diplomatic support-which
it has given the Israeli aggreisors, as referred to by the Ambassador of Morot<c*
again today in his brilliant statement in which he cited
specific facts, the situation in the Middle East is steaJily deteriorating and becoming an ever greater threar
to international peace. The responsibility For this situstion rests squarely with the United States and with
its prodgks, the Israeli aggressors.

45. Everyone can see that the distance between the
United States declaration of support for and its actual
implementation
of that principle, as revealed by the
facts, is enqrmous. On this question too there is a
great discrepancy, I might even say a total inconsistency, between the words and the deeds of the United
States.

52. Now a few words on the draft resoIution just submitted by the representative of Zambia in connexitln
with the Security Council’s consideration of Israel’s
new act of aggression against Lebanon. The Sovic~
delegation feels compelled to note the regrettabte fact
that any draft resolutions of the Security Council which
concerns Israel are born in convulsions and anguish.
This has become a regular occurrence in the annal%
of the Security Council since the Israeli aggression
against the Arab countries in June 1967.

46. As the Soviet delegation has already pointed out
in the Security Council[ibid. ,para. 1081,what happens
in practice-and
this is,something which is also shown
quite clearly in the statement by Ambassador Yost
to which I have referred-is that the United States,
while declaring token agreement with the principle of
the withdrawal of Israeli troops from the occupied territories, makes this agreement conditional upon such
demands as “alterations”
and “rectifications”
of the
borders between Israel and the Arab countries, which
in fact is tantamount to handing over to Israel a considerable portion of the Arab territories it has occupied.

53. The wicked fairies, whom the delegations of certain countries, primarily the United States and son?e
of its traditional followers, consistently and actively
endeavour to impersonate,
do their utmost in such
cases to ensure that the child, i.e. the draft resolution.
6

Abstuining:
Colombia, Nicaragua,
United States of America.

will not be born at all, or, if it is born, that it will
in any case be weak, sickly and helpless. It would
be no exaggeration to say-we are all well aware of
it-that during the consultations held among members
of the Security Council for the purpose of elaborating
a draft resolution on the item under discussion, proposals for the adoption of effective measures against the
aggressor were originally formulated and put forward
which took fully into account the needs qf the hour
and ofthe situation and the realities which had emerged
in the Middle East. It was a question of describing
Israel’s new aggressive attacks against Lebanon clearly
and unequivocally as a manifest and obvious threat
to international peace in the area and applying to Israel
appropriate and effective measures as provided for in
Chapter VII of the Charter. At the very least, Israel
was to be warned clearly and unequivocally that those
measures would be applied to it if it continued to pursue
its policy of escalating aggression against the Arab
States.

The d&t resolution
with 4 abstentions.5

Sierra Leone,

wns adopted by 11 votes to none,

58. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation fr’ovz French):
I now call on all those who wish to speak in explanation
of vote.
59. Mr. JAKOBSON
(Finland): The Security CounciI
has condemned the armed attack made by Israeli forces
against the territory of Lebanon, At the same time,
we are gravely concerned about all violations of Security Council resoIutions. We deplore the loss of life,
the destruction and the suffering on both sides of the
border between Lebanon and Israel, and the sense of
insecurity and tension prevailing throughout the entire
area.
60. Having said that, I wish to recall something you
said, Mr, President, in the statement you made as representative of France at our meeting last Friday. You
said: “this is no longer the time for pronouncing
anathemas” [l541st meeting, ~NI’N. 52). You also said,
and again I am quoting from your statement: “If the
distressing events in Lebanon could make it possible
for us”--the
four permanent members-“with
the
encouragement
and the support of the Council, to
advance more boldly upon the onIy possible route at
the present time, the route of peaceful settlement, then
it will be a case of an ill wind having blown somebody
good.” [Ibid. parcc. 51

54. We must, however, note Once again-and this
too is now clear to all of us--that certain extremely
important provisions, at least as originally formulated,
have now been removed from the draft resolution,
thanks to the efforts of the United States delegation
and other individual delegations which follow it and
which in this instance are playing the role of the wicked
fairies and the invidious role of the defenders and protectors of the Israeli aggressors, Of course the attempts
of the United States delegation and of those which
join with it in supporting the Israeli aggressors have
not been entirely successful, The child, in spite of all
the violence directed against it, was not stillborn, even
though you could hardly call it very healthy. It is
unquestionably weaker than the embryo was to begin
with, but in any case, the attempts to destroy completely the draft which is now before the Council for
consideration having failed, the text does provide for
condemning Israel for its new armed attacks against
Lebanon. It also provides that, in the event of a repetition of such acts of aggression by Israel, the Security
Council should adopt the effective measures envisaged
in the relevant articles of the United Nations Charter.

61. What you said, Mr. President, has in fact been
the dominant theme of the debate on this question in
the Council, Virtually everyone around this table has
expressed deep concern about the continued deterioration of the situation in the Middle East, about the
increased danger of military escalation in the area, and
about the futility of dealing in this Cauncil from time
to time with one act of violence or another, without
coming to grips with the essence of the problem.

55. It is therefore possible that the Council’s adoption
of even such a draft resolution as this will have a certain
salutary eCfect on both the aggressor and his protectors.
We shall wait and see how the latter vote on this draft
resolution.

62. To quote the representative of Colombia, “Our
role is not to regularize war but to seek peace” [ibid.,
pMY1. 191. But while the war in the Middle East is
reaching new levels of violence, the peace-making process is at a stand-still.

56. The Soviet delegation will base its position on
the draft resolution on the statement I have just made.

63. I was particularly struck by something said by
the representative of Zambia in the statement he made
on Thursday.

5’7. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation j?om French):
I will now put to the vote the draft resolution submitted
by the representative of Zambia.

“As things stand now,“-he
said-“we
run the
risk of making the same historical error made during
the time preceding the June 1967 war: the error of
leaving things to drift towards tension, confrontation
and conflict.” [1540th meeting, pnrn. 51

A vote wm taker? by show of hands.
Il?ffl~ozi~: Burundi, China, Finland, France, Nepal,
Poland, Spain, Syria, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Zambia.
Agninst:

The parallel is indeed ominous, but at the same
time it must be recognized that there is a fundamental
difference between the situation today and the one pre-

64.

None.

5 See

7

resolution

280

(1970).

ceding the June 1967 war. Three years ago, the Security
Council was hopelessly divided on the question of the
Middle East, and failed to agree even on an analysis
of the problem, not to speak of agreeing on how to
solve it.
6.5. Today the members of the Security Council,
including the four permanent members, which are
engaged in their consultations on this question, agree
that the situation in the Middle East is dangerous and
that an urgent effort for peace should be made. Even
more important, they unanimously support Security
Council resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967,
which, for the first time in twenty years, offers a comprehensive political settlement of tl-e questions at issue
between Israel and its Arab neighbours.
66. In the search for a peaceful political settlement
in the Middle East the four Powers obviously have
a special role by virtue of their great power and influence in the area. But, of course, the parties to the
conflict themselves must have primary resporisibility
for co-operating fully in any effort to turn away from
violence and set in motion the process of making peace.
The debate of the last few days in the Security Council
has demonstrated that the members of the Security
Council strongly hope that the four Powers, which for
more’ than a year have been engaged in their consultations, will intensify their efforts so as to facilitate and
expedite the implementation
of Security Council
resolution 242 (1967) and to enable the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Ambassador Jarring, to resume at an early date his activities designed
to promote agreement and assist in efforts to achieve
a peaceful and accepted settlement in accordance with
the provisions and principles of resolution 242 (1967).

69. I must also express our regret that we were not
able in this Council to say anything in agreement abollt
the future. We know that serious and sustained efforts
were made to turn from the past and to record support
and encouragement for continuing efforts to search for
an accepted settlement. It is a reproach to us all that
those efforts did not succeed.
70. I make no excuse for going back to what I said
earlier in our debate. We should keep uppermost in
our minds the aim of reaching agreement, We should
not impede or frustrate the discussions going forward
in the Four. We should seek to facilitate and accelerate
those discussions. The place to pursue those discussions is not here and now but in the meetings of the
Four and their deputies which are going ahead, and
not by offensive obstruction. We should encourage the
Four to proceed with all speed and with a greater sense
of conciliation and urgency, to report as soon as possible on their deliberations to the Secretary-General.
Then we can hope that Ambassador Jarking will soon
renew his consultations with both sides. Only by that
means can the hope of a peaceful settlement be kept
alive. Only by that means can the way be opened for
new initiatives “to promote agreement and assist
efforts to achieve a peaceful and accepted settlement”
[see resolution 242 (1967), pma. 31. When I speak of
new initiatives, certainly I do not exclude any new
idea or proposal of the kind which has been suggested
to US, for instance, by the Ambassador who spoke
to us just now. We must keep open minds about
methods and procedure.
71. It is natural that there should be a desire to condemn, to score, to wit5 victories in a vote. We have
often condemned violence in the past. We do so again
now. It has already been asserted in this debate that
there will be no value, no advance, no benefit merely
from repeating condemnations. We all know that condemnation is not enough.

67. Lord CARADON
(United Kingdom): We voted
for the resolution adopted today, having worked to
make it acceptable: its previous form was unacceptable
to us. We knew that we could not undo the violent
events that brought us here. We could not remove
the suspicion, the mistrust, the hate which those events
intensify. We knew that we could not by any immediate
resolution of ours here in this Council remove the
mounting dangers; but we were prepared to condemn
the escalating violence, as we have condemned all acts
of violence or retaliation in the past. It is in that context
that we condemned the premeditated military action
on Lebanese territdry. There is no escape, no settlement, no peace to be won by violence.

72. All of us want to see some positive action. In
what direction? In increase of tension and fierce feeling
and in accusation and counter-accusation, and in abuse
and negative repetition? Surely the action sh6uld be
in the direction that we have already authorized and
approved. I+ should be in urgent pursuit of the discussions based on the resolution which this Council passed
unanimously two and a half years ago. The reproach
is that we have tolerated such serious delays and we
have allowed ourselves to be diverted; we have been
more anxious to defend our own separate positions
than to work together.

68. At the same time we were not prepared to vote
for a resolution which took no account of the over-all
situation. We were not prepared to vote for a resolution
which was wholly one-sided. We had to take into
account violations of resolutions of the Security Council from whatever quarter. We could not disregard
death and destruction on either side. We look back
on the many occasions when we have had to deal with
resolutions of this kind in this Council, and we must
say again that violence solves nothing. Violence does
not prevent violence. Violence breeds violence.

73. Harsh things have been said in this debate,
wounding accusations, misrepresentations and utiustified allegations. I shall not seek to answer them flow.
It is of paramount importance that the agreement we
reached in November 1967 should not be jeopardized
and destroyed. The processes of consultation and
negotiation should proceed without hindrance, and Proceed with renewed determination and much greater
ugency. I have never said that progress will be easy.
I have never spoken in over-optimism or ComPIacencYj
8

but I have always advocated that agreement should
be relentlessly pursued.

“Declwes that such armed attacks can no longer
be tolerated, and repeats its solemn warning to Israel
that if such armed attacks were to be repeated, the
Security Council would, in accordance with resolution 262 (1968), and this resolution, take adequate
and effective measures as envisaged in Chapter VII
of the Charter to implement its resolutions.‘”

74. Surely it is our duty to take the course of conciliation. It is the only way of hope. If we fail to take
it now we shall have failed all those who look to US
to find a way to end the violence and to work for
a just settlement.

81. Paragraph 3 of the resolution just adopted which
embodies most of the paragraph I have just read out,
has omitted the reference to Chapter VII of the Charter.
I do not say this just to bring more acrimony into our
debate; far be it from me to do so. But, within the
meaning of the Charter, and the context of the resolutions that have been adopted by the Security Council
on Israeli attacks against Arab countries, including two
attacks on Lebanon, for all of which lsrael was condemned, let me remind the Council that between 31
December 1968 and 15 September 1969 five resolutions
were adopted by the Council, all of which contain a
paragraph such as paragraph 3 of resolution 262 (1968)
of 3 1 December I968 in which the Council

75. The choice is very clear today. The lead which
you, Sir, have constantly given us also provides ground
for believing
that an immediate
return to the
four-Power talks is the right course. We may not there
succeed; but we must most certainly try; and from
this Council in which ultimate responsibility must lie
I trust that we shall find not obstruction but encouragement. This Council demanded withdrawal of Israeli
troops from the Lebanon [resolution 279 (197011. That
action was right; it was opportune; it was unanimously
decided.
76. I believe and I am sure that the right course is
for us to follow-up what we did together in that first
resolution by making another urgent effort-an effort
in the wider field of con&liation and settlement. For
our part, we are impatient, restless to press ahead,
to make up for so much lost time, to overcome the
enemy of delay, to persist in spite of all discouragements and never to give up.

“Issues a solemn warning to Israel that if such
attacks were to be repeated, the Council would have
to consider further steps to give effect to the
decisions.”
A similar warning is to be found in resolution 265 (1969),
paragraph 3 OFwhich reads:

77. Mr. TOMEN
(Syria): May I first of all pay a
tribute to the representative of Zambia for the constructive roIe he played in bringing our deliberations to an
end today by the adoption of the resolution on which
we have just voted by an overwhelming majority of
the Council.

L’C~~~de~l~~~~the recent premeditated air attacks
launched
by Israel on Jordanian villages and
populated areas in flagrant violation of the United
Nations Charter and the cease-fire resolutions and
warns once again that if such attacks were to be
repeated, the Council would have to meet to consider
further more effectiv.: siep es envisaged in the Charter to ensure against repetition of such attacks.”

78.

My delegation wishes also to pay a tribute to the
two delegations of Zambia and Spain for the very constructive role they played on 12 May when they suggested the immediate withdrawal of all Israeli troops
from Lebanon in resolution 279 (1970) which was
adopted unanimously by the Security Council.

82. I shall not tax the patience of the Council by
reading all the corresponding paragraphs in the three
other resolutions condemning Israel in a similar context, but certainly the question should arise why the
resolution just voted upon has completely omitted the
reference to Chapter VII and the only adequate and
valid measures that should have been adopted to stop
the attacks of Israel and its continued aggression.

79. We voted in favour of the resolution that has just
been adopted. Nevertheless, I wish to make it clear
that this resolution does not represent the stand of
the Syrian delegation on the Israeli attack on Lebanon,
a stand which we made clear at the outset and especially
in my statement of 13 May [1539tla meeting].

83. The argument was advanced that if we adopted
such a paragraph, specifying the invocation of Chapter
VII, that might lead to weakening the authority of the
Council because we cannot implement such a paragraph. This argument, amounting to a justification for
weakening the resolution by not referring specifically
to Chapter VII, was and is a rationalization,
not a
legal or a realistic argument. We have been told, as
I said, that if action was demanded which could never
be implemented
it would lead to a weakening of the
authority of the Security Council. It is alleged, furthermore, that if such a clause were adopted, the Council
would never be able to implement its decision.

SO. We believe that this resolution falls far short of
what we had conceived it to be at the beginning. Indeed,
it is no secret now that we have negotiated various
drafts and we still maintain that we would have liked
the present resolution to contain paragraphs that had
been omitted during the consultations between the various delegations
of the Security Council, Specifically,
paragraph 3 of a draft resolution that my delegation
submitted, which read:

‘ ‘Detemines
that such premeditated
attacks constitute a grave threat to peace,”
and paragraph 5 thereof, which read:

armed
84. The fallacy of that argument is too obvious. It
condemns the Secul’ity Council to live for ever in a
9

,

vicious circle of incapacity which it can never break.
It paralyses its authority for ever. We had a most recent
precedent when the United States and the United Kingdom vetoed the resolution on Southern Rhodesia
because it called for action [!534tl? meeting]. Such an
argument will continue to be invoked whenever it does
not suit the interests of some particular Power. Practically, it constitutes a perpetuation of attacks of aggression such as those that have bee!1 carried out by
Israel. However, we consider paragraph 3 of the present
resolution as meaning that the next step will be taken
under Chapter VII. That is why we voted in favom
of the resolution.

States attack on Carnboclia. This analogy, as I showed
in my statement of 13 May, was made not by Arab
spokesmen but by American editorial writers. Ittdeed,
no less a person than His Holiness the Pope drew this
analogy, as reported in today’s New Yurk Times,where
it is stated:
“Pope Paul VI, in an address to a consistory of
cardinals and bishops, made a ‘pressing appedl
today for a negotiated settlement of the conflicts
in Indo-China and the Middle East.”
89. So right from the beginning His Holiness also
draws the analogy. Therefore my delegation undcrstands the condemnation of Israel today as being a
double condemnation both of the policy of Israel and
its premeditated military action against Lebanon and
of the premeditated military action of the United States
against Cambodia. Of course the analogy is not complete because China and North Viet-Nam are not Members of the United Nations or the Security Council,
but that does not detract from the validity of the analogy
that the condemnation applies in both cases.

85. I come now to what has bezn referred to in the
Fourth paragraph of the preamble and in operative
paragraph4 as “violations of resolutions of the Security
Council”. Much has been said, much is being said,
and much will be said about violations, but let me
say, at the outset, that violations, like any act, do not
take place in a vacuum. It is a law of physical nature,
as well as human nature, that every action is followed
by a reaction. Indeed, this principle was excellently
expressed in the intervention of the representative of
Spain on 15 May 1970, when he said:

90. Mr. YOST (United States of America): The basic
approach of my Government to the latest tragic events
in the Middle East was stated in some detail during
my intervention last Thursday[/%&h
meeting]. In that
statement, I made it abundantly clear that the United
States fully supports Lebanon’s political independence
and territorial integrity. I also stressed that we could
not condone any threat to Lebanon’s independence
and territorial integrity from any source.

“Consistent with this view, my delegation wishes
to stress some aspects of the matter: the delegation
of Israel alleges that it suffers constant aggression
from the Palestinian guerrillas; it very often refers
to bombings, shellings, armed attacks and aggression
of all kinds. My delegation laments the fact that there
are constant violations of the cease-fire resolution,
with the inevitable
victims. Yesterday [Z540th
fnecting] the representative of Syria recalled how,
after having approved resolutions 233 (1967) and 234
(1967), the Israeli army proceeded to nccupy the
Golan Heights.” [1541st meeting, purer. 24.1

91. We particularly regretted the large-scale Israeli
attack of 12 May and the accompanying loss of life
and destruction of property.‘We have never hesitated
to condemn such massive and disproportionate attacks.
This was a heavy blow at a time when Lebanon’s
leaders are struggling to cope with severe and unique
problems under trying circumstances of which all of
us are aware. We wese happy to support resolution
279 (1970) and we were happy when Israel withdrew
its forces completely from Lebanese territory.

86. The Golan Heights are still occupied, as well as
all the other occupied Arab territories in Jordan, the
United Arab Republic and Syria. So the very first act
of violatisn is the one to be emphasized, and that is
the negation of the principIe of the Charter, the nonacquisition of territory by force, and not permitting
the attacker or the aggressor to benefit from the fruit
of aggression.

92. At the same time we cannot overlook the serious
provocations from Lebanese territory which preceded
Israel’s attack. Israel as well as Lebanon has a right
to political independence and territorial integrity. The
Charter’s provisions are equally applicable to all
Members. In our judgement the present resolution, in
spite of some improvement over previous versions,
is still unbalanced. It does not, in our judgement, take
sufficient account of the repeated violations of the
cease-fire originating from within Lebanon and of the
numerous casualties, including civilian casualties,
resulting from these violations. Though we should not
wish our abstention to be construed as equating the
provocation with the Israeli response, we do not
believe that the adoption of a one-sided resolution bY
the Council at this stage will assist in efforts to facilitate
a lasting settlement in accordance with resolution 242
(1967). It is only through the achievement of a peaceful
political settlement that the cycle of provocation and
response, which constantly aggravates the conflict, can
be broken.

87. Let me once more remind’the Council that Israel
has not abided by the Security Council resolutions on
Jerusalem and on accepting a representative of the
Secretary-General
to investigate the situation of the
population in the occupied areas, or its resolutions on
Lebanon. It should also be remembered that the
humanitarian
resolutions as well as the resolutions on
Jerusalem were adopted by the General Assembly.
These are acts of violation.
88. I come now to the third and last point in my
explanation
of vote. Today, in paragraph 2 of the
resolution just adopted, IsraeI is condemned for “its
premeditated military action in violation of its obligations under the Charter”. It will be recalled here that
when the debate opened the analogy was drawn
between the Israeli thrusts into Lebanon and the United
10

93. I should like to reiterate once more our strong
belief that all States in the area should make clear
by actions as well as words their desire for the achievement of a just and lasting peace on the basis of Security
Council resolution 242 (1967). My own Government:
is fully committed to this objective, and it is our intention to look beyond this unhappy chapter in the history
of the Middle East, to redouble our efforts to facilitate
the implementation
of that resolution in a11 its parts
and without reservation. We hope we may have the
co-operation of the Soviet Union in doing so.

99. It is for these reasons and considerations that’
my delegation abstained from casting its vote on this
occasion.
100. Mr. KUgAGA
(Poland): For several days we
have been discussing the recent Israeli armed attack
against Lebanon. ConcIusive evidence has been given
to the effect that what we are dealing with is a clear
case of aggression committed
by Israel. Having
adopted an interim resolution the aim of which was
to compel the aggressor immediately to withdraw its
troops from the territory of Lebanon, the Security
Council had to follow it with appropriate judgement
of that aggressive act and with a decision strong enough
to prevent its repetition.

94. As I said a few days ago, however, I am not
encouraged by the performance of the Soviet representative during this series of Council meetings. He has
not in a single one of his statements to us given the
slightest sign of a desire to contribute to a peaceful
settlement in the only way by which such a settlement
is conceivable, that is, by calm and quiet statesmanship,
by conciliation,
by accommodation. On the contrary,
he has seized every opportunity to envenom the
atmosphere, to make propaganda and indeed to persuade us that a total lack of objectivity and impartiality
characterizes the Soviet posit’ion.

101. The latest Israeli attack on Lebanon certainly
constitutes, as we have pointed out in our intervention,
a serious escalation in that country’s aggressive
policies. As such it calls for condemnation, for Israel
cannot be given a premium for the swiftness of its
attack or for the contempt it demonstrates with regard
to the Council’s deliberations and allegedly futile
action.

95. Peace never has been and never will be achieved
by such means. The representative of Finland has just
noted that efforts towards peace are at a standstill.
I can only express the hope that, after due reflection
and in a quieter and less public atmosphere, the Soviet
Union may decide to resume a serious, joint effort
with many others to work towards peace and to exert
its influence, as the United States intends to do, for
a full implementation
of all parts-not just a single
part-of
resolution 242 (1967).

102. The Council has already twice condemned Israel
fi*esolutions 262 (1968) nd 270 (1969)] for its premeditated military attacks on Lebanon in violation of
its obligations under the Charter and the Security Council resolutions, Twice also a solemn warning has been
addressed by the Council to Israel Lib&) that actions
of military reprisal in grave violation of the cease-fire
could not be tolerated and that, should Israel repeat
them, the Council would have to consider more effective steps envisaged in the Charter in order to enforce
its decision and to prevent such acts in future.

96. Mr. SAVAGE (Sierra Leone): My delegation has
great sympathy and respect for the delegation of
Lebanon. The brave and peace-loving inhabitants of
that country have demonstrated beyond any shadow
of doubt whatever their willingness as well as readiness
to live in peace in the Middle East.

103. It is now clear to us all that Israel chose to ignore
th3se resolutions and to disregard the warnings which
they contained. It is self-imposing that we should not
tolerate that defiance and that tbe Council should take
appropriate measures that would make the aggress01
feel the impact of international condemnation and of
international
will to curb its aggressive activities. Any
manifestation
of a lenient attitude on the part of the
Council in respect of such attacks, whatever excuses
might be offered, any endeavour to refrain from action
against those attacks under the pretext of preserving
a so-called balanced approach towards both parties-that
is, the aggressor and the victim of aggression-would
not, in our opinion, bring closer apeaceful
solution of the Middle East problem but, on the contrary, would only serve to aggravate the already dangerous situation in the area by encouraging the
aggressor.

97. My delegation has already expressed its position
on the matter under consideration in its unstinted support of resolution 279 (1970), adopted unanimously by
the Council last week[l537tlz rnreti/zgJ The resolution
just adopted does not appear to us to have advanced
the cause of peace in any way. Its stipulations, in the
view of my delegation, have already gained expression
in resolutions 262 (1968) and 270 (1969).
98. In addition, my delegation holds the view that
a jus t and lasting peace in the Middle East cannot and
will not be achieved by means of piecemeal measures,
especially if those measures fall short of the desired
objectives. In other words, it is inconceivable to expect
peace in the region unless the fundamental issues are
settIed once and for all. With this in mind my delegation
would earnestly urge those responsible for the maintenance of peace in the Middle East, particularly the
four big Powers which have been engaged in talks,
to consult more actively towards the attainment of this
all-important
goal. In this connexion also, we should
like to see the Jarring mission reactivated.

104. In the opinion of my delegation, the salient elements of the present debate of the Security Council
have been the condemnation of Israeli armed attacks
and the reaffirmation of the determination
to insure
against the repetition of such attacks. We have also
seen a manifestation
of both concern about the
deteriorating situation and an overwhelming desire to
provide the necessary conditions for speedy and decisive progress on the road to the political solution of
11

that problem as envisaged in Security Council resolu, tion 242 (1967)-in particular, the crucial point con, cerning the inadmissibility ofthe acquisition of territory
by force and the withdrawal of all Israeli troops from
occupred Arab territories.

lages are being shelled and innocent Israeli civilians
are murdered in a premeditated and publicly proclaimed war of attrition. The Security Council resolution focuses its attention on the Israeli action, carried
out with the utmost care to avoid civilian casualties,

105. We voted in favour of the resolution that has
just been adopted. We know that in the process of
its elaboration forces and interests have been at work
-the same interests which are’ rendering impossible
the solution of the question of the Middle East, which
are arming the aggressor, which are hampering the
action of the Security Council. These must have been
reflected in the contents of the resolution which we
have adopted. However we have, I would repeat, voted
in favour of this resolution. We wish to associate ourselves with the condemnation,of Israel’s act contained
in paragraph 2 of the resolution, as well as with the
solemn warning that if such armed attacks were to
be repeated, the Security Council would take adequate
and effective measures as envisaged in the relevant
provisions of the Charter. To us, this means all the
measures provided for in the Charter, including those
under Chapter VII,

110. In the Middle East the Arab States openly wage
war against Israel. The resolutiop adopted here seems
to counsel Isra.el not td defend itself, not to protect
its territory and its citizens. Of such texts the prophet
said, “They have eyes and see not, they have ears
and hear not”.
1 Il. I should like to express our appreciation to those
delegations that have refused to associate themselves
with the resolution. By the double standard applied
to Israel and its failure to address itself explicitIy to
the obvious causes of the deterioration in the situation,
the resolution adopted appears regrettably to be
another nail in the coffin of the Security Council’s ability to deal with the Middle East situation equitably.
realistically and constructively.
112. The situation reflected in today’s experience is
not new in the history of my people. We still remember
that our fathers struggling for equality were sometimes
charged with being offensive. We remember how in
certain parts of the world Jews were not allowed to
defend themselves, how they were punished for striking down attackers. We have not forgotten how pogromists were hailed by some for murdering Jewish
women and children. As in the past, we have no intention of allowing injustice and abuse to affect us, We
are determined to remain firm in our struggle, to ensure
for Israel the rights enjoyed by all other nations.

106. The PRESIDENT
(interp,.etatiun~om
French):
We have concluded the explanations of vote. I now
call on the representative of Israel.
107. Mr. TEKOAH
(Israel): The Security Council
has terminated its deliberations
on the Israeli and
Lebanese complaints regarding the continued deterioration of the situation. To you, Mr. President, and
to members of the Security Council, I should like to
express our highest esteem. I cannot stress sufficiently
our profound appreciation of the personal friendship
which binds us to the representatives at this table,
including those whom events in recent years have
separated from us, Nor need I say how much importance we attach to the understanding and close cooperation which mark relations between Israel and
States members of the Council. It is in this spirit, and
yet in sober candour, that I should like to assess the
conclusions of our debate.

113. We shall tirelessly continue to search for peace
with our neighbours. We shall seek to maintain scrupulously the cease-fire established between Israel and
the Arab States. We shall always defend ourselves
against armed attack and protect our people from aggression until our neighbours realize that peace is belter
than war.
114. ‘Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (tmmlatedfiom
Rnssirw): For many years now,
going back to the unlamented days of the cold war,
United States representatives have had the habit of
trying to compensate for their own lack of arguments
by making slanderous attacks on the Soviet Union and
its position. It is unfortunate that in the present instance
too the United States representative, Ambassador
Yost, has resorted to this method. Many times over
the years I have had occasion in such cases to tell
the United States representatives that they should
thank God that the Soviet Union exists and that they
thus have something to slander. But I would advise
them to desist from this abominable practice of shifting
the blame on to someone else.

108. We have, of course, taken note of the statements
by representatives who voiced anxiety at the armed
attacks directed against Israel from Lebanon. We also
note that the resolution just adopted expresses the
Council’s grave concern about violations of Security
Council resolutions and deplores the loss of life resulting from such violations. However, the adoption of
this one-sided Syrian-inspired text is clearly another
of the seasonal ceremonies from which Israel, the
merits of its case and its fundamental rights are in
fact barred.
109. The Council seems always to go through the
same motions. The debate revo!ved around Israel’s
action against bases of aggression on Lebanese territory and the armed attacks against Israel which had
made that action inevitable. The resolution confines
its interest to the Israeli defensive action and fails to
mention on an equal basis the acts of aggression perpetrated against Israel. In the area Israeli towns and vil-

115. The point I made is quite simple: the crucial,
fundamental and essential factor in a Middle East settlement is the complete withdrawal oi: all IsraeIi troops
from all territories they have occupied in that area
to the positions they held prior to 5 June 1967. ‘#hat
12

is unjust about that, of what is Ambassador Yost accusing the Soviet Union? We are insisting that justice
should be done and we say frankly and openly before
the Security Council, the United Nations and the whole
world that this is the position which is just, clear and
honourable. Aggression should not be rewarded. I
recall that a former President of the United States,
Mr. Eisenhower, made such a statement: aggression
should never be rewarded. Evidently, the United States
position has now changed and the discussion of this
item in the Council has shown us all quite clearly that
Ambassador Yost has actively attempted to shield the
aggressor and reward him for his aggression. We can
under no circumstances agree to that. Ambassador
Yost is waiting in vain for support for his position.

120. Mr. GHORRA (Lebanon): Mr. President, allow
me first of all to express to you the Lebanese delegation’s warm thanks for the way in which you have
conducted the deliberations of this Council in examining the Lebanese complaint in regard to the miIitary
attack by Israel upon Lebanon. My delegation has been
greatly moved, particularly by the new, vivid and vibrant expression that you have given to the traditional
friendship existing between France and Lebanon.
121. At the same time I wish to express my delegation’s thanks to all delegations that have supported
our case, that have condemned the aggression, that
have felt with our victims, that have co-operated with
us in deliberations and negotiations in order to come
out with a resolution inspired by the spirit of justice
and equity prevailing among the majority of the Security Council and not inspired by any particular delegation around this table. My thanks go to the representative ofzambia who submitted the draft of the resolution
which has just been adopted. To him, to his delegation
and to his country, Lebanon will always be grateful.
To the representative of Spain, a country with which
we have had warm traditional links of friendship goes
our gratitude also for promptly acting in introducing
on 12 May a draft resolution[see resolution 279 (197O)J
which called upon Israel to withdraw immediately all
its armed forces from Lebanon.

116. I might in this connexion quote the following
words from a recent statement by the President of the
United Arab Republic, Mr. Nasser, published inZ+nvda of 3 May 1970:
“We will never surrender and will never cede a
singIe inch of our land. We do not want destruction.
Our aim is to liberate our lands. All we are striving
for is genuine peace, based on justice.”
117. If the United States also desires the peace about
which Ambassador Yost has spoken at such great
length here, it can ensure that Israel withdraws its
troops from all occupied Arab territories. This is a
very clear and fair statement of the question.

122. I thank all the delegations that have supported
the resolution today. I understand that some delegations had reservations regarding the resolution and for
that reason they were not in a position to vote for
it.

118. With regard to the Soviet Union and the position
on the question of a Middle East settlement, I said
in a statement made on behalf of the Soviet Government here in the Security Council on 13 May:

123. The representative of Sierra Leone reminded us
the other day 11539th meeting] of an important fact,
that in Sierra Leone there exists an important Sierra
Leonese community hailing from Lebanon, loyal to
Sierra Leone and working with its brethren for the
devel prnent of that beautiful country. We were very
grate ,ul for the kind words that the repreientative
of
Sierra Leone addressed to my delegation today. In
other countries, such as Nicaragua, Colomt$a and the
United States, we have also very important Lebanese
communities.
I wish I had with me today the dozens
of telegrams that I have received from Colombia and
from tlifferent parts of the United States showing the
concern and anxiety of those communities about the
aggression committed
by Israel against southern
Lebanon, especially as tens of thousands of those
people hail from that particular region which was subjected to the murderous gunning of the Israeli Armyfrom Marjayoun, from Hasbaya, from Shaba and from
other places. Those people have always formed a very
important link in the friendship between Lebanon and
those countries. I only have to mention that in the
United States alone there are nearly one million good
loyal Americans hailing from Lebanon, always anxious
and concerned about the territorial
integrity, the
sovereignty and the peace of Lebanon.’

“The Soviet Union is firmly in favour of a lasting
peace being established in the Middle East, so that
the nationa strife, hostility and war inflamed by
imperialism may be a thing of the past. . .

f

“There is only one road to a peaceful settlement
in the Middle East: the withdrawal of the aggressor’s
troops from all the territories occupied by it.”
11539th meeting, paras. 54 and 55.1

That is the Soviet Union’s position, No one in the
world, not even Ambassador Yost, will succeed in slandering the Soviet Union for this clear, frank and just
position. Our country firmly supports and consistently
advocates a peaceful settlement in the Middle East.
The corner-stone of such a settlement is compliance
with the just demand for the withdrawal of Israeli
troops from all Arab territories seized by Israel during
the aggression of June 1967. The sooner the United
States delegation and Administration
and their Israeli
friends understand this, the better, and the sooner will
it be possible to reach agreement in the four-Power
talks in an atmosphere of calm, on a settlement of
this and all the other questions involved in a peaceful
settlement in the Middle East.
119. The PRESIDENT
(inteupretationfr’om
I call on the representative of Lebanon.

124. Naturally we would have liked to have a stronger
resolution and a resolution adopted unanimously by
the members of the Council. Warnings have been given

French):

13

I

to Israel in the past, but those warnings have not been
heeded. It seems that we shy away not only from the
invoking of Chapter VII of the Charter but also from
the mere mention of some of the wording of Chapter
VII of the Charter as if it were taboo. This attitude
could be used by an already known aggressor or a
would-be aggressor as a sanctuary for his actions. We
hear every now and then that policemen shy away
from scenes of crime to avoid involvement and danger.
Is that the trend of our days in international and municipal affairs? We of the United Nations cannot afford
to go on marking time, simply adopting resolutions
and walking away glad that the debate is over and
that the contents of a new paper or resolution have
been added to the jurisprudence of United Nations
international law. We certainly cannot find satisfaction
in Horace’s saying, “The years as they pass plunder
us of one thing after another”.
125. We agree with Lord Caradon that nothing should
be said or done to impede the progress for peace in
the Middle East. The peace in the Middle East is not
disturbed by the Arab people. It is disturbed by the
occupier of Arab territories, who has been there fol
nearly three years now. May I remind the Council that
the attack against Lebanon was mounted mainly from
the Golan Heights in Syria, which are under the Military occupation of Israel. It is inadmissible both to
occupy territories and at the same time to use those
territories as a springboard for an attack against
neighbouring countries.
126. Allow me, finally, to recall what Horace said,
and there is no doubt that this applies to Israel: “If

you do not know how to live aright, make way for
those who do. You have played enough, have eaten
enough and drunk enough; it is time for you to leave
the scene.” It is time for Israel to leave the scene
of occupation and live in peace.
127. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfionz French):
The debate is now concluded. It remains for me, as
President of the Security Council, to thank all members
of the Council for the effort of conciliation they have
made in order that the will of the Council might be
expressed in a clear resolution which, while it did noI
obtain the desired unanimity, has nevertheless received
wide support.
128. But beyond aresolution and the votes, the Council has clearly expressed its will that its resolutions
should be respected by all and not only respected bul
implemented-particularly
resolution
242 (1967),
which still remains the basis for a peaceful settlement.
129. Another eiement has become manifest, namely,
that many members of the Council have stressed the
fact that all possible efforts should be made to ensure
implementation
of the resolution and that in particular
the consultations taking place among the four permanent members be pursued and speeded up in order
to facilitate such a settlement. In other words, everyone
is aware of the fact that for the Security Council. and
for the United Nations, there can be only one victory:
that of peace, a just and lasting peace.
The meeting rose ut 7.25 p.m.
