A /68/PV.69

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-eighth session

69th plenary meeting

Wednesday, 18 December 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ashe  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Antigua and Barbuda)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Sinhaseni
(Thailand), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 115 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other elections
(b) Election of two members of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission
The Acting President: Members will recall that,
in accordance with paragraphs 4 (a) to (e) of resolution
60/180, of 20 December 2005, the Organizational
Committee shall comprise the following: seven
members of the Security Council, including the five
permanent members; seven members of the Economic
and Social Council, elected from regional groups;
five top providers of assessed contributions to United
Nations budgets and of voluntary contributions to
United Nations funds, programmes and agencies,
including a standing peacebuilding fund; five top
providers of military personnel and civilian police
to United Nations missions; and seven additional
members elected by the General Assembly, giving due
consideration to representation from all regional groups
in the overall composition of the Committee.
Members will also recall that, at the 83rd plenary
meeting of its sixty-sixth session, the Assembly
elected Croatia and El Salvador as members of the
Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission for a two-year term of office beginning

on 1 January 2012, and, at the 62nd and 65th plenary
meetings of its sixty-seventh session, the Assembly
elected Brazil, Kenya, Malaysia, Peru and South Africa
as members of the Organizational Committee of the
Peacebuilding Commission for a two-year term of
office beginning on 1 January 2013.
The General Assembly will now proceed to
the election of two members of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission.
By resolution 60/261, of 8 May 2006, the Assembly
decided that the members of the Organizational
Committee shall serve for renewable terms of two years,
as applicable. Accordingly, Croatia and El Salvador are
eligible for immediate re-election.
Regarding candidatures for the two seats, I
should like to inform members that for the Eastern
European States, the Group has endorsed Bosnia and
Herzegovina; for the Latin American and Caribbean
States, the Group has endorsed Guatemala.
Members will recall that, in resolution 60/261, the
General Assembly decided that the rules of procedure
and established practice of the Assembly for the
election of members of its subsidiary bodies shall
apply to its election of members of the Committee.
For this election, rules 92 and 94 shall be applicable.
Accordingly, the election shall be held by secret ballot
and there shall be no nominations.
However, I should also like to recall paragraph 16
of decision 34/401, whereby the practice of dispensing
with the secret ballot for elections to subsidiary organs

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U‑506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

13-62479 (E)

*1362479*

A/68/PV.69

when the number of candidates corresponds to the
number of seats to be filled should become standard,
unless a delegation specifically requests a vote on a
given election.
In the absence of such a request, may I take it that
the Assembly decides to proceed to the election on that
basis?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Since the number of
candidates endorsed by the Group of Eastern European
States and the Group of Latin American and Caribbean
States corresponds to the number of seats to be filled,
may I take it that the General Assembly decides to elect
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Guatemala as members
of the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission for a two-year term of office, beginning
on 1 January 2014?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: I congratulate Bosnia
and Herzegovina and Guatemala for their election
as members of the Organizational Committee of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (b)
of agenda item 115?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 15
Culture of peace
Report of the Secretary-General (A/68/286)
Note by the Secretary-General (A/68/216)
Draft resolutions A/68/L.28, A/68/L.30 and
A/68/L.31
The Acting President: In connection with this
item, the General Assembly has before it the report
of the Secretary-General entitled “Promotion of
interreligious and intercultural dialogue, understanding
and cooperation for peace” (A/68/286) and a note by
the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the
Director General of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization (A/68/216). The
Assembly also has before it three draft resolutions issued
as documents A/68/L.28, A/68/L.30 and A/68/L.31.

2/26

18/12/2013

I would furthermore like to draw the attention
of members to a letter dated 22 August 2013 from
the Secretary-General addressed to the President of
the General Assembly, transmitting the sixth annual
report of the High Representative for the Alliance of
Civilizations (A/68/361).
I now give the floor to the representative of
Bangladesh to introduce draft resolution A/68/L.28.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): On behalf of its
sponsors, I have the honour to introduce draft resolution
A/68/L.28, entitled “Follow-up to the Declaration
and Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace”.
Bangladesh has taken pride in submitting this draft
resolution to the Assembly since 2001. Since that time,
the draft resolution has received the overwhelming
support of Member States and has been adopted each
year by consensus.
Despite many efforts and many pro-people and
pro-planet resolutions aimed at improving sustainable
peace and stability across nations, it is unfortunate
that incidents of violence, conflict, killing, prejudice
and human suffering have yet to become history and
that peace remains elusive. A culture of peace is
therefore urgently needed. We need to create a mindset
of tolerance and of respect — respect for the law and
for others and respect for diversity, irrespective of
caste, creed, color, race or religion. We believe that all
violence, misunderstanding, war and terror emanate
from a mindset of intolerance, ignorance, hatred and
disrespect for others.
The world faces too many problems due to
divisiveness and narrow-mindedness, which disrupt
and derail our shared objectives of sustainable peace,
stability and progress. For the world order to move
away from its present chaotic, uncertain and violent
condition, building a culture of peace will provide
the solution. Promoting and inculcating a mindset
of the culture of peace forms the core of the creative
management of differences and divisions.
Although we have witnessed the completion of
the International Decade for a Culture of Peace and
Non-Violence for the Children of the World, 2001-2010,
we must maintain and strengthen the draft resolution
now, even more than in years past.
Impressive frameworks are to be found in documents,
but translating them into action remains a daunting
task. Inequality, discrimination, misunderstanding and

13-62479

18/12/2013

intolerance around the globe are generating new levels
of conflict. We need a culture that upholds human
dignity and promotes understanding and respect among
nations. In times of tension and fear, we need calm and
reason. I have no doubt that such can be achieved by
inculcating and promoting a culture of peace.
Against that backdrop, my delegation has submitted
this annual draft resolution. We thank delegations for
their proactive participation in the negotiation process.
We also thank them for their valuable inputs and
cooperation. This year, the draft resolution contains
a basic technical update to the draft resolutions of
previous years. Apart from technical updates, the draft
resolution incorporates a few additional elements. They
are as follows.
First, the draft resolution welcomes the successful
holding of the High-level Forum on the Culture of Peace,
convened by the President of the General Assembly at
its sixty-seventh session, as envisaged by resolution
67/106, and refers in particular to the high-level and
wide-ranging participation.
Secondly, the draft resolution notes the mention by
the Secretary-General in this year’s report (A/68/286)
that peace should be given due consideration in the
post-2015 development agenda.
Thirdly, the draft resolution requests the SecretaryGeneral to report to the General Assembly on actions
of all the relevant entities of the United Nations to
implement the Programme of Action on a Culture of
Peace, as requested, at its sixty-ninth session.
The High-level Forum on the Culture of Peace,
organized by the President of the General Assembly
and convened on 6 September, provided the Assembly
a unique opportunity to bring together all stakeholders
and to reinvigorate our common endeavour. The
enthusiasm exhibited during the Forum inspired us to
accommodate a provision on the convening of such a
high-level forum in September 2014. We are extremely
pleased that the Member States agreed to retain that
provision in the text. The holding of such events every
year will not necessarily require any additional cost in
terms of the United Nations budget. But it will convey
a strong message to the world, and especially to the
younger generation, that the United Nations is truly
committed to nurturing a culture of peace.
Every year, the draft resolution receives the support
of a large number of States. I am pleased to mention
that this year, more than 100 countries are sponsoring

A/68/PV.69

the draft resolution. That reflects the fact that a culture
of peace is very dear to all of us. It is an aspiration of
all humankind. It is the essence of the Charter of the
United Nations.
I thank and commend all of the sponsors for their
support and commitment. It is my belief and hope that
one day, not only every delegation will come forward to
sponsor the draft resolution, but that, more important,
every nation, every society, every family and every
household will practice the spirit and mindset of a
culture of peace, aiming at our cherished goal of
sustainable peace, stability and prosperity across
nations.
With that aspiration, I hope that, as in past years,
we will be able to adopt draft resolution A/68/L.28 by
consensus.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran to
introduce draft resolution A/68/L.31.
Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): On behalf
of its sponsors, I have the honour to introduce, under
agenda item 15, draft resolution A/68/L.31, entitled “A
world against violence and violent extremism”. Since
the publication of the draft resolution, 13 new sponsors
have joined the initial 12 sponsors of the draft resolution.
They are Afghanistan, Belarus, Bolivia, China, India,
Iraq, Japan, Nicaragua, the Philippines, the Russian
Federation, Switzerland, Turkey and Thailand.
Let me first express my sincere gratitude to all the
sponsors of the draft resolution and all other delegations
for their constructive participation and support during
the open and transparent consultations that my
delegation conducted. Their proposals, suggestions and
interventions made the draft resolution more robust
and helped to accommodate the views of different
Member States. The cross-regional sponsorship also
underscores the universal recognition of the need to act
on the pressing global challenges of violence and violent
extremism. In that spirit, the sponsors respectfully call
on all Member States to support the draft resolution
today.
Growing violent extremism, in particular sectarian
violence, which plagues many parts of the world,
constitutes the core issue that the draft resolution deals
with. It draws on the ideas presented by His Excellency
Mr. Hassan Rouhani, President of the Islamic Republic
of Iran, during his electoral campaign, and the need to
promote prudent moderation and reject extremism and

13-624793/26

A/68/PV.69

violence. That overarching theme was further developed
in the statement that he delivered during the general
debate of the General Assembly (see A/68/PV.6). He
devoted the best part of his statement to the imperative
of fighting violence and extremism. In his statement,
he talked of fears and hopes — the “fear of the
institutionalization of violence and extremism” — and
the hope of a preference for dialogue over conflict
and moderation over extremism. President Rouhani
expressed alarm over “the catastrophic impact of
violent and extremist narratives” and reiterated that it
should not — in fact, must not — be underestimated.
He also expressed regret over the fact that violence and
extremism nowadays had gone beyond the physical
realm and had unfortunately afflicted, entrenched and
tarnished the mental and spiritual dimension of life in
human societies. While stressing the need to promote
and reinforce tolerance, he proposed to the United
Nations to consider the idea of a world against violence
and violent extremism.
The draft resolution was crafted on the basis of
the foregoing, as well as in the light of the dismaying
developments in part of the world and the great
importance that we attach to the fight against the
violence, extremism and sectarian violence that threaten
to plague our region and other parts of the world. Given
those developments, it is imperative today, more than
ever before, that the international community agree on
effective measures to combat violent extremism.
The time has now come for the General Assembly,
as the sole universal body encompassing representatives
of nearly every nation on Earth, to act to address violent
extremism and the wide-ranging problems that it creates
and to take the first step in laying the foundation for
promoting an institutionalized fight against sectarian
violence and violent extremism. We hope that the draft
resolution provides a solid basis for such a process. Our
action in the General Assembly could be part of, and
contribute to, other endeavours at the domestic and
regional levels in addressing multifront confrontations
and redressing the conditions and situations in which
only violent nihilism could thrive.
The draft resolution means to serve as a call to
break the endless repetition of the past, uphold the
concept of citizenship over sectarian allegiances, place
the next generation’s prosperity above the settling of
past scores and look to the future with hope and prudent
moderation as the master key. By adopting the draft
resolution, all Member States would also concur that,

4/26

18/12/2013

in dealing with the threat of violence and extremism,
we all need to cooperate, and there is no room for a
zero-sum game in any field.
The draft resolution is new in the sense that the
General Assembly has not dealt with violent extremism
in the past. It expresses alarm over the rise in violent
extremism, condemns all those behind that scourge
and their acts, such as targeting the civilian population,
attacking religious and cultural sites and disrupting the
development process in societies. The draft resolution
reaffirms the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, including the obligations of all
States to refrain from the threat or use of force and to
settle their international disputes by peaceful means, as
armed conflicts could create the conditions conducive
to the spread of violent extremism. It also emphasizes
the importance of tolerance and respect for human
rights as an antidote to violent extremism.
The draft resolution invites all Member States,
the United Nations system and other international and
non-governmental organizations to initiate policies
aimed at checking the spread of violent extremism and
sectarian violence.
Concrete remedies are an important element of the
present draft resolution, including those it recommends
in the fields of education and community engagement,
as is the appeal it makes to all actors to take up and
implement those remedies.
The Secretary-General is also requested to keep the
General Assembly informed at its seventieth session on
the implementation of the present draft resolution and
to recommend ways and means by which the United
Nations system and the Secretariat could assist Member
States in generating public awareness about the dangers
of intolerance, as well as fostering understanding and
non-violence.
Finally, allow me to express my sincere hope that
the draft resolution will gain the broadest possible
support and be adopted by consensus. That will help
accelerate coordination and cooperation among States
towards addressing the growing problems emanating
from violent extremism.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan to introduce draft resolution
A/68/L.30.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): It is my great
honour to join the representative of the Republic of the

13-62479

18/12/2013

Philippines as a sponsor in introducing the text of the
draft resolution entitled “Promotion of interreligious
and intercultural dialogue, understanding and
cooperation for peace” (A/68/L.30).
The representative of the Republic of the Philippines
will expound on the significance and relevance of
this important initiative that our two countries have
jointly led over the past few years. We believe that this
initiative, which has gradually gained the support of the
wider membership, addresses one of the most urgent
needs of our time.
The world around us is still afflicted with extremist
ideologies, mutual suspicion and mistrust. Much of it
can be attributed to the lack of effective communication
and dialogue and the consequent lack of understanding
and respect for the various religions and cultures of
the world. All nations must continue to engage in a
constructive, genuine and sincere interreligious and
intercultural dialogue at all levels. Such a dialogue will
help us overcome the unfounded but deeply entrenched
fears that stem from a lack of proper understanding
of each other’s perspectives. The dialogue should
be pursued in a structured and organized manner. It
should include religious leaders and institutions, local
and national Governments, regional and international
organizations, civil society and the media. Our ultimate
objective is to prevent conflict around the world through
moderation and a global culture of peace.
Theological and cultural differences notwithstanding,
religions and cultures have much in common that
can actually unite us. We should build on those
commonalities for promoting religious and cultural
harmony within and among societies and nations.
Religious and cultural diversity is a positive driving
force that can meaningfully contribute to the
socioeconomic development of multicultural societies
all around the world.
We greatly appreciate all steps and initiatives
being taken by various Governments and organizations
at different levels, as mentioned in the SecretaryGeneral’s report of this year (A/68/286).
We particularly appreciate the important role being
played by UNESCO and civil society in that regard and
encourage them to continue their valuable efforts for
the common good of humankind. It is our belief that,
through increased dialogue and better understanding,
it is possible to achieve the objective of having a
diversified yet harmonious and peaceful world standing

A/68/PV.69

solidly on the pillars of peaceful coexistence and unity
in diversity.
The draft resolution has been discussed thoroughly
for nearly a week at the expert level in informal
consultations. Those consultations were held in a
collegial and cooperative atmosphere, with an open
mind and flexibility. That has enriched the draft
resolution and enabled us to achieve a balanced draft
text that reflects the points of view of all partners.
The sponsors convey their deepest gratitude to our
partners for their constructive contribution in further
streamlining and strengthening the draft resolution.
It is our hope that the draft text will be adopted by
consensus and that more States will join us as sponsors
this time.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines to introduce draft
resolution A/68/L.30.
Mr. De Vega (Philippines): The Philippines,
together with Pakistan, is again very honoured to
introduce the draft resolution entitled “Promotion of
interreligious and intercultural dialogue, understanding
and cooperation for peace” (A/68/L.30), under agenda
item 15, entitled “Culture of peace”.
Nine years ago, we resolved to pursue universal
peace through greater understanding of our diversity in
religions as well as cultures. It seemed such a daunting
task. But, on 11 November 2004, that initiative was
unanimously adopted as the landmark resolution
59/23. The resolution was entitled simply “Promotion
of interreligious dialogue”. It had five preambular
paragraphs and only three operative paragraphs.
Essentially, it affirmed that mutual understanding
and interreligious dialogue constituted important
dimensions of the dialogue among civilizations and of
the culture of peace.
The resolution opened the door for this body to
engage in partnership with civil society in general
and the religious sector in particular. Since then, our
initiative, our vision, has grown from strength to
strength, garnering wider participation and ownership
by more and more stakeholders.
Allow us to join the representative of Pakistan in
thanking the Member States that have traditionally
sponsored and supported this draft resolution
throughout the years. Allow us also to welcome and

13-624795/26

A/68/PV.69

18/12/2013

thank those Member States that are sponsoring the
draft resolution for the first time.

Fifth, it welcomes the work of the Anna Lindh
Foundation in contributing to the Dialogue process.

After three rounds of informal consultations
facilitated by Pakistan and the Philippines from 2 to
4 December, the final draft text was put to a silence
procedure up to 9 December, and the silence was not
broken. As mentioned by the representative of Pakistan,
a genuine dialogue of openness and constructiveness
characterized the consultations. We worked with
candour and honesty, yet also with understanding
and flexibility. We were animated by the spirit of
cooperation. Clearly, that is the essence of the draft
resolution. We listened to one another. We understood
and respected the position of each of us.

Sixth, it refers to beliefs, cultures, religions and
faiths, with a view towards discussing common issues
and objectives and in so doing reach a broader audience
and engender a wider ownership of the Dialogue.

This year’s draft resolution continues to be a wellbalanced text. It builds on nearly a decade of experience.
Its 17 preambular paragraphs and 18 operative
paragraphs benefit not only from the usual technical
updates but also from a broader and more inclusive
perspective that would allow us to more widely and
more sustainably address our common challenges. Let
me take the body through some of the most notable
features of the draft resolution.

In addition to the participating Member States,
we also wish to thank participating observer missions,
such as the Holy See, and the representatives of
intergovernmental organizations, such as the European
Union and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, for
their very wise and valuable contributions.

First, it includes technical updates from UNESCO,
as the lead United Nations agency, on a plan of action
to implement 2013-2022 as the International Decade for
the Rapprochement of Cultures. It will be recalled that
we proclaimed the Decade last year through resolution
67/104.
Second, it commends the ideas suggested at the
UNESCO High Panel on Peace and Dialogue among
Cultures, held in Paris on 19 November 2012, to help
identify areas for practical action in all sectors and
levels of society for the promotion of interreligious and
intercultural dialogue, tolerance, understanding and
cooperation.
Third, it welcomes the continuing work of the
Asia-Europe Meeting (ASEM) on interfaith dialogue,
in particular the ASEM Vientiane Declaration
of 6 November 2012 and the ASEM High-level
International Conference on Intercultural and Interfaith
Dialogue, which will be held in Saint Petersburg in July
2014.
Fourth, it also welcomes the deepening engagement
of the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations,
particularly the Sixth Global Forum of the Alliance of
Civilizations, which will be held in Bali, Indonesia, in
August 2014.
6/26

Seventh, it acknowledges that individuals can make
a positive contribution to the promotion of interreligious
and intercultural dialogue.
Eighth, and finally, we rearranged a few of the
preambular and operative paragraphs with already
agreed language from previous years’ resolutions,
moving the general ones to the beginning.

I also offer thanks to the Office for Economic
and Social Council Support and Coordination, the
Department of Economic and Social Affairs and the
General Assembly Affairs Branch for the technical
assistance they have extended.
I cannot overemphasize the value of what we
continue to do in promoting interreligious and
intercultural dialogue and how that dialogue serves
as the foundation for a just and lasting peace. Without
peace there can be no sustainable development. For that
reason, I speak for the Philippines and, perhaps, other
Member States that are also sponsors and supporters
of Iran’s draft resolution, entitled “A world against
violence and violent extremism” (A/68/L.31), and the
draft resolution introduced by the representative of
Bangladesh, entitled “Follow-up to the Declaration
and Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace”
(A/68/L.28). Our three initiatives complement and
build on each other.
Let me end by paying tribute to the late President
Nelson Mandela. Madiba embodied the highest values
of the United Nations. By his life and example, Madiba
reminded us that education is the most powerful
tool in promoting peace through interreligious and
intercultural dialogue. He said,
“No one is born hating another person because of
the colour of his skin, or his background, or his
religion. People must learn to hate, and if they can
13-62479

18/12/2013

learn to hate, they can be taught to love, for love
comes more naturally to the human heart than its
opposite.”
On behalf of Pakistan and the other sponsors, I have
the distinct honour of joining in the call for the General
Assembly to adopt the draft resolution by consensus.
Ms. Ibrahim (Brunei Darussalam): On behalf of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
whose members are Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia,
Indonesia, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore,
Thailand and Viet Nam, I have the honour to deliver
this statement under the agenda item entitled “Culture
of peace”.
Throughout the centuries, South-East Asia has
always attracted visitors from all over the world who
have brought their cultures and religious influences.
As a result, ours is a region rich in culture, one that
is ethnically and religiously diverse. ASEAN views its
great heritage positively, and we unreservedly embrace
our uniqueness, especially as we work together to
achieve an ASEAN Community by 2015.
ASEAN also gives priority to promoting dialogue
and mutual understanding to that end. We view that
diversity as an essential element for economic and
social development and for maintaining peace and
security in the region. ASEAN will therefore continue
to hold high regard and respect for a culture of peace
through initiatives such as the Global Movement of
Moderates (GMM).
Embracing moderation is an important ASEAN
value. It was thanks to the practice and recognition
of the importance of moderation in the region that,
on 3 April 2012, at the ASEAN Summit in Phnom
Penh, ASEAN leaders unanimously adopted the GMM
initiative, which essentially calls on the voices of
moderation, made up of the silent majority, to drown
out the voices of extremism in all forms, to reclaim
the centre and moral high ground. We believe that the
real divide in the world today is not between East and
West, between developed and developing countries,
or between Muslims and non-Muslims. Instead, the
fault line lies between moderates and extremists of all
religions and beliefs, and in all areas and aspects. We
therefore encourage our people, especially our youth,
to be socially responsible and care for one another
despite their differences. We also continue to educate
them on the value of respecting those who come from

A/68/PV.69

different religious and cultural backgrounds, which
we do through various means, including the use of
information and communications technology, such
as the Interfaith Dialogue e-Portal established by the
Special Non-Aligned Movement Ministerial Meeting
on Interfaith Dialogue and Cooperation for Peace and
Development, held in Manila in 2010.
ASEAN has also embarked on a regional project
called the ASEAN Young Professionals Volunteer
Corps, which aims to provide assistance in various
projects in the areas of rural development, poverty
eradication, education, agriculture, health and
environmental matters. We believe the programme can
promote dialogue and interaction among the young
people of ASEAN and strengthen cultural and religious
understanding.
Besides our own regional cooperation, ASEAN is
also active in other forums, such as the Asia-Europe
Meeting (ASEM). We welcomed the outcome of
the seventh ASEM Interfaith Dialogue, held in the
Philippines on 13 and 14 October 2011, which focused
on harnessing benefits and addressing challenges of
migration through interfaith and intercultural dialogue.
At the international level, we are pleased that the
General Assembly continues to support two important
draft resolutions, namely, those entitled “Promotion of
interreligious and intercultural dialogue, understanding
and cooperation for peace” (A/68/L.30) and “Followup to the Declaration and Programme of Action on
a Culture of Peace” (A/68/L.28). Both of those draft
resolutions are being sponsored by all ASEAN member
States. We also recognize the significance of a new
draft resolution entitled “A world against violence
and violent extremism” (A/68/L.31). The three draft
resolutions are to be adopted by consensus and indicate
the commitment of States Members of the United
Nations to work together in this area. We hope the draft
resolutions will continue to facilitate and provide for
our combined efforts towards peacebuilding.
ASEAN appreciates the various efforts of the
United Nations undertaken to promote a culture of
peace, particularly the United Nations Alliance of
Civilizations and the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization. In promoting
a culture of peace through the work of the Alliance,
the United Nations has collaborated with various
Member States, which ASEAN welcomes. ASEAN
also welcomes the sixth Meeting of the Global Forum
of the Alliance of Civilizations, which will be held in

13-624797/26

A/68/PV.69

Bali, Indonesia, in August 2014, and we encourage the
participation there of all States Members of the United
Nations, international organizations and civil society
organizations.
In conclusion, ASEAN would like to express
its appreciation for the contributions of one of South
Africa’s great leaders, the late Nelson Mandela, who
helped to raise global awareness on the culture of
peace. To that end, ASEAN will do whatever it can to
support peace efforts, which are the very foundation of
the United Nations.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the European Union.
Mr. Vrailas (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and
its member States. The candidate countries the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Iceland
and Serbia; the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania
and Bosnia and Herzegovina; the European Free Trade
Association country Norway, member of the European
Economic Area, as well as the Republic of Moldova,
Armenia and Georgia, align themselves with this
statement.
All the draft resolutions before us today are
important. We thank the main sponsors for their efforts.
I would like to say a few words on draft resolution
A/68/L.31, entitled “A world against violence and violent
extremism.” The European Union would like to thank
the Islamic Republic of Iran for the constructive and
open spirit in which it led the consultation process. We
also appreciate the inclusion of many of the European
Union’s proposals.
The European Union and its member States are
very much engaged in the fight against terrorism. In a
broader context, we also acknowledge the importance
of fighting violent extremism. We are convinced of
the utmost importance of respecting all human rights,
fundamental freedoms and the rule of law while
countering terrorism. That is also a priority for the
EU and its member States when addressing violent
extremism. We welcome the emphasis that the draft
resolution to be adopted today puts on that dimension.
We reaffirm that violent extremism can be overcome
only by measures that adhere to the highest human
rights standards and are in full compliance with the
rule of law.

8/26

18/12/2013

We wish to call on all States to reinforce efforts in
countering violent extremism and ensure full respect for
all human rights for all persons. Words should become
reality. We welcome the Islamic Republic of Iran’s
efforts to contribute to what the peoples of the United
Nations expressed in the Preamble of the Charter of the
United Nations, namely, ending the scourge of wars,
reaffirming fundamental human rights, abiding by the
rule of law and promoting social progress and better
standards of life in larger freedom.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): Malaysia wishes to align
itself with the statement made by the representative
of Brunei Darussalam on behalf of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) on agenda item 15,
entitled “Culture of Peace.” In addition, allow me to
deliver some remarks in my national capacity.
On behalf of my delegation, I wish to thank the
Secretary-General for his report entitled “Promotion of
interreligious and intercultural dialogue, understanding
and cooperation for peace” (A/68/286). I also wish to
express our appreciation to the Director General of
UNESCO for her report on the follow-up to the United
Nations Declaration and Programme of Action on a
Culture of Peace (see A/68/216). In addition, we welcome
the sixth annual report of the High Representative
of the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations (see
A/68/361). Those reports chronicle important efforts by
the United Nations system to promote a global culture
of peace and non-violence, both within and beyond
national borders.
Malaysia commends the work of UNESCO and
the Alliance of Civilizations, as well as other United
Nations entities and initiatives in pursuit of true
understanding and tolerance to bridge divides and
help overcome prejudices through intercultural and
interreligious dialogue. We also commend the efforts
undertaken to instil values related to the culture of peace
through education and the focus on youth involvement.
It is in full support of those undertakings that Malaysia
sponsored the draft resolution on the promotion of
intercultural and interreligious dialogue (A/68/L.30).
In addition to action within the United Nations
system, we would also like to highlight the contribution
that the concept of moderation can add in efforts
to promote a culture of peace. In 2010, the Prime
Minister of Malaysia called on the silent majority of
moderates to come together in a global movement to
reclaim centre stage from the loud voices of hatred and

13-62479

18/12/2013

extremism. Three years on, neither the relevance nor
the urgency of that call has subsided. The international
community remains gripped by violent conflicts across
the world perpetrated by extremists who choose to
spread their ideology by sowing discord, instilling
fear and committing terrorism. Now more than ever,
the collective voices of moderates need to be heard in
order to quell the extremist rhetoric that completely
contradicts the culture of peace, one that is so vital for
lasting stability, security and development.
While the call for a global movement of moderates
is fairly recent, moderation itself is an age-old, living
principle that is embodied in all the great religions.
In advocating the middle path between extremes,
moderation is an approach that emphasizes the universal
values of mutual respect, understanding, tolerance and
compassion, which are key ingredients in cultivating a
culture of peace.
We need not look far for vivid examples of
moderation in action. The world is mourning the
loss of President Nelson Mandela, who exemplified,
among many other virtues, those of forgiveness and
conciliation. It is testimony to his sense of moderation
and his leadership that no bloody retribution took
place in South Africa for all the evils and injustices
perpetrated against the majority of South Africans
during the apartheid regime. Rather, he called for
reconciliation and national healing, charting a middle
path that brought together the long-divided people of
South Africa.
Moderation is also reflected in the conduct of
Malala Yousufzai, the young Pakistani who defends
the right of all children, including girls, to education.
Despite being viciously attacked by extremists for her
ideals, she refused to be silenced and continues to fight
for the noble cause of universal education with courage
beyond her years. That, in turn, has garnered massive
support and awareness. Malala’s example is evidence
that moderation and standing up to extremism is not
about being weak or about appeasement, but empowers
people to leave a mark for good.
The Global Movement of Moderates (GMM) is a
sincere effort to channel in a massive way the courage
and spirit shown by Nelson Mandela and Malala
Yousufzai. In the three years since its inception, the
GMM has received far-reaching support from countries
and groupings across the world. In particular, ASEAN
has endorsed and adopted the GMM in recognition
of moderation as a central value of the ASEAN

A/68/PV.69

way. It underpins the interaction of our multiracial,
multicultural and multireligious communities in which
we prioritize the peaceful resolution of disputes. The
noteworthy absence of wars and armed conflict among
neighbours in the region is testament to ASEAN’s
commitment to upholding moderate values that promote
mutual trust and confidence and predispose one to
dialogue and negotiation as the key means of resolving
disputes.
The idea of the GMM has also received the support
of many others, as can be seen from the various outcome
documents of a number of international meetings and
conferences of organizations such as the Non-Aligned
Movement, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
the Commonwealth and the Asia-Europe Meeting. We
hope that the initiative will continue to receive greater
support in the years to come.
Malaysia believes that the GMM as a whole can
complement the mission and work of the United Nations
system at various levels in the promotion of a culture of
peace. We are pleased to note that the Global Movement
of Moderates Foundation, a nongovernmental
organization based in Malaysia to further the cause
of moderation in pursuit of peace, is working together
with the Alliance of Civilizations to promote better
understanding of the concept of moderation and its
contribution to enhanced respect and dialogue among
religions, cultures and beliefs.
In conclusion, the obstacles that prevent a culture
of peace from taking root are many, but they are not
insurmountable. We believe that moderation and a
global movement of moderates can make a valuable
contribution to the overall efforts to achieve the culture
of peace that is vital to sustaining the development and
prosperity that all countries desire.
Ms. AlGharabally (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, my delegation would like to express its thanks
and appreciation to the Secretary-General for his work
in preparing the report before us today (A/68/286),
which covers the issues and activities considered by
the principal United Nations entities in their efforts to
encourage dialogue, understanding and cooperation
among religions and cultures for the sake of peace.
My country also commends the efforts, good offices
and pivotal role of the United Nations educational and
cultural body, UNESCO, to entrench a culture of peace,
which has helped to create an environment conducive to
that culture through the preparation of the Declaration
and Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace. We

13-624799/26

A/68/PV.69

should also like to thank the High Representative for
the Alliance of Civilizations, Mr. Nassir Abdulaziz
Al-Nasser, for all his efforts, and for his presentation of
the sixth annual report on the Alliance of Civilizations
(see A/68/361), including the main activities and
progress being made in that regard. And we should not
fail to thank all the Member States that have sponsored
the draft resolutions calling for the promotion of a
culture of peace and encourage understanding, dialogue
and cooperation between religions and cultures in order
to promote tolerance and respect for cultural differences
as a way to prevent conflict (A/68/L.28, A/68/L.30 and
A/68/L.31).
The first words of the Charter of the United
Nations are “We the peoples” — we, the different
peoples, born of different environments, with our own
cultures, civilizations and beliefs, living in one world
and together forming human civilization. The State of
Kuwait therefore attaches the utmost importance to
promoting a culture of peace and encouraging dialogue
among cultures, religions and civilizations, particularly
today, when waves of extremism, fundamentalism and
hatred among peoples have led to increasing violations
of human rights and to racial discrimination and
contempt for others and their religions.
We would like to draw attention to the fact that
dialogues and alliances among civilizations do not
imply the creation of a melting pot of religions, beliefs or
even cultures. A civilization is the vessel that contains
the religions and cultures and beliefs of peoples, and
the objective of a dialogue among civilizations is to
consider the roots of differences, to deal with them,
learn about the ethics of the differences between one
another and stand humbly before them. That is why my
country stresses the importance of intensifying efforts
to promote a culture of peace, reactivate the dialogue
among cultures, spread the values of moderation,
tolerance and mutual respect and renounce extremism,
hatred and violence in all its forms and manifestations.
That is the responsibility of all Member States and
international organizations.
The State of Kuwait is eager to support the efforts
of the Organization because we believe in the noble
principles of the Charter and look forward to a more
effective international role in the initiative of the
Alliance of Civilizations. In that context, I would
like to mention the practical, positive steps that have
been taken in Kuwait to implement a dialogue among
civilizations.

10/26

18/12/2013

We subscribed to that initiative and joined the
Group of Friends of the Alliance early on, making a
reality of our belief in the importance of a continuing
dialogue and interaction among peoples and
civilizations. In that regard, Kuwait has established a
national plan in accordance with the objectives of the
initiative, aimed at entrenching a culture of tolerance,
peace and moderation and confronting the phenomena
of terrorism, extremism and violence. An international
centre for moderation has been established in Kuwait to
call for moderation in thinking about and dealing with
one another.
Peace was a longstanding cultural aspect of Kuwaiti
society even before the establishment of the modern
State, reflecting acceptance of others, tolerance,
dialogue with other cultures and religions and openness
to all peoples and civilizations. Today in our modern
State, the Constitution of Kuwait assures and guarantees
the freedom of opinion, expression, belief and religious
rituals freely and safely. The State of Kuwait, although
small in size, has been a meeting place for peaceful
peoples, where more than 120 nationalities live in
harmony, stability, dignity and peace.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to stress that
enriching a culture of peace is a process that demands
belief and serious work in order to realize that culture’s
principles — respect for human rights and freedom
of expression and opinion, as well as justice, equality
and the fight against poverty and unemployment. It is
impossible for a people whose basic rights are being
violated to enjoy peace and non-violence. We therefore
urge that all such rights be respected and implemented
so that we may live in a world of amity, tolerance and
peace.
Ms. Al-Jefairi (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation would like to thank the President for
convening this meeting. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his report (A/68/286), and the
High Representative for the United Nations Alliance
of Civilizations, Mr. Nassir Abdulaziz Al-Nasser, for
his report (see A/68/361) and for the efforts he and
his Office have made in that regard. I would also like
to express our particular appreciation for his work to
intensify the Alliance’s efforts through self-evaluation
and the presentation of new proposals and ideas.
Needless to say, peace has been one of the
fundamental purposes of the United Nations since
its inception. Achieving that goal is unquestionably
enormously complex, since the world now faces so
13-62479

18/12/2013

many conflicts and changes. The Assembly might
agree with our belief that most such conflicts stem
from issues that require shared effort in order for us to
renounce violence, deal with its underlying causes and
spread a culture of peace among peoples and societies.
Hence the importance of dialogue, understanding and
cooperation among religions and cultures in order to
achieve peace. We therefore very much appreciate
the efforts being made by the main United Nations
bodies in this area, particularly UNESCO, to make the
objectives, commitments, resolutions and international
declarations on the culture of peace a concrete reality,
especially this year, which is considered the beginning
of the International Decade for the Rapprochement of
Cultures.
The United Nations Programme of Action
for a Culture of Peace stresses the importance of
basing efforts on two fundamental pillars, namely,
development and human rights. Since a culture of
peace must be made up of a number of values, aspects
and human behaviours based on the renunciation of
violence, respect for people’s fundamental rights and
social participation in development, we believe that the
environment we should establish in the international
community can be summarized as follows. Those
principles are: resolving conflicts through mediation
and without violence, ensuring human rights for all and
promoting national institutions in that field, realizing
that the culture of peace is an extension of democracy,
ensuring the participation of all segments of society in
national development, promoting national capacities
to avoid great economic and social differences and
combating poverty, recognizing a common responsibilty
in building the culture of peace, encouraging activities
in support of human rights, implementing peace as a
process through formal and informal education, using
all available means to achieve peace, and ensuring a
broader role for educators in the field of the promotion
of a culture of peace.

A/68/PV.69

fourth Global Forum, which plays an effective role in
combating polarization and extremism by promoting
tolerance and cultural diversity within and among
societies.
The State of Qatar has also made many efforts
to resolve conflicts through mediation based on the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. Such
efforts have lessened tensions that were, in many cases,
threats to international peace and security.
In the light of the role that education plays in
the promotion of peace, my country has set itself the
priority task of raising the level of education and of
mainstreaming the culture of peace in curriculums at
all levels. In our assistance to children, Sheikha Mozah
bint Nasser Al-Missned has launched an international
initiative entitled “Educate a Child”, which aims at
providing primary education to millions of children in
countries suffering from conflict and war. Under the
initiative, 25 projects have been set up in Africa, Asia
and the Middle East for about 500,000 children.
In conclusion, my delegation reiterates its
commitment to work with the General Assembly and
all United Nations bodies to achieve the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and to
implement the Programme of Action on a Culture of
Peace.
Mr. Sapkul (Thailand): My delegation aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the representative of
Brunei Darussalam on behalf of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (see A/68/PV.66).

We have worked to spread the culture of peace
nationally and internationally. We have called for an
exchange of experience and practices in that regard. In
that respect, the Doha International Center for Interfaith
Dialogue has been created.

Thailand thanks the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report (A/68/286) on the promotion of
interreligious and intercultural dialogue, understanding
and cooperation for peace and thanks the Director
General of UNESCO for the report on follow-up to the
Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture of
Peace. My delegation acknowledges the commitment
and active role of United Nations entities, particularly
UNESCO, in taking the lead in mainstreaming the idea
of a culture of peace in their activities. My delegation
also expresses our appreciation to the former and current
High Representatives for the Alliance of Civilizations,
His Excellency Mr. Jorge Sampaio and His Excellency
Mr. Nassir Abdulaziz Al-Nasser, for their dedication
and continued advocacy of cultural diversity.

Qatar was one of the first States to support the
United Nations Alliance of Civilizations, and has
done so since its inception. We hosted the Alliance’s

The promotion of the culture of peace encompasses
several dimensions. Let me share some of our thoughts
with the Assembly.

Mr. Haniff (Malaysia), Vice-President, took the
Chair.

13-6247911/26

A/68/PV.69

First, we are living in an increasingly globalized,
interconnected and interdependent world, where
civilizations, cultures and religions meet, interact and
sometimes come into conflict. Thailand has therefore
supported the promotion of the culture of peace and
interreligious, interfaith and intercultural dialogue.
By doing so, people of different cultures and religions
will have a better understanding of one another, thus
creating mutual respect and tolerance.
In that regard, Thailand thanks the Government of
Austria for hosting the fifth Alliance of Civilizations
Global Forum in February 2013. The Vienna Declaration
on the Alliance of Civilizations reaffirms the common
political will among nations to promote tolerance,
pluralism and mutual respect.
Secondly, it is our belief that love, kindness and
compassion are the basic elements of all religions,
that peace is the ultimate common goal and that every
religion can coexist peacefully. Given all of that, it
is puzzling to witness interreligious violence and
conflicts. Are they caused by a misinterpretation of the
essence of religion? If so, there is definitely a need for a
deeper and true understanding of the core of religions,
faiths and beliefs. We therefore strongly urge political
and religious leaders to promote mutual respect and
tolerance and to bridge the gap in understanding among
people of different religions, faiths or beliefs through
interfaith and interreligious dialogue.
The Asia-Pacific is one of the most diverse regions
in terms of religious communities, and Thailand sees
the need for regional interfaith dialogue. We have
actively participated in such dialogues. The Thai
Government has also established a working group
on regional interfaith dialogue that embraces all
stakeholders and encourages them to work together,
build networks in order to enhance interfaith dialogue
activities in Thailand and strengthen international
interfaith partnership abroad.
Thirdly, Thailand believes that peace lies in the
hands of our future generation. Therefore, we attach
importance to cultivating a culture of peace among
young people. Last October, our Ministry of Culture
organized a religious youth service cultural camp. In
addition, a number of intercultural and interreligious
projects have been initiated by several universities
and civil society organizations. We also welcome
the outcome of the fifth Youth Peace Ambassador
Training Workshop, held in Thailand in November
2012 by UNESCO in cooperation with our civil society
12/26

18/12/2013

organizations. Those are some examples of our strong
determination to promote a culture of peace.
Fourthly, we share the view that women are agents
of peace and can significantly contribute to conflict
resolution. In line with Security Council resolution 1325
(2000), on women and peace and security, Thailand has
actively promoted the role of women in the culture of
peace and security. A subcommittee on women and
the promotion of peace and security was established in
September 2012. It aims to assist, protect and empower
women who have been affected by conflict and violence.
In addition, peace ambassadors from the Thai chapter
of the Universal Peace Federation, a non-governmental
organization with consultative status in the Economic
and Social Council, actively took part in the Global
Women’s Peace Network, which was launched in
Bangkok in September.
Fifthly, we recognize the role of the media in
advocating a culture of peace. However, the role and
influence of the media can be a two-edged sword. The
media must be encouraged to make impartial judgments
and to take full responsibility when disseminating
information. The media must play an increasing role in
eliminating hatred and prejudice, must promote better
understanding among people and must strongly oppose
violence. The media must also be a bearer of peace.
Lastly, Thailand agrees wholeheartedly with the
Secretary-General that interreligious and intercultural
dialogues are closely connected to the Programme of
Action on a Culture of Peace. We therefore support the
idea of streamlining the content of related activities on
those issues into one comprehensive report, rather than
several separate reports. Not only will that be more
cost-effective, but it will not unduly burden United
Nations entities or Member States.
Let me conclude by reaffirming Thailand’s
continued support for a culture of peace. Thailand has
been a traditional sponsor of draft resolutions under
this agenda item. This year, we are one of the Member
States that have sponsored all three draft resolutions
under this item. It is our hope that all three of them will
be adopted by consensus.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): My
delegation is pleased to participate in this debate on the
promotion of interreligious and intercultural dialogue
for peace, a goal to which Morocco accords particular
importance and that constitutes a main vector of the
foreign policy of the Kingdom of Morocco.

13-62479

18/12/2013

I would like to take this opportunity to thank
Ms. Irina Bokova, Director General of UNESCO,
Mr. Jorge Sampaio, former High Representative of the
United Nations Alliance of Civilizations, and Mr. Nassir
Abdulaziz Al-Nasser, new High Representative of the
Alliance, for their efforts to spread a culture of peace,
dialogue and respect for differences.
We have noted with great interest the report of
the Secretary-General (A/68/286) relating to the main
activities conducted by United Nations organizations
over the past year for the promotion of dialogue among
cultures, civilizations and religions. Those activities
touched upon several dimensions of that dialogue and
several regions of the world, thereby demonstrating
ownership by the entire international community of
that goal, which is so important for peace, security and
international cooperation.
The cross-cutting and complex nature of this
topic explains and justifies the central involvement of
UNESCO and the Alliance of Civilizations, as well as
other agencies, such as the United Nations Population
Fund, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations, the United Nations Environment
Programme, the Joint United Nations Programme
on HIV/AIDS and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights. Others such
as UNICEF, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the International
Organization for Migration bring added value to the
pursuit of that goal. We hope and are confident that
they will bring their contributions to bear.
We welcome the fact that many programmes and
projects on education, youth, media and migration have
been implemented and that several action plans have
been elaborated, including the Rabat Plan of Action
of 2012, which specifically seeks to prevent any form
of incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence.
The Global Forums of the Alliance of Civilizations
held in Doha and Vienna led to the development of a
strategy for the period 2013 to 2018 that encompasses
six areas for action, including youth, the consolidation
of partnerships, conflict prevention and concerning
financing and the structure of the Alliance. Moreover,
a number of important initiatives were developed to
strengthen objective, transparent and constructive
dialogue among civilizations.
Having said that, advocating for the promotion of
interreligious and intercultural dialogue, understanding
and cooperation and organizing meetings dedicated

A/68/PV.69

to that goal will unfortunately, in and of themselves,
not be sufficient to establish and develop a culture of
peace. The ownership of that goal by each Member
State and within each State by the various departments
concerned and by civil society, as well as the adoption
of measures to combat extremism, intolerance and
prejudice towards other communities and religions,
are a necessary and indispensable complement and the
basis of a genuine policy for the promotion of dialogue
and the coexistence of civilizations in daily life. That
task and that responsibility are becoming ever more
urgent in the current context of weakening reference
points and rising extremism, xenophobia, Islamophobia
and other forms of discrimination. As His Majesty the
King stressed recently in a message to a addressed to
the international conference that was held in Fez on
2 October,
“The strengthening of dialogue among cultures and
civilizations and respect for cultural diversity will
not be able to become a reality without national
foundations that enable ownership by each citizen
of those noble goals.”
Since its launch, in 2005, the Alliance of
Civilizations, with its 138 members, including
Morocco, has promoted dialogue among civilizations
and a rapprochement of peoples and cultures, as well
as a narrowing of the divide in relations among nations.
The Alliance of Civilizations has proven to be an
effective instrument and a fundamental platform that
advances sound values based on mutual understanding
and respect, tolerance and intercultural dialogue, while
at the same time condemning the fusion of religions,
extremism and violence. However, that progress cannot
be consolidated and made sustainable without resolving
conflicts and establishing a global partnership for the
achievement by all nations, small, middle-sized and
large, of the Millennium Development Goals. There
is therefore a very close relationship, on the one hand,
between peace through dialogue, understanding and
respect for the identity and specific characteristics of
others, and, on the other, the realization by all of the
Millennium Development Goals, which will permit
social relations to be eased and fundamental needs to
be met, thereby creating fertile ground for an opening
towards others and acceptance of their specific
characteristics.
We hope that the designation of 2013-2022 as
the International Decade for the Rapprochement
of Cultures will substantially contribute to the

13-6247913/26

A/68/PV.69

emergence of a genuine culture of tolerance, dialogue
and understanding among Member States. I can
assure you, Sir, that the Kingdom of Morocco will
remain a committed and determined partner for the
implementation of that strategy.
Mr. Escalante Hasbún (El Salvador) (spoke
in Spanish): I should like to address agenda item 15,
“Culture of peace”, which has always been of great
importance to the people and Government of El Salvador
in both its domestic and its international dimensions.
We believe that this issue of great importance as a
theme that encompasses all three pillars of the work
of the United Nations: international peace and security,
development, and the promotion and protection of
human rights.
We also welcome the draft resolutions that we
will adopt today by consensus, and we recognize the
contribution of Bangladesh, Iran, Pakistan and the
Philippines in the work undertaken in these negotiations.
El Salvador, a State member of the Central American
Integration System (SICA), has historically been a
catalyst of the unity of Central America and greater
nation. Along with the region as a whole, it has come a
long way since the late 1980s via the Contadora Group
process and the Esquipulas Agreement in strengthening
its status as a zone of peace, freedom, democracy and
development.
Our country suffered an internal armed conflict
that caused our people a great deal of pain. It is for
that reason that we reject any shady attempt to involve
the people and Government of El Salvador in a warlike
conflict that could set back the democratic process of
the Central American region.
El Salvador expresses its unyielding position as a
staunch advocate for a peaceful settlement of differences
through dialogue and understanding, which is why
we have been considered within the United Nations
as a model for peacebuilding for other countries. We
have participated intensely in various peacekeeping
operations around the world as a faithful reflection of
our nation’s commitment to that matter. As a member of
the Peacebuilding Commission for the biennium 20122013, which is coming to a close, we have been able
to offer our cooperation and experience in peace and
negotiation processes in numerous conflicts around
the world. We are always committed to the peaceful
settlement of disputes.

14/26

18/12/2013

In the regional sphere, El Salvador has fostered the
implementation of and effective compliance with the
new regional security model instituted in the Framework
Treaty on Democratic Security in Central America,
which establishes the principles and mechanisms to
sustain the peacebuilding process and democracy in
the region.
El Salvador wishes to reiterate to the international
community its firm commitment to the consolidation
of the Central American economic integration
process, and its faithful adherence to and good faith
in its international obligations and to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the
Charter of the Organization of American States. We
also wish to make it clear that, together with our sister
republics of the Central American region, we are bound
by historic, economic, social and cultural ties. We share
the same ideals and a common future.
In conclusion, El Salvador expresses its
unconditional support for and joins the efforts of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, especially in its Management of Social
Transformations Programme and its theme “Promoting
equity and social inclusion: pathways to prosperity
for all”. That initiative allows us to evaluate progress,
identify good practices and lessons learned, and assess
difficulties that arise in that field; it is a methodology
that can be applied in our country, with particular
attention to women and men with disabilities.
The Acting President: In accordance with
resolution 45/6, of 16 October 1990, I now call on the
Permanent Observer of the International Federation of
the Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies.
Mr. Lobry-Boulanger (International Federation
of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies): The
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent
Societies (IFRC) welcomes the reports of the SecretaryGeneral on the promotion of interreligious and
intercultural dialogue, understanding and cooperation
for peace (A/68/286) and of the Director-General of
UNESCO on the implementation of the follow-up to the
Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture of
Peace (see A/68/216), as well as the progress described
in the latter report. Specifically, the IFRC agrees with
the Secretary-General’s statement that
“peace cannot be reduced to the mere absence of
conflict, and [that] it requires positive dispositions
towards such values as respect for dignity and

13-62479

18/12/2013

diversity, intercultural dialogue and
understanding” (A/68/216, para. 64).

A/68/PV.69

mutual

The IFRC is strongly committed to fostering a
global culture of respect for peace and non-violence,
intercultural dialogue and social inclusion in which
human values and dignity are truly celebrated. Indeed,
promoting social inclusion and a culture of non-violence
and peace is one of our three strategic aims for the
present decade. Over the past year, we have highlighted
the vulnerabilities of three specific groups in that
regard: women in conflict and disaster settings, people
with disabilities and migrants.
In last year’s debate on the subject of agenda item 15,
the IFRC highlighted the serious issue of interpersonal
and self-directed violence during and after disasters,
and the role that the Red Cross and Red Crescent can
play and is playing in protecting and assisting vulnerable
populations (see A/67/PV.58). Yet, as was reaffirmed
at the nineteenth session of the General Assembly of
the IFRC, which was held in Sydney, Australia, and
brought together our 189 member national societies, the
most specific sexual and gender-based violence is still
shrouded in silence and stigmatization.
Sexual and gender-based violence is often a
continuum of a pre-existing situation of vulnerabilities
and risks, discrimination and violence. Exacerbated by
conditions of conflict and disasters, it is perpetrated
against women, girls, boys and men. We must not turn
a blind eye to the survivors, but instead step up our
collective efforts to prevent violence and to ensure
that those who survive violence do not suffer the
double burden of discrimination and lack of access to
necessary support.
The IFRC is intent on promoting the social
inclusion and the human value and dignity of the
more than 1 million of us living with disabilities.
We welcome the increased attention towards people
living with disabilities and the commitments made by
Member States during the General Assembly’s Highlevel Meeting on the Realization of the Millennium
Development Goals and Other Internationally Agreed
Development Goals for Persons with Disabilities” (see
A/68/PV.3), at which they recommitted themselves
to taking national and international action to support
disability-inclusive development. Furthermore, on
13 October, the International Day for Disaster Reduction
focused on disability and reinforced the message of the
inclusion of people with disability in the context of the
Hyogo Framework for Action.

The IFRC stands ready to work with Governments
to reduce the vulnerabilities of people with disabilities.
At the nineteenth session of its General Assembly in
Sydney last month, the IFRC adopted a resolution
emphasizing that persons with disabilities often face
barriers to their social inclusion, full and effective
participation, and economic development, which can
have a negative impact on their opportunity to engage
in education and employment, impair access to health
services and lead to increasing poverty.
The resolution further calls on the Movement’s
components to take all necessary measures to seek
to ensure the protection and safety of persons with
disabilities, particularly in situations of risk, including
not only situations of armed conflict, humanitarian
emergencies and the occurrence of natural disasters,
but also in times of peace. In addition, the resolution
urges all of the Movement’s components to work
with Governments, including through appropriate
humanitarian diplomacy, to help address the needs of
persons with disabilities and implement the relevant
instruments of international law to support the rights
of persons with disabilities, address discrimination,
change perceptions and combat stereotypes and
prejudice.
The IFRC took great interest in the High-Level
Dialogue on International Migration and Development
in October and in the strong condemnation contained
in its outcome document of acts, manifestations and
expression of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia
and related intolerance against migrants and the
stereotypes often applied to them, including on the
basis of religion or belief. The IFRC strongly supports
the call for States to apply and where needed, reinforce
existing laws where xenophobic and intolerant acts,
manifestations or expressions against migrants occur,
in order to prevent impunity for those who commit
those acts.
The 2011 IFRC strategy on violence prevention,
mitigation and response identified migrants as one of
the categories of people at particular risk of violence.
With regard to migration, studies have shown that
violence is interrelated with overpopulation, high
stress levels, a lack of policing and security, a lack
of safe sanitation facilities, high levels of alcohol and
other substance abuse, few livelihood opportunities,
chaotic environments, and feelings of hopelessness and
powerlessness.

13-6247915/26

A/68/PV.69

Displacement increases with factors that could
lead to suicidal behaviour. Refugees who are grieving
or have significant stress are at risk of committing
suicide. Furthermore, migrant women, especially those
in irregular situations, are particularly vulnerable
to labour exploitation, sexual exploitation, forced
marriage, forced begging, slavery and many other
forms of exploitation.
The IFRC, with a network of 189 national societies
is committed to preventing violence, victimization and
the exploitation of migrant women and their families.
We work along migratory trails to combat and prevent
the risk of human trafficking and other forms of
exploitation in countries of origin, xenophobia and
other forms of violence during transit, and violence and
labour exploitation in destination countries. We work
alongside Governments to ensure that the protection
and assistance needs of all migrants, irrespective of
their legal status, are met.
In conclusion, the IFRC wants to echo the
emphasis placed by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
on the positive requirements for peace. Nurturing,
living and celebrating values such as respect for
dignity and diversity, intercultural dialogue and
mutual understanding all start by promoting skills
and value-based education. We believe in the value of
formal and non-formal education in empowering people
with skills to save lives and change minds and hearts.
We believe that members of societies all over the world
can learn how to operate and relate to each other from a
values framework that they own, in which they believe,
that gives meaning to their lives, that fosters wellbeing, happiness and peace, and through which there
is hope for their children and grandchildren to live in a
peaceful, inclusive and caring society.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on agenda item 15.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolutions
A/68/L.28, A/68/L.30 and A/68/L.31. In connection
with draft resolution A/68.L.31, I give the floor to the
representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): In connection
with draft resolution A/68/L.31, entitled “A world
against violence and violent extremism”, I wish to put on
record the following statement of financial implications
on behalf of the Secretary-General, in accordance with
rule 153 of the rules of procedure.

16/26

18/12/2013

Under paragraph 14 of draft resolution A/68/L.31,
the General Assembly would request the SecretaryGeneral to report to the General Assembly at its
seventieth session on the implementation of the
resolution and to recommend ways and means by which
the United Nations system and the Secretariat could
assist Member States, upon their request and within
existing resources, in generating public awareness
about the danger of intolerance as well as fostering
understanding and non-violence.
It is anticipated that the request contained in
operative paragraph 4 would involve, in addition to the
documentation workload of the Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management (DGACM),
one document of 8,500 words, to be issued in all
languages. This would entail additional requirements
in the amount of $50,900 for documentation services in
2015. While no provision for the requested activity has
been made under the proposed programme budgets for
2014-2015, all possible efforts will be made to absorb
the additional requirements of $50,900 from within
the existing resources under section 2 of the proposed
programme budget for the period 2014-2015.
Accordingly, should the General Assembly adopt
draft resolution A/68/L.31, additional requirements
of $50,900 would arise under section 2 (“General
Assembly and Economic and Social Council affairs
and conference management”), of the proposed
programme budget for biennium 2014-2015. However,
all possible efforts will be made to absorb the additional
requirements of $50,900 from within the existing
resources under section 2 and to report thereon in the
context of the performance report for 2014-2015.
The Acting President: The Assembly will first
take a decision on draft resolution A/68/L.28, entitled
“Follow-up to the Declaration and Programme of Action
on a Culture of Peace”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that since the submission of draft resolution
A/68/L.28, and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have become
sponsors: Argentina, the Plurinational State of Bolivia,
Cameroon, Chad, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Djibouti,
Dominica, the Dominican Republic, Ghana, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Honduras, Jamaica, Kazakhstan,

13-62479

18/12/2013

Kenya, Kiribati, Kyrgyzstan, Libya, Maldives, Mali,
Montenegro, Mozambique, the Niger, Oman, Palau,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Suriname, Tonga,
Vanuatu, Yemen and Zimbabwe.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/68/L.28?
Draft resolution A/68/L.28 was adopted (resolution
68/125).
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/68/L.30, entitled
“Promotion of interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
understanding and cooperation for peace”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that since the submission of draft resolution
A/68/L.30, and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have become
sponsors: Algeria, Austria, Brunei Darussalam,
Cameroon, China, Egypt, Hungary, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Italy, Japan, Kyrgyzstan, the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Luxembourg,
Montenegro, Myanmar, Peru, the Russian Federation,
Slovenia, Thailand, Togo and Tunisia.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/68/L.30?
Draft resolution A/68/L.30 was adopted (resolution
68/126).
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/68/L.31, entitled
“A world against violence and violent extremism”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that since the submission of draft resolution
A/68/L.31, and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have become
sponsors: Afghanistan, Belarus, the Plurinational State
of Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, China, Ecuador,
India, Iraq, Japan, Libya, Montenegro, Nicaragua,

A/68/PV.69

the Philippines, the Russian Federation, Serbia,
Switzerland, Thailand and Turkey.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/68/L.31?
Draft resolution A/68/L.31 was adopted (resolution
68/127).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor
to the speakers in explanation of vote, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union on resolution
68/126, entitled “Promotion of interreligious and
intercultural dialogue, understanding and cooperation
for peace”. The European Union would like to extend
its thanks to the delegations of Pakistan and the
Philippines for the very constructive spirit in which
they led the consultation process.
The European Union expresses appreciation for the
efforts of the main sponsors to take into account some
of the remaining concerns raised in previous years.
We appreciate in particular the addition of the new
fourteenth preambular paragraph, which acknowledges
the positive contribution individuals and representatives
of groups play in the promotion of interreligious and
intercultural dialogue. The European Union continues
to attach importance to always mentioning religion
and belief in conjunction. We also appreciate the main
sponsors’ willingness to strengthen language on the
role of civil society, especially in paragraph 14, when
listing the actors the United Nations should actively
engage with in the context of intercultural dialogue.
In the promotion of intercultural dialogue,
we attach great importance to the work done by
UNESCO, which is the lead agency in the promotion
of intercultural dialogue, as well as other initiatives for
enhancing dialogue and mutual understanding, such
as the Alliance of Civilizations and the Anna Lindh
Foundation. While the States members of the European
Union acknowledge that the text has continued to
improve over the years, we trust that its sponsors will
look positively into the suggestion of making the draft
resolution a biennial initiative.
Mr. Prosor (Israel): I refer my statement to
resolution 68/127. The Iranian theocracy has presented

13-6247917/26

A/68/PV.69

a resolution that is riddled with hypocrisy. By putting
it forward, Iran seeks to ride the wave towards
international legitimacy, but Iran’s aspirations cannot
be allowed to drown out the cries of its people who are
victims of a regime that pretends to be progressive, but
in truth is tragically regressive.
Iran’s calls for nations to denounce violence and
extremism could easily fill the pages of an absurdist
fiction. I would suggest that the Iranians borrow a
phrase from the London tube and caution readers of the
resolution to “mind the gap” between the document’s
aspirations and the situation in Iran.
Not long ago, the Washington Post published an
article written by Shirin Ebadi, the 2003 Nobel Peace
Prize winner. She wrote about Iran’s use of torture, media
censorship and persecution of religious minorities.
While world leaders congratulated themselves on the
interim deal reached in Geneva, Ebadi described the
scene in Tehran, where
“the lifeless body of a young man hung from a
crane in a bleak public square ... spreading fear
among Iranians, who suffer the world’s highest per
capita rate of executions”.
Resolution 68/127 implores nations to ensure a
violence-free life for their people, while fully respecting
their human rights. Yet Iran is one of the world’s worst
human rights abusers. It is a regime that hangs gays,
stones women, imprisons journalists and executes
political opponents. Reading through the document
before the Assembly, it was not clear to me whether I
was reading a United Nations resolution or President
Rouhani’s New Year resolution. After all, Iran is the
world’s primary sponsor of terror, responsible for
the murder of thousands of innocent civilians from
Bangkok to Burgas and Buenos Aires. It is also the
principal supplier of weapons in the Middle East,
igniting conflicts and inflaming sectarian divides.
Iran continues to lend its financial, military
and political support to murderous groups such as
Hizbullah and Hamas. Those terrorist organizations
have dispatched hundreds of suicide bombers, planted
thousands of bombs and fired tens of thousands of
missiles at innocent civilians. Just this weekend,
President Rouhani provided another example of Iranian
hypocrisy when he tweeted:
“Countries that provide arms and training to
terrorists have created crisis in the region and

18/26

18/12/2013

will eventually be caught up in this support for
terrorism”.
Can we believe this? When I read it, I thought I was
reading pages from Alice in Wonderland, not Rouhani’s
Twitter feed. It reminded me of a serial killer lecturing
us all on the sanctity of life.
Today’s resolution also calls on nations to recognize
one another in a display of tolerance. Iran demonstrated
that so-called tolerance last week when it took the floor
in the General Assembly and refused to recognize
Israel, a fellow State Member of the United Nations.
Nonetheless, Israel joined the consensus to demonstrate
its support for the ideals set out in the resolution and for
the Iranian people. In doing so, Israel is putting people
before politics in the hope that others will follow our
example.
The resolution sets the bar high. Now it is up to the
international community to ensure that Iran measures
up.
Mr. Erdman (United States of America): The United
States firmly supports efforts to promote interreligious
and intercultural dialogue and cooperation, as set forth
in resolution 68/126. We are pleased to be joining the
consensus on the resolution.
The United States believes strongly in encouraging
a culture of peace through the adoption and promotion
of values based on freedom, justice, democracy and
human rights and that reject violence and address the
root causes of conflict. We are encouraged by this
consensus-based effort to promote tolerance, dialogue,
reconciliation and respect for cultural diversity. As a
multi-ethnic, multicultural and multi-religious nation,
we also believe that dialogue, understanding and
cooperation among and between members of different
religious and cultural backgrounds is important to the
development of peaceful and harmonious relations
between groups and States.
We understand that resolution 68/126, on the
promotion of interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
reaffirms the international community’s recognition
that article 19 of the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights (resolution 2200A (XXI)), in its
entirety, provides the international framework for the
protection of freedom of expression. In that regard, the
United States reaffirms its well-known position that the
exercise of the right to freedom of expression should
be afforded the maximum possible protection. The

13-62479

18/12/2013

United States would like to recall that at the time of
the adoption of the Vienna Declaration on the Alliance
of Civilizations, welcomed by this resolution, we
expressed concern about the 2006 Report of the Highlevel Group of the Alliance of Civilizations, and we take
this opportunity to restate that concern.
With regard to resolution 68/127, the United States
joined the consensus today because we believe in
dialogue and agree that fighting violence and violent
extremism is an important goal. Today’s adoption by
consensus in the General Assembly on the Iranianled resolution entitled “A world against violence and
violent extremism” reinforces the importance of
engagement regarding our shared interests and a focus
that is shifting away from conflict and violence towards
diplomatic solutions.
We share the international community’s serious
concerns about the dangers posed by Iran’s destabilizing
activities in the Middle East and beyond. In recent
years there has been a clear resurgence of Iran’s State
sponsorship of terrorism, primarily through the Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps Quds Force, the Ministry
of Intelligence and Security, Iraqi Shia militias and
Iran’s ally Hizbullah, which all pose a threat to regional
stability and use violence to support their aims. That
runs counter to efforts to combat violence and violent
extremism.
We urge Iran to underscore its commitments, as
laid out in this resolution, by prioritizing what Iran’s
President Rouhani has called prudent moderation and
constructive cooperation in its regional policies, in
order to help restore peace and stability in the region.
Halting its military support to those who perpetuate
violence against innocent civilians or contribute to
sectarian conflict in the region would do much to
give meaning to the sentiments Iran expresses in this
resolution.
We understand that the Iranian people have given
President Rouhani a mandate to realize their strong
desire for a more constructive and moderate course,
both at home and abroad. We are encouraged by the
progress made so far on the track mapped out by the
group of the five permanent members of the Security
Council and Germany, made possible by the work of the
international community. We also welcomed President
Rouhani’s statement during his address to the General
Assembly earlier this year, when he said that Iran

A/68/PV.69

“will act responsibly with regard to regional and
international security and is willing and prepared
to cooperate in these fields ... with other responsible
actors” (see A/68/PV.6, p. 15).
We hope to see those words reflected not only in
this resolution, but with practical and visible steps from
Iran that align its activities with its own stated ideals
and those of the international community.
Ms. Ventura (Canada): Canada joined the
consensus on resolution 68/127, entitled “A world
against violence and violent extremism”, because it is
a strong supporter of human rights and fundamental
freedoms and believes that all citizens of the world
should be free from discrimination. In order to achieve
a world without violence, where human rights and
the freedom of all people are respected, we — all of
us — must take concrete actions and not rely on words
or gestures. In an effort to support the resolution,
we urge all States to comply with their international
human rights obligations. In particular, we look to the
sponsor of the resolution to translates its words into
action, to ensure that there is respect for human rights
and the fundamental freedom of its people without
discrimination of any kind, including for women,
ethnic minorities and all religious communities.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 15.
Agenda item 32
The role of diamonds in fuelling conflict
Note verbale dated 9 December 2013 from
the Permanent Mission of South Africa
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting the report of
the Kimberley Process to the General Assembly,
pursuant to General Assembly resolution 67/135
(A/68/649)
Draft resolution (A/68/L.29)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of South Africa to introduce draft
resolution A/68/L.29.
Mr. Nhlapo (South Africa): Before I introduce
draft resolution A/68/L.29, I would like to take a brief
moment to thank those who once again this morning,
as we have experienced in the past 10 days since the

13-6247919/26

A/68/PV.69

passing of our former President Nelson Mandela, have
expressed the goodwill and support coming from far and
wide within Africa and the international community.
Our people remain strengthened by those messages of
support, and we can assure them that we will continue
to uphold the principles that Nelson Mandela fought for
until his passing. We urge the international community
to give us all necessary support during the next difficult
period of our consolidation of the gains of our struggle
and our democracy.
I would first of all like to thank the sponsors of
draft resolution A/68/L.29 for their kind support, but
also to say that the draft text is the product of the
amendments and discussions that took place during two
consultations held last week and that after it was put to
the silence procedure. It has therefore been submitted
in the current format for consideration by the General
Assembly.
Allow me to note that it is a consensus text that is
normally adopted by the General Assembly at the end
of every year after it has been presented by the current
or outgoing Chair of the Kimberley Process. It is
therefore in that context that I am introducing the draft
resolution, as requested in resolution 67/135, adopted at
the previous General Assembly session.
The draft resolution is an update of the one
introduced by my predecessor, Ambassador Gillian
Milovanovic of the United States, in the Assembly last
year. May I also take this opportunity to congratulate
her on the work that she has done during her tenure of
office, in particular in steering the Kimberley Process
through very difficult times and in putting it where it is
today. We shall recall that in her report (A/67/640), she
noted the progress made in 2012 and some outstanding
issues that had to be dealt with in the course of this
year. I am therefore happy to say that there has been
progress on some of the outstanding issues indicated
in the last resolution adopted by the General Assembly.
Let me also point out that there has been an
increase in the number of participants in the Kimberley
Process. There are now 54 participants representing
81 countries, including 28 members of the European
Union represented by the European Commission. The
new addition in terms of the membership of the Process
is the Republic of Mali, which was accepted as a new
member last year. Let me also indicate that some of the
new elements of a technical and political nature that are
included in the new draft resolution are the outcomes of
the eleventh plenary session of the Kimberley Process
20/26

18/12/2013

final communiqué, hosted in Johannesburg by South
Africa from 19 to 22 November.
The Kimberley Process adopted the proposed new
rules and procedural norms to regulate the activities of
its working bodies. Participants and observers agreed
on the streamlining of the procedure for the preparation
and adoption of decisions and documents of the
Kimberley Process, thereby enhancing its effectiveness
in the pursuit of its mandate.
The draft resolution also reflects the progress made
by the Kimberley Process to strengthen implementation
of the peer review system, increase the transparency
and accuracy of statistics, promote research into the
traceability of diamonds, promote inclusiveness by
broadening the level of involvement by Governments,
industry and civil society in the Kimberley Process
Certification Scheme, foster a sense of ownership by
participants, improve information and communication
flows and enhance the capacity of the Certification
Scheme to respond to emerging challenges.
It expresses appreciation to Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia,
the Russian Federation, Singapore, South Africa and
Viet Nam for receiving review visits or missions in
2013, welcomes the commitment of those countries
to continuously open their certification systems to
reviews and improvements, and calls upon other
participants that have not already done so to make
themselves available to receive review visits. It also
recognizes the importance of the Kimberley Process
in promoting economic development, particularly in
the artisanal and small-scale diamond-mining sector,
and encourages an increased focus on issues related
to development, including through the work of the
Diamond Development Initiative.
It further notes the continued cooperation of the
Kimberley Process with the United Nations on the issue
of diamonds from Côte d’Ivoire, in accordance with the
provisions of Security Council resolution 2101 (2013) of
25 April and in line with the administrative decision on
sharing information with the United Nations. Indeed,
it goes on to the report of the review mission that went
to Côte d’Ivoire and recognizes that Côte d’Ivoire has
fulfilled the minimum requirements as far as possibly
could be achieved under the United Nations embargo,
and recalls that the Security Council, pursuant to its
resolution 2101 (2013), will review measures in the
light of progress made towards Kimberley Process
implementation.

13-62479

18/12/2013

It acknowledges Liberia’s involvement in the work
carried out by the Kimberley Process regional team for
cooperation in the Mano River region, encourages the
Kimberley Process, in collaboration with the Panel of
Experts on Liberia, established pursuant to Security
Council resolution 2025 (2011) of 14 December 2011,
to support the efforts of Liberia to continue reinforcing
its internal controls system and to continue to address
the challenges to the implementation of the Kimberley
Process Certification Scheme, and takes note of the
review visit to Liberia from 18 to 27 March.
It goes on to welcome the initiative from Kimberley
Process participants in West Africa to enhance their
cooperation on Kimberley Process implementation
and policy harmonization efforts in the context of
the regional approach for the Mano River region,
and acknowledges the region’s plans for developing
a regional strategy and road map as the outcome of a
high-level workshop on regional cooperation in West
Africa.
It notes that the plenary meeting of the Kimberley
Process restated the administrative decision on the
temporary suspension of the Central African Republic,
as approved through the written procedure of 23 May,
and the reported willingness of the Central African
Republic to address issues of non-compliance with
Kimberley Process Certification Scheme minimum
requirements and strengthen its internal control
systems.
The decision of the plenary meeting regarding the
continued participation of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela in the Kimberley Process acknowledges the
positive step represented by the submissions presented
by the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela in response
to the decision of the plenary meeting, and invites
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to continue its
efforts to fully reintegrate into the Kimberley Process
Certification Scheme through the steps outlined in the
Kimberley Process communiqué of 30 November 2012.
With regard to a very delicate subject, the draft
resolution notes the discussions during 2013 on
the subject of the Kimberley Process reforms and
the proposed changes to the definition of “conflict
diamonds”, among other proposals, also notes that
consensus was not reached on whether or not to change
the definition of “conflict diamonds”, and further
notes that the Chair, participants and observers were
encouraged to continue dialogue on this issue.

A/68/PV.69

The draft resolution acknowledges that the plenary
meeting of the Kimberley Process adopted a proposal
for modifications to the Kimberley Process core
document aimed at strengthening the Kimberley Process
Certification Scheme within its current remit. As I
indicated earlier, it also acknowledges the adoption by
the plenary meeting of the Kimberley Process of seven
administrative decisions, on technical definitions;
guidelines for the preparation, review and analysis of
Kimberley Process statistical data; the chairmanship
of Kimberley Process working bodies; Kimberley
Process participants’ applications for membership and
participation in working bodies; protection guidelines
for the use of the Kimberley Process logo; the dissolution
of the Participation and Selection Committees and
the formation of the Committee on Participation and
Chairmanship; and technical certificates for scientific
research.
In conclusion, let me say that the progress that
has been noted — notably in the report and the final
communiqué issued by the Kimberley Process plenary
that took place in South Africa in November — represents
a renewed commitment on the part of the participants
in and observers to the Kimberley Process to ensuring
that we continue to make it relevant, strengthen our
internal controls and ensure that the Process can
continue to respond effectively to the challenges it
faces. We also take note that the situation has changed
since the Kimberley Process was founded in 2003,
particularly in some participating countries, as well as
within the industry and civil society. We are committed
to preserving a unique partnership that has enabled the
Kimberley Process to survive and to confront some
difficult challenges that have arisen to date.
I would like to thank those who have once again
supported the draft resolution, and to point out that
some participants have indicated they would like to be
included. We hope that this will definitely be taken into
consideration.
In conclusion, once again I would like to request the
Assembly to take note of the report of the Kimberley
Process Certification Scheme (see A/68/649), and, as in
the past, to adopt the draft text as proposed.
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
observer of the European Union.
Mr. Busuttil (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU). The
candidate countries Turkey, the former Yugoslav

13-6247921/26

A/68/PV.69

Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Iceland and
Serbia; the countries of the Stabilization and Association
Process and potential candidates Albania and Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, Georgia and
Armenia, align themselves with this statement.
The European Union and its member States, which
act as a single participant in the Kimberley Process
Certification Scheme, would like first to commend
South Africa for its successful chairmanship of the
Kimberly Process in a year that marked the tenth
anniversary of the Scheme. We also welcome the results
achieved insofar as they illustrate the important efforts
deployed to continue strengthening the Kimberley
Process and confront future challenges.
The European Union welcomes the fruitful work
undertaken this year, notably the approval by the recent
Kimberley Process plenary meeting of modifications to
the annexes of the Kimberley Process core document.
It also welcomes the agreement to continue examining
and reviewing the Certification Scheme minimum
requirements and the recommendations aimed at
strengthening implementation. The European Union
also welcomes the adoption of administrative decisions
on the chairmanship and membership of the Kimberley
Process working bodies. We firmly believe that the
consistent use of those implementation tools will
strengthen the Process’ ability to tackle the illicit trade
in conflict diamonds, and call on all participants to step
up efforts to that end.
As Chair of the Kimberley Process Working
Group on Monitoring, the European Union has
actively contributed to strengthening implementation.
It encourages participants to continue committing
themselves to enhanced scrutiny through Kimberley
Process peer review visits and submitting substantive
annual reports. In particular, the European Union would
like to express appreciation to South Africa, Liberia,
the Russian Federation, Singapore and Viet Nam for
hosting review visits in 2013, and to the countries that
have extended invitations for review visits in 2014 and
2015.
Furthermore, the European Union notes with
satisfaction that the Kimberley Process intends to further
improve its transparency and promote the publication of
annual and review visit reports. We also believe that the
joint EU-India Kimberley Process Certification Scheme
data-sharing platform, as presented at the Kimberley
Process plenary, could be considered a good example

22/26

18/12/2013

of enhanced information-sharing among participants as
regards Kimberley Process implementation.
The credibility of the Kimberley Process
Certification Scheme as an international process
depends on effective implementation and enforcement
by its participants. In that regard, the number of fake
certificates detected and the illegal shipments blocked
in 2013 testify testify that the Kimberley Process is
effective in deterring conflict diamonds from entering
the legitimate trade. The European Union looks forward
to further progress in that area in 2014.
In the light of Security Council resolution 2101
(2013), the Kimberley Process engagement with Côte
d’Ivoire has illustrated the positive role that the Scheme
can play in situations where the production of and trade
in diamonds might affect peace and security. As Chair
of the Working Group on Monitoring and facilitator of
the United Nations Group of Experts on Côte d’Ivoire,
the European Union was part of the recent Kimberley
Process review mission to Côte d’Ivoire. In that regard,
it has been helping the country to fulfil the Kimberley
Process minimum requirements to the extent possible
under the United Nations embargo.
The European Union welcomes the good
cooperation of the Côte d’Ivoire authorities in meeting
the Kimberley Process requirements and is determined
to further support the efforts of Côte d’Ivoire in
developing a transition strategy and road map aimed at
the lifting of the United Nations embargo, thus ensuring
that Ivorian diamonds will contribute to recovery and
development. In that context, the European Union,
through its Instrument for Stability, will provide
technical assistance to promote the formalization of the
artisanal mining sector and reinforcing the country’s
chain of custody.
With regard to other countries in West Africa,
the EU welcomes the continued engagement of the
Kimberley Process with Liberia under Security
Council resolution 2079 (2012), as regional cooperation
remains key to ensuring stability in the region. In that
context, the European Union also highly welcomes the
initiative of participants in the Mano River region to
enhance their cooperation in the implementation of the
Kimberley Process Certification Scheme and policy
harmonization.
The most recent testimonial to the Process’s ability
to deal with situations of non-compliance has been the
Central African Republic’s temporary suspension from

13-62479

18/12/2013

the Scheme in May. As Chair of the Kimberley Process
Working Group on Monitoring, the European Union is
monitoring the situation and welcomes the efforts made
by the Central African Republic authorities to develop
a work plan for strengthening the country’s internal
control system. However, we feel that the security
conditions in the country do not currently provide
guarantees for preserving the integrity of the chain of
custody of diamonds.
In looking forward, the European Union welcomes
the decision taken at the Kimberley Process plenary
meeting in Johannesburg to consider establishing an
innovation committee with a view to encouraging
further debate on reform issues and how the Scheme can
respond to wider ethical issues. We strongly recognize
the need to further strengthen and adapt the Kimberley
Process to meet future challenges in the global diamond
supply chain and to provide assurance for consumers
that diamonds are not tainted by violence.
In 2013, the international community has
demonstrated its determination to act collectively
and constructively through the Kimberley Process,
which is a valuable instrument to prevent diamonds
from fuelling conflicts, and ultimately to contribute
to economic and social development, particularly in
developing countries. In that context, the European
Union welcomes the framework on implementation
of the Washington Declaration on integrating the
development of artisanal and small-scale diamond
mining in the Kimberley Process.
The EU expresses its gratitude to South Africa for
its stewardship of the Process this year. We warmly
welcome the People’s Republic of China as incoming
Chair at the start of the second decade of the Process,
and congratulate Angola on its election as incoming
Vice-Chair. We look forward to working closely with
the new Chair and Vice-Chair to bring renewed impetus
and strength to the Kimberley Process Certification
Scheme.
Mr. Maksimychev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation thanks the Republic
of South Africa for its successful chairmanship
of the Kimberley Process in 2013 and its effective
consultations and coordination in preparing draft
resolution A/68/L.29, entitled “The role of diamonds in
fuelling conflict: breaking the link between the illicit
transaction of rough diamonds and armed conflict as a
contribution to prevention and settlement of conflicts”,
which my delegation supports. We also wish success

A/68/PV.69

to the People’s Republic of China and the Republic of
Angola as Chair and Vice-Chair, respectively, of the
Kimberley Process in 2014.
Since 2000, the Russian Federation has been
an active participant in the Kimberley Process.
We commend its role in eliminating rough conflict
diamonds from legitimate trade, and welcome the
ongoing process to broaden the circle of participants
in the Process. It is necessary to further encourage
States to fully participate in the Process in the interest
of rapidly creating a global, smoothly functioning and
fully transparent mechanism for international trade in
rough diamonds.
In our view, disproportionate sanctions are
counterproductive and risk promoting uncontrolled, socalled grey trade areas. We support efforts to develop
transparent and uniform rules and procedures for the
Process that would prohibit double standards. In that
respect, it is difficult to view the reform initiatives of
the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme as timely
when the issue lacks consensus among the participating
States.
The Russian Federation opposes the politicization
of the work of the Kimberley Process and the inclusion
in its agenda of issues unrelated to its competencies.
We note with regret the increasingly frequent attempts
to transfer the issue of conflict diamonds outside of
the Kimberley Process to alternative forums lacking
a United Nations mandate. We emphasize that such
irresponsible actions are unacceptable and risk
weakening the existing streamlined, international
control systems of the rough diamond trade. In that
regard, we particularly note the unbreakable link
between the Kimberley Process and the United Nations,
established by the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council and the General Assembly.
A unique feature of the Kimberley Process is
its tripartite structure. However, its work should be
based first and foremost on international cooperation,
with steadfast adherence to the underlying principles
of international law and the national legislation of
participating States. That also applies to representatives
of civil society, whose actions should assist States in
accomplishing the main objectives of the Kimberley
Process. Only the coordinated efforts of States, the
diamond industry and non-governmental organizations,
based on standardized rules, will ensure that the
tripartite structure of the Process becomes its strong
point.

13-6247923/26

A/68/PV.69

Mr. Prosor (Israel): For many decades, the
reputation of the diamond industry was tarnished by
conflict diamonds. Used as a tool for warfare and
cash flow for warlords, those precious gems ignited
wars, fueled slavery and enflamed entire countries.
Lightweight, valuable and easy to smuggle, rough
diamonds drove some of the worst armed conflicts
in Africa — from Angola to Liberia and from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to Sierra Leone.
Ten years ago, an alliance of Governments,
non-governmental organizations and the diamond
industry united to address that crisis. They established
a Certification Process to assure buyers that the
diamonds they purchased were free from violence and
human rights abuse. Since the Kimberley Process was
established in 2003, conflict diamonds have fallen from
15 per cent of the global trade in rough diamonds to
less than 1 per cent. This success is proof of what can
be accomplished when a global commitment is matched
by global action.
I may be biased, but I believe that Israel is the jewel
of the Middle East and that the diamond industry is the
jewel of the Israeli economy. Alongside Mumbai, Dubai
and Shanghai, Israel is at the forefront of developments
in the diamond industry. As the world’s leading exporter
of diamonds and the third-largest trading centre for
diamonds, Israel is committed to demonstrating that a
sustainable economy can be sustained by such values
as integrity, honesty and trust. Israel regards the fight
against conflict diamonds as an expression of tikkun
olam — the obligation of every person to make the
world a better place.
For that reason, Israel was one of the first countries
to raise awareness of conflict diamonds. We were one
of the first to play a part in establishing the Kimberley
Process. And we were the first country to issue a
certificate when the Kimberley Process went into effect
in 2003. When Israel served as Chair of the Kimberley
Process in 2010, it formed a partnership with the World
Customs Organization and forged ties with countries
that were not yet part of the Process.
Diamonds are assessed by four Cs: cut, color,
clarity and carat. Today, I propose that the international
community assess its success in addressing the illegal
diamond trade through the adoption of a four different
Cs, namely, conscience, conviction, credibility and
confidence.

24/26

18/12/2013

We must act on our collective conscience and raise
awareness of the horrors and tragedies of the illegal
diamond industry. We must show conviction to end the
rampant human rights abuses that go hand in hand with
conflict diamonds. We must demonstrate our credibility
by further strengthening the Kimberley Process and
ensuring that every single diamond is certified conflictfree. And we must ensure that buyers have confidence
that they are buying diamonds that were responsibly
mined, cut and polished.
Legally mined diamonds can contribute to Africa’s
growth and prosperity, but only if the industry is
responsibly regulated. Our dedication to this cause
must have the same clarity as the diamonds we seek to
certify.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on agenda item 32.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/68/L.29, entitled “The role of diamonds in
fuelling conflict: breaking the link between the illicit
transaction of rough diamonds and armed conflict as a
contribution to prevention and settlement of conflicts”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that, since the submission of the
draft resolution and in addition to those delegations
listed in document A/68/L.29, the following countries
have become sponsors: Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Brazil, the Czech Republic, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Estonia, Finland,
France, Germany, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Latvia,
Lithuania, Malta, the Netherlands, Poland, Portugal,
Romania, Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland, Thailand,
Ukraine and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/68/L.29?
Draft resolution A/68/L.29 was adopted (resolution
68/128).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 32?
It was so decided.

13-62479

18/12/2013

Agenda item 71 (continued)
Assistance to survivors of the 1994 genocide in
Rwanda, particularly orphans, widows and victims
of sexual violence
Draft resolution (A/68/L.32)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the Assembly held a joint debate on agenda item 71,
together with agenda item 70, entitled “Strengthening
of the coordination of humanitarian and disaster relief
assistance of the United Nations, including special
economic assistance” and its sub-items (a) to (d) at its
66th and 67th plenary meetings, on 12 December 2013.
I give the floor to the representative of Rwanda to
introduce draft resolution A/68/L.32.
Ms. Uwizera (Rwanda): I have the honour to
introduce the draft resolution entitled “Assistance to
survivors of the 1994 genocide in Rwanda, particularly
orphans, widows and victims of sexual violence”,
as contained in document A/68/L.32. We thank the
countries that sponsored the draft resolution, namely,
Belgium, Canada, Finland, Japan, Luxembourg, the
Netherlands, Poland, Slovenia, Spain, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America.
The text was first adopted on 23 December 2003,
after the tenth commemoration of the 1994 genocide in
Rwanda, as resolution 58/234. Under that resolution, the
General Assembly decided to designate 7 April 2004 as
the International Day of Reflection on the Genocide in
Rwanda.
Rwanda commends the Secretary-General for his
report (A/68/497), which provides a detailed analysis
of the current challenges to the delivery of relief and
rehabilitation assistance by the United Nations and its
partners to survivors of the 1994 genocide against the
Tutsi in Rwanda, in addition to recommendations for
appropriate ways to meet their remaining critical needs.
Nearly 20 years since the genocide took place,
Rwandans, and particularly the survivors, are
continuing to make tremendous strides in constructing
the social fabric that was broken as a result of the
genocide. However, given the extent to which the
genocide has affected Rwandans, the post-trauma is a
progressive healing process.
Despite the Government of Rwanda’s continued
efforts to allocate part of its ordinary budget to the

A/68/PV.69

pressing needs of the genocide survivors through
the Assistance Fund for Genocide Survivors, the
Government of Rwanda still faces serious challenges
associated with the enormous endeavour of rebuilding
survivors’ shattered lives. The needs remain huge in
sectors such as housing, health care, education and
welfare support. The draft resolution is therefore
intended to assist genocide survivors, especially widows
and orphans. It is our hope that the General Assembly
will continue to express its solidarity with the survivors
of the 1994 genocide by adopting the draft resolution,
as it has done in the past, and at the same time will
recommit to the fight against genocide throughout the
world and to the promise of “never again”.
In conclusion, the year 2014 marks 20 years since
the genocide. Rwanda has chosen the theme “remember,
unite, inspire”. We believe that this is an important
occasion for all of us to come together to remember
the lives that were lost, show our solidarity with the
survivors and unite to ensure that it never happens
again.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take action on draft resolution A/68/L.32, entitled
“Assistance to survivors of the 1994 genocide in
Rwanda, particularly orphans, widows and victims of
sexual violence”.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution and in addition to those delegations listed
in A/68/L.32, the following countries have become
sponsors: Belgium, Canada, Egypt, El Salvador,
Estonia, France, Luxembourg and Spain.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/68/L.32?
Draft resolution A/68/L.32 was adopted (resolution
68/129).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 71?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: I now call on those
representatives wishing to speak in exercise of the right
of reply.

13-6247925/26

A/68/PV.69

18/12/2013

Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): I wish
to express my appreciation and thanks to you, Sir, the
Secretariat and all delegations for their widespread
support for the consensus adoption of resolution 68/127
today.

Mr. Prosor (Israel): Abraham Lincoln said that you
can fool all of the people some of the time and some of
the people all of the time, but you cannot fool all of the
people all of the time. I would like to recall those words
for the representative of Iran.

Secondly, I would like to take this opportunity
to say a few words about the statement made by the
representative of Israel. We fully understand the anger
and fury of the representative of the Israeli regime
that led to his hate speech today. It is evidently due to
the fact that the resolution, entitled “A world against
violence and violent extremism”, promotes moderation,
tolerance and respect for human rights and condemns
violence and violent extremism. Obviously, these are
issues and concepts that the violent Israeli regime does
not tolerate. He represents a regime that occupies the
lands of other nations and places people in the occupied
lands under harsh blockade. This is the most extremist
of policies ever contemplated and implemented,
coupled with its flouting of all norms and principles
of international law. We are and, it is safe to say, the
whole of humankind is against the policy of putting the
people under occupation under siege and of denying
them basic necessities.

Israel has been and remains hopeful that the words
in resolution 68/127, on which we joined the consensus,
will be a torchlight that Iran can follow. Unfortunately,
the statement made by the representative of Iran and
other such statements made internationally over the
past few weeks, and Iran’s decision not to recognize the
State of Israel, tell us a different story. When making
his remarks, the representative of Iran found the time
to launch a range of baseless accusations against Israel,
but conveniently failed to mention the serious violations
of international law that his country has committed and
is committing today.

The violent extremism that the resolution seeks to
combat also includes the blatant resort to violence to
put down the resistance of people under occupation.
I therefore reject any accusation attributing extremist
policies to my country.
As members of the Assembly know, Iran was and
continues to be the victim of violent extremism, and
many Iranians have been targets of sectarian violence.
We have suffered for many years due to armed elements
and groups in our region, including from the policies
adopted by two extremist regimes in power during the
1980s and 1990s, in particular to the East and West
of our territory, until the early years of this century.
Fortunately, both of those regimes are now gone.
To alleviate the plight resulting from those
extremist policies, the Islamic Republic of Iran has
done everything in its power, including encouraging
and supporting moderation in the region surrounding
Iran. The current Iranian President focused during his
electoral campaign on the need to expand moderation and
prudence and turn them into a basis for policymaking
in every areas, including in international relations.

26/26

I refuse to accept lectures on many issues from
Iran, which can teach us only, unfortunately, the ABCs
of terrorism. It stands behind terrorist activities from
Argentina and Bulgaria to Cyprus — all proven and
known. Iran is, unfortunately, the world’s chief trainer
and primary sponsor of terror. It provides sophisticated
weapons to Hamas, Hizbullah and other terrorist
groups in the region and around the world. It is always
an interesting experience when a representative of
the greatest State sponsor of terror speaks out against
terror, extremism and violence. The Islamic Republic
of Iran continues to fund and train terrorists to murder
innocent civilians in all parts of the globe.
Innocent people in all corners of the world are victims
of Iran’s sponsored terrorism, which is something that
we hope, based on resolution 68/127 — and this is what
Israel is calling for — will focus the world’s attention
on Iran. The Iranians should read their own resolution
and follow it. Unfortunately, today in Iran, women
are denied basic rights, free expression is repressed,
minorities are persecuted and elections are a sham. All
of this goes on and on and on, and I should not like to
take up further time on this matter.
Regarding Israel, we are committed to the peace
process. Discussions are under way between us and the
Palestinians on that issue. We hope to resolve it very
soon. It has nothing to do with today’s resolution.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

13-62479
