S/2021/146

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 February 2021
Original: English

Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
By its resolution 2552 (2020), the Security Council extended the mandate of the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic (MINUSCA) until 15 November 2021 and request ed the SecretaryGeneral to report on its implementation every four months. The present report
provides an update on major developments in the Central African Republic since the
report of the Secretary-General of 12 October 2020 (S/2020/994).

II. Political situation
2.
The political context over recent months was dominated by developments
related to the 27 December presidential and legislative elections. Political tensions
significantly increased as a result of the trust deficit between the Government and the
opposition over the electoral process, coupled with a marked deterioration in security
in many parts of the country fuelled by some political stakeholders and armed groups
aiming to disrupt the electoral process and constitutional order.
3.
Tensions further escalated following the 3 December decision of the
Constitutional Court to invalidate five of the 22 presidential candidates, including the
former president of the Central African Republic, François Bozizé. The Court argued
Bozizé failed to meet the “good morality” legal requirement for candidates because
of United Nations sanctions against him and an international arrest warrant issued in
2014 for alleged assassinations, torture and other crimes. Bozizé’s political party, the
Kwa Na Kwa, publicly called for calm and restraint, while denouncing the Court’s
decision. Despite his public acceptance of the Court’s decision and formal support to
presidential candidate and former Prime Minister, Anicet-Georges Dologuélé, Bozizé
travelled to the centre and west of the country, rallying support from armed group
leaders.
4.
Subsequently, some armed groups escalated attempts to obstruct the elections.
On 15 December, representatives of the Retour, Réclamation et Réhabilitation (3R),
Mouvement patriotique pour la Centrafrique (MPC), Unité pour la paix en
Centrafrique (UPC), a segment of the Front populaire pour la renaissance de la
Centrafrique (FPRC) and the Mokom and Ngaïssona anti-balaka factions, signed a
joint statement denouncing the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in

21-01548 (E)

180221

*2101548*

S/2021/146

the Central African Republic and criticizing the Government’s shortcomings in
advancing the peace process. On 17 December, they announced the formation of the
Coalition des patriotes pour le changement (CPC), which Bozizé publicly endorsed
on 27 December. The Government accused Bozizé of attempting a coup. On
4 January, the public prosecutor of the Bangui Court of First Instance announced the
opening of a criminal investigation against Mr. Bozizé, including for rebellion and
undermining state security.
5.
The electoral campaign period from 12 to 25 December was disrupted by a surge
in violence by CPC-affiliated armed groups. Several independent candidates and
those aligned with the presidential party were attacked. The main opposition political
platform, the Coalition de l’opposition démocratique 2020 (COD -2020), announced
the suspension of its campaign on 19 December, citing insecurity and irregularities in
electoral preparations, demanding postponement of the elections and holding of
national consultations. On 26 December, the Constitutional Court rejected multiple
requests from the opposition to postpone the elections, arguing that it was necessary
to preserve the constitutional timeline.
6.
The first round of presidential and legislative elections took place on
27 December. Violence perpetrated by CPC-affiliated armed groups, mainly in the
north-west and south-east, had an impact on voter participation. A total of 695,019
voters (37.4 per cent of the registered total) cast their ballots, while 3,243 out of 5,448
polling stations (59.5 per cent) were operational country-wide and abroad. The
opposition called for the vote to be annulled, arguing that the process di d not comply
with constitutional and legal requirements and insecurity inhibited voting.
Preliminary reports from national and international electoral observer missions
deployed in Bangui and its vicinity by the National Elections Observatory, the African
Union, the Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS) and the
Community of Sahelo-Saharan States expressed overall satisfaction with the elections
despite challenges.
7.
On 4 January, the National Electoral Authority published provisional results for
the presidential election, announcing that President Touadéra received an absolute
majority of votes cast (53.9 per cent), followed by former Prime Ministers and
opposition candidates Dologuélé (21.01 per cent) and Martin Ziguelé (7.46 per cent).
On 7 January, 10 opposition candidates filed a joint appeal to the Constitutional Court
contesting the results. Presidential candidates Dologuélé, Ziguelé and Gonda also
filed separate appeals requesting the annulment of the elections.
8.
The National Electoral Authority released provisional results for the legislative
elections on 5 January. A total of 21 candidates, including two women, were elected
in the first round, while 122, including 13 women, qualified for a run -off.
9.
On 18 January, the Constitutional Court rejected most challenges based on
insufficient evidence or because irregularities would not have changed the results.
The Court validated the results of the presidential election, announcing the re -election
of President Touadéra, with 53.16 per cent of the 599,416 validated votes. The Court
established the overall turnout at 35.25 per cent of registered voters and annulled the
results for both presidential and legislative elections in Bambari, Baoro, Bozoum,
Carnot 1 and Carnot 2 owing to insecurity and destruction of electoral material.
Leaders of the opposition coalition COD-2020 publicly rejected President Touadéra’s
re-election and the final results of the first round of legislative elections, on
19 January and 2 February, respectively.
10. There were reports of state agents targeting the political opposition. On
14 January, the Government prevented presidential candidate and former head of the
transition Catherine Samba-Panza from boarding an international flight, a decision
that was subsequently rescinded. Following the confirmation of his re-election, on
2/20

21-01548

S/2021/146

18 January President Touadéra addressed the nation, expressing his readiness to unite
the country and engage in dialogue with the political opposition.
11. On 1 February, the Constitutional Court proclaimed the final results of the
legislative elections, with 22 candidates elected in the first round, including two
women, and invalidated the victory of 6 candidates. The poll was cancelled in
13 constituencies. COD-2020 announced the withdrawal of its candidates from the
remaining legislative elections. On 3 February, the Union pour le renouveau
centrafricain opposition party announced that it would remain engaged in the electoral
process.
12. The Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the Central African
Republic, alongside international partners, engaged with national stakeholders,
including presidential candidates, to facilitate the creation of conditions conducive to
holding credible, inclusive and peaceful elections within constitutional timelines. The
Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations reinforced this strategic engagement,
including during a visit with the African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security
and the ECCAS Commission President to Bangui from 27 to 30 October. The
Secretary-General amplified this message through radio and video messages on the
eve of the launch of the campaign.
13. From 9 to 12 December, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Central Africa and the ECCAS Commission President visited the Central African
Republic to engage with national stakeholders. On 2 December, the United Nations
Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa decided to
support the Central African political process.
14. On 26 December, President Denis Sassou Nguesso of the Republic of the Congo,
in his capacity as ECCAS president, convened an extraordinary meeting of ECCAS
heads of State focused on the Central African Republic. Members condemned
violence and called for inclusive political dialogue, the deployment of troops from
the subregion and the prompt appointment of an ECCAS permanent mediator for the
Central African Republic. On 29 January, following a mini-summit of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region on the situatio n in the Central
African Republic, convened by President João Lourenço of Angola in his capacity as
acting president of the Conference, a joint call was issued for dialogue and for armed
groups to observe an immediate ceasefire.
Electoral preparations
15. Voter registration in the Central African Republic and the diaspora concluded
on 13 October, with 1,858,236 Central Africans, including 867,167 women (46.67 per
cent), registered. The Government did not provide the legal framework to enfranchise
Central African refugees.
16. On 14 October, a committee comprising political parties, public administration
and civil society representatives selected 11 new National Electoral Authority
commissioners, who were appointed by presidential decree on 16 October fo r a sevenyear term and sworn in on 23 October. Opposition leaders expressed the view that
some new commissioners lacked impartiality and/or qualifications.
17. On 26 October, the Constitutional Court permitted 27 political parties to submit
candidates for the legislative elections despite failing to meet the 35 per cent quota
for female candidates, acknowledging socioeconomic and other constraints to
women’s political participation. On 3 December, the Constitutional Court validated
1,504 candidates, including 234 women (15.59 per cent), an increase of five per cent
in women’s participation compared to 2015. MINUSCA, with the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) and the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality
21-01548

3/20

S/2021/146

and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), established a hotline and a situation
room dedicated to protecting women candidates and voters from electoral violence.
18. Throughout November, National Electoral Authority agents and service
providers protested in Bangui and threatened to suspend their support for electoral
operations, demanding outstanding salaries and per diem arrears. On 8 December, the
Government provided UNDP with $1.4 million to pay those arrears, and that process
was completed a week before the elections.
19. On 1 February, the Constitutional Court instructed the Government and the
National Electoral Authority to organize the second round and new rounds of
legislative elections for the installation of the National Assembly no later than 2 May.
The National Electoral Authority subsequently announced that those elections would
take place on 14 March.
20. MINUSCA and the United Nations country team continued to support electoral
preparations, including through the transport and distribution of electoral material.
As at 1 February, the UNDP-managed basket fund for the presidential, legislative and
local elections through 2022 had spent or already committed $28.1 million of the
$29 million disbursed by the Government and its international partners. It has a gap
of up to $3 million for the legislative run-off elections and approximately $10 million
for local elections.
Peace process
21. While implementation of the Political Agreement stalled owing to the elections
and security context, some progress was made, particularly in disarmament and
demobilization. Following five months of inactivity, the Agreement’s national level
implementation mechanism convened on 5 February to recognize the two -year
anniversary of the Political Agreement and discuss dialogue with stakeholders in t he
peace process. Local-level mechanisms met in some areas, where they promoted
inclusive dialogue to reduce tensions with active engagement of women leaders. They
also played a critical role in the holding of fair, inclusive and peaceful elections by
raising awareness among community leaders and armed group commanders.
22. On 31 December, following the establishment of CPC, President Touadéra
signed decrees rescinding the appointments of Maxime Mokom of the anti -balaka, Bi
Sidi Souleymane (alias Sidiki) of 3R; Mahamat Hamat Alhissene (alias Al-Khatim)
of MPC; and Ali Darassa of UPC, all involved in CPC. Mokom had been the Minister
of Disarmament, Demobilization, Reinsertion and Repatriation, while the others had
been advisors to the Prime Minister for the special mixed security units.
23. The special mixed security units remained non-operational in Bouar and Paoua
due to absence of military orders, while many elements reportedly deserted or
defected, often with weapons. Lack of internal cohesion, command and control, and
insufficient sustainment, as well as interpersonal tensions, also plagued these units.
The training center in Ndélé in the north-east was completed; the start of actual
training was postponed principally owing to delays by armed groups in fin alizing lists
of candidates. On 11 November, the President chaired a ceremony marking the launch
of the integration process of 292 ex-combatants into the national defence and internal
security forces, including 15 women.
Local dialogue and reconciliation
24. On 9 and 10 November, the Government, with MINUSCA support, held a
conference in Bangui to foster peace between Runga and Gula ethnic groups in the
Vakaga, Haute-Kotto and Bamingui-Bangoran Prefectures. Thirteen ethnic
communities and eight signatory armed groups agreed to a reconciliation pact to end
violence, contributing to a peaceful election process in the two Prefectures.

4/20

21-01548

S/2021/146

III. Security situation
25. The security situation deteriorated owing to armed violence by CPC -affiliated
armed groups, especially in the north-west and south-east. The military and police
capabilities of MINUSCA were stretched thin, while pressure on the Mission
intensified owing to widespread defections and desertions among national security
forces. Despite these challenges, the Mission preserved constitutional order, protected
civilians and enabled the polls in most of the country, albeit at a high cost.
26. As at 1 February, recorded violations of the Political Agreement had decreased
from the 644 in the previous reporting period to 530. However, the numbers fail to
convey the impact of the violations on the security situation and the serious setbacks
to extending state authority. Civilians were the target of 277 violations, followed by
illegal military activities (130), restrictions of movement (91) and obstruction of state
institutions, humanitarian organizations or the United Nations (32). The anti-balaka
perpetrated most violations (127), followed by FPRC (100), 3R (100), MPC (80),
UPC (78), national defence and security forces (33), Révolution et justice -Sayo
Branch (RJ-Sayo) (9), Mouvement des libérateurs centrafricains pour la justice
(MLCJ) (1), Rassemblement patriotique pour le renouveau de la Centrafrique (RPRC)
(1) and Parti du rassemblement de la nation centrafricaine (1).
27. Attacks by armed groups took place across the country before, during and after
polling day in an attempt to seize power and disrupt the democratic process. Seven
peacekeepers were killed and five injured. Serious incidents targeting the opposition
fuelled mistrust among political actors and undermined faith in the democratic
process. In early December, national security forces searched the homes of several
political figures, including Mr. Bozizé, his eldest son, and Mr. Mokom, on unclear
grounds. On 23 December, unidentified actors set the house of Mr. Bozizé’s son in
Bangui on fire under the watch of the Presidential Guard.
28. Security developments before the elections set the stage for the increase in
violence surrounding polling day. On 5 October, a government delegation and
guarantors of the Political Agreement met 3R leadership, which committed to the
electoral process and extension of state authority. Reportedly frustrated that the
President had not responded to its demands, 3R strengthened and expanded its
positions in the Nana-Mambéré, Ouham-Pendé and Mambéré-Kadei Prefectures
starting 12 November; attacks increased after 3R leader Sidiki Abbas met with
Mr. Bozizé in mid-December. The decision on 30 November by UPC leader Ali
Darassa and FPRC Chief of Staff Ali Ousta to jointly lead the command of the “mixed
brigade” illustrated the growing dominance of UPC in Haute Kotto P refecture.
29. There was an upsurge of security incidents by anti-balaka, 3R, MPC, FPRC and
Révolution et justice armed groups in the northwest after Mr. Bozizé mobilized armed
groups. CPC aligned armed groups launched simultaneous, coordinated attacks fro m
three main axes towards Bangui and across the country, including on Baboua,
Bambari, Bozoum, Grimari and Sibut, between 18 and 23 December. CPC further
disrupted movements on the main supply route (MSR-1) connecting Bangui to the
Cameroon border and temporarily cut off power to Bangui.
30. In response, MINUSCA deployed all its reserves, including two quick reaction
forces, pre-positioned the joint task force for Bangui and strengthened its overall
posture, in coordination with national defence and security forces within the
framework of the integrated security plan for the elections. MINUSCA successfully
disrupted attacks, including against national armed forces positions such as in
Bossembélé and Yaloké, Ombella-M’Poko Prefecture, and Bozoum, Ouham-Pendé
Prefecture. On 25 December, in Dékoa, three MINUSCA peacekeepers were killed
while supporting national defence and security forces under attack.
21-01548

5/20

S/2021/146

31. On election day, in the west, CPC elements attacked voting centres in Bozoum
and Bouar. In Ouham, Ouham-Pendé and Nana-Mambéré Prefectures and in part of
Ombella-M’Poko Prefecture, CPC elements threatened electoral agents, resulting in
the closure of polling stations, and destroyed and burned electoral material in several
polling stations. Various polling stations in Bria closed following shootings by UPC
and anti-balaka elements, while those in Yalinga were burned. Other polling stations
in the east and centre were unable to open or closed rapidly owing to insecurity and/or
absence of state electoral agents.
32. CPC continued attacks against national security and defence forces,
non-governmental organizations and MINUSCA after election day, mainly in the
north-west and south-east, notably in Bangassou, Bouar and Grimari. On 13 January,
a significant number of CPC elements conducted simultaneous and coordinated
attacks on several locations in the outskirts of Bangui. MINUSCA repelled the attacks
alongside national defence and security forces and bilaterally deployed troops. One
peacekeeper was killed, as were 37 combatants.
33. On 15 January, another peacekeeper was killed and two injured while repelling
an ambush by CPC elements near Grimari, Ouaka Prefecture. Two others lost their
lives on 18 January when ambushed by CPC on the Bangassou -Gambo axis, Mbomou
Prefecture. That same day, the Mission repelled a CPC attack on a MINUSCA convoy
on MSR-1 that injured three contracted drivers.
34. Electoral violence prompted a nationwide curfew on 7 January. In Bangui,
internal security forces, while enforcing the national curfew, fired shots, killing two
civilians and wounding six on 11 January. On 18 January, national armed forces
fatally shot a civilian at a checkpoint, reportedly owing to his refusal to comply with
their orders. On 21 January the Government declared a 15-day nationwide state of
emergency due to the security situation, which was extended for six months by the
National Assembly on 5 February.
35. The electoral security plan envisaged the national forces as first responders to
security threats. MINUSCA was compelled to assume most security responsibilities
owing to the failure of national forces to deploy agreed numbers before the elections
and significant defections and desertions among those deployed. Out of the 2,500
national armed forces originally planned for deployment, 296 deployed, while 394
internal security forces deployed out of the planned 759. Approximately
50 sub-prefectures were not covered by either the armed forces or internal security
forces owing to financial and logistical shortfalls. In the west and centre, some
national forces who had abandoned their posts sought refuge and protection in
MINUSCA bases with their weapons, resulting in challenges and concerns for the
safety and security of United Nations personnel. In some instances, defected soldiers
crossed into a neighbouring country.
36. In addition to adapting its robust posture, MINUSCA received two infantry
companies and two military utility helicopters from the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) through inter-mission cooperation to enhance security for
civilians and the elections. Additional security support for the national defence and
security forces were deployed at the request of the Government under bilateral
agreements.

IV. Humanitarian situation
37. The humanitarian situation deteriorated as a result of attacks against civilians and
humanitarian workers, intercommunal tensions and armed group violence. Over half
the population (2.8 million people) require humanitarian assistance and protection, with
1.9 million affected by severe needs. Approximately 2.3 million people suffer from
acute food insecurity, among whom 525,000 are in the emergency phase.
6/20

21-01548

S/2021/146

38. Since mid-December, it is estimated that 240,000 people were newly displaced
within the Central African Republic owing to election-related violence, including
124,000 who were able to return home. In addition, an estimated 105,000 Central
Africans fled to neighbouring countries. As at 31 December 2020, approximately
682,000 Central Africans were internally displaced; an additional 635,000 lived as
refugees in neighbouring countries. The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees facilitated the return of 4,937 Central African refugees
in 2020.
39. In 2020, there were 424 incidents targeting humanitarians, resulting in three
deaths and 29 injuries, a 39 per cent increase in comparison to 306 incidents in 2019.
There were 66 incidents against humanitarian workers in January 2021, the highest
number ever recorded. The most dangerous areas for hum anitarian workers are
Bangui, followed by Ndélé, Batangafo, Kaga Bandoro and Bria. Most recent incidents
relate to interference in relief delivery, threats, diversion of aid, illegal taxation and
movement restrictions.
40. COVID-19 and the sustained disruption of the main supply route owing to
violence exacerbated vulnerabilities, having a severe impact on the humanitarian
situation, including by preventing delivery of vital aid and inflating the prices of basic
household goods. In January, there were shortages of basic food items in several local
markets, with a two-fold increase in prices for key items such as sugar and cassava,
deepening inequalities and aggravating the protection crisis. MINUSCA supported
efforts to contain the virus’ spread, including through projects to build or rehabilitate
water points.
41. In 2020, humanitarian actors provided 1.64 million people per month with
multisectoral assistance, 90 per cent of the target of the 2020 humanitarian response
plan. This was enabled by improved access in certain areas and increased coordinated
response capacities. A total of $365 million of the 2020 humanitarian response plan
target of $553.6 million was mobilized. The 2021 humanitarian response plan
requiring $444.7 million was only 8 per cent fund ed as at 1 February.

V. Protection of civilians
42. MINUSCA updated contingency plans for each field office to anticipate
election-related security and humanitarian risks. Capacity-building sessions
strengthened community alert networks in several locations, which facilitated
information-sharing with the Force, enhancing physical protection of civilians.
43. Electoral violence multiplied threats against civilians. Violence attributed to the
CPC disrupted the protective environment that MINUSCA had helped create,
multiplying threats against civilians such as in Bangassou, which resulted in massive
displacement. MINUSCA adjusted its robust posture, operations and presence to
protect civilians despite being overstretched by the end of December.
44. In October and December, civilian and police surge teams deployed to
Batangafo, Ouham Prefecture, following a deterioration in security. Before election
day, MINUSCA deployed human rights and police personnel to hotspots to monitor
the elections and document human rights violations and abuses. MINUSCA continued
to coordinate closely with humanitarian organizations and the United Nations country
team to identify risks, challenges and solutions to protect civilians, as well as to
strengthen civil-military coordination with bilateral forces on humanitarian principles
and activities.

21-01548

7/20

S/2021/146

VI. Extension of state authority and the rule of law
45. The Government continued to implement its strategy for the extension of State
authority, supported by MINUSCA and the United Nations country team. MINUSCA
launched 17 projects to reinforce the capacity of executive civil servants in three pilot
prefectures.
46. A total of 15 out of 16 prefects and 54 out of 71 sub-prefects remained at their
post throughout the violence. They contributed to holding elections, including in areas
with heightened security risks. Some discharged their duties from MINUSCA
premises where they had sought refuge following threats.
Security sector reform
47. MINUSCA continued to provide strategic and technical support to national
authorities to implement the national security sector strategy and respective sectoral
plans. Despite this support and the training and equipment by international partners,
national defence and internal security forces faced numerous challenges during the
electoral period. On 6 January, the Minister of Defence requested the general
inspectorate of the army to inspect the staffing and deployment of national defence
forces, including operational readiness, command and control, sustainment, public
expenditure management, logistical support and oversight, as well as human rights
violations allegations. The European Union Military Training Mission in the Central
African Republic and MINUSCA are assisting the national authori ties in this review.
National armed and internal security forces
48. Since 17 December, MINUSCA has reported numerous instances of national
armed forces abandoning positions with their weapons in the prefectures of
Bamingui-Bangoran, Lobaye, Mbomou, Nana-Gribizi, Nana Mambéré, Ombella
M’Poko, Ouaka, and Ouham Pendé, individual cases of desertion and defection, as
well as human rights violations by these forces. As part of the 2019/2020 recruitment
campaign, 578 recruits had completed basic training by the European Union Training
Mission in the Central African Republic at the end of November. A second basic
training course for 438 recruits started on 5 January. CPC attacks, including partial
looting of the military camp in Bouar, undermined efforts to establish the west
military defence zone.
49. As at 1 February, 4,909 internal security forces, including 2,258 police officers
(597 women) and 2,651 gendarmes (351 women), were deployed to all prefectures
except Basse-Kotto, MINUSCA and UNDP trained 689 police officers and
gendarmes, including 197 women, on election security. MINUSCA observed cases of
abandonment of position by internal security forces in Mbomou, Nana -Gribizi, and
Ouaka Prefectures. In November, 1,198 recruits, including 317 w omen, entered police
and gendarmerie training schools.
50. The Mine Action Service handed over a regional ammunition depot in Bouar to
national authorities and continued coordination with the authorities for the
installation of five specialized storage facilities. The Service trained more than 408
members of the MINUSCA force, United Nations entities and humanitarian actors on
explosive ordnance risk.
Disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation
51. The Government continued disarmament and demobilization operations in the
centre and north-east, with MINUSCA support. Operations were conducted from
16 October to 1 December in Birao, Bria and Kaga Bandoro for 437 combatants,

8/20

21-01548

S/2021/146

including 21 women, from RPRC, MLCJ, FPRC, MPC, and Séléka-Rénové; 282
weapons of war, 10,342 rounds of ammunition and 60 explosives were collected. A
total of 2,532 former combatants, including 144 women, have entered the programme
since it started in December 2018.
52. Electoral violence increased the risks of youth recruitment and potential for
renewed intercommunal violence. As part of community violence reduction activities,
as at 1 February, 2,242 beneficiaries, including 886 women, were registered and
56 war weapons, 1,118 artisanal weapons, 20 unexploded ordnance and 143
ammunitions were collected in Bangassou, Bangui, Bossangoa, Bouar, Bria, and Kaga
Bandoro.
Justice and the rule of law
53. Between 1 December 2020 and 1 February 2021, 311 prisoners escaped from
the Bambari, Bangassou, Bimbo women’s, Bossembélé, Bouar, Carnot, Mbaïki and
Nola prisons. While some individuals detained for serious crimes escaped from Bouar
prison, an increasing number of high-profile detainees are in Bangui prisons. Most
escapes followed attacks by armed groups or rumours of attacks, leading national
prison and security personnel to abandon their posts. This situation, exacerbated by
the underperformance of those responsible for perimeter security, is straining
MINUSCA support to prisons. On 13 January, the training of 151 prison offi cer
candidates was temporarily suspended owing to electoral violence in Bangui.
54. On 13 November, President Touadéra inaugurated the headquarters of the
Special Criminal Court, which had been refurbished by MINUSCA and UNDP. The
President appointed five international magistrates, and the Court’s legal aid system
became operational on 6 November 2020.
55. Electoral violence had a serious impact on the functioning of the justice sector.
As at 1 February, 69 per cent of 208 planned judicial personnel were in their posts
and 60 per cent of first instance and appellate courts operational. The Ministry of
Justice suspended all temporary judicial missions to areas controlled by armed groups
owing to violence, while MINUSCA supported the relocation of magistrates from
Bangassou, Bouar and Paoua to Bangui.
56. Between 1 October 2020 and 1 February 2021, MINUSCA transferred to
national authorities in Bangui 66 individuals who had been arrested, including
through the use of urgent temporary measures, on suspicion of h aving committed
various criminal offences, including 48 suspected of electoral violence.

VII. Human rights and the fight against impunity
57. The human rights situation deteriorated, as electoral violence led to widespread
human rights violations beginning in December. MINUSCA documented serious
human rights abuses, perpetrated mainly by armed groups, including the abduction
and killing of civilians, physical attacks, death threats against voters, violation of
freedom of movement, destruction of electoral materials and burning of polling
stations. Since polling day, state agents have conducted several arbitrary arrests, and
their enforcement of a nationwide curfew resulted in cases of disproportionate and
excessive use of force.
58. Between 1 October 2020 and 1 February 2021, MINUSCA documented 267
incidents of human rights violations affecting 448 victims (262 men, 51 women,
16 boys, 15 girls, 63 groups of collective victims and 40 unidentified victims) and
41 conflict-related civilian deaths, despite COVID-19 restrictions limiting the
investigative capacity of MINUSCA. This represents an increase of 60.6 per cent in
21-01548

9/20

S/2021/146

the number of incidents, 56.2 per cent in the number of victims and 87.6 per cent in
the number of conflict-related civilian deaths compared to the previous reporting
period.
59. Signatory armed groups, including those in CPC, perpetrated most violations
and abuses and were involved in 222 incidents affecting 356 victims, a 56.2 per cent
increase in the number of incidents and 46.8 per cent in the number of victims
compared to the previous reporting period. State agents, primarily members of the
national defence and internal security forces, were involved in 37 violations affecting
64 victims, an increase of 144 per cent in the number of incidents and 238.5 per cent
in the number of victims compared to the previous period.
60. On 24 January 2021, the national authorities surrendered to the International
Criminal Court Mahamat Said Abdel Kani, suspected of war crimes and crimes
against humanity allegedly committed in Bangui in 2013 as a Séléka commander.
61. The Mission continued to apply the United Nations human rights due diligence
policy in its support to national security forces, conducting eight risk assessments.
Transitional justice
62. After delays, on 2 December the selection committee for the future truth, justice,
reparation and reconciliation commission recommended 11 commissioners, including
five women, a significant advancement for gender equality in Central African
institutions. On 30 December, President Touadéra confirmed their nomination for a
four-year term by presidential decree. MINUSCA and UNDP provided advocacy and
technical assistance, with funding from the Peacebuilding Fund.
Conflict-related sexual violence
63. Movement of troops and armed clashes linked to the elections exposed women,
girls, men and boys to increased risk of conflict-related sexual violence. MINUSCA
received 51 allegations of conflict-related sexual violence, mostly rape, affecting at
least 111 victims (62 women, 42 girls and 7 girls of unknown age believed to be
minors). Election-related insecurity had an impact on the medical, psychosocial and
legal services available to victims.
64. Between October and December, MINUSCA conducted five workshops on the
prevention of sexual violence in the electoral context, in addition to awareness-raising
activities for over 2,300 individuals, including to prevent electoral violence against
female voters and candidates.
Children and armed conflict
65. Between 26 and 30 November, the Country Task Force on Monitoring and
Reporting interviewed and verified 255 children (94 girls and 161 boys) associated
with FPRC from the list of 267 children it had presented on 3 November as part of
the national disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation programme.
The separated children entered reintegration programmes funded by the United
Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF). On 30 November, four children accused of
association with armed groups who had been detained at Ngaragba prison in Bangui
were released and enrolled in reintegration programmes.
66. As part of the “ACT to protect children affected by armed conflict” campaign,
MINUSCA raised awareness among 2,328 individuals on increased risks of grave
child rights violations during the electoral period. On 27 December and subsequent
days, CPC attacked 17 schools serving as polling stations.

10/20

21-01548

S/2021/146

VIII. Socioeconomic situation
67. COVID-19 continued to have a negative impact on the country’s socioeconomic
situation. The International Monetary Fund confirmed the trend of gross domestic
product (GDP) contraction (minus 1 per cent in 2020), with a deterioration of the
budget deficit to 6.3 per cent of GDP, against an expected 2.8 per cent. The 2021
budget law aims to improve domestic revenue and the efficiency of public spending
and to strengthen governance and the business climate.
68. According to the World Bank, pre-existing structural problems in the Central
African economy have exacerbated the impact of the pandemic. This impact may wipe
out years of progress in human development, driving as many as an additional 92,800
people into poverty, which is estimated to have risen from 70.5 per cent in 2019 to
72.2 per cent in 2020.
69. The pandemic affected more than 2 million Central Africans, or just less than
half of the entire population, with job losses particularly affecting the infor mal sector,
which includes 90 per cent of employees. In response, the United Nations has
supported job protection schemes in both the formal and informal sectors.
70. To improve the Government’s ability to monitor implementation of the national
reconciliation and recovery plan, its permanent secretariat launched in November a
programmatic monitoring tool with World Bank and United Nations support. Training
for the tool, which will provide a complete overview of all development initiatives
being implemented, with real-time monitoring, began in January 2021.

IX. United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic
Military component
71. As at 1 February, the strength of the military component of MINUSCA was
11,451 (5.2 per cent women), out of an authorized strength of 11,650 personnel,
including 297 staff officers (57 women) and 136 military observers (35 women). It
comprised 11 infantry battalions; one high-readiness protection battalion; one battle
group; three quick reaction force companies, including one special forces company;
and enabling units, specifically one military police company, three multi -purpose
engineering companies, one reduced engineering company, one airfield construction
engineering company, one heavy transport company, three level-II hospitals and one
level-I-plus hospital with forward surgery and orthopedic modules, three helicopter
units and four unmanned aerial vehicles. The force further improved its mobility and
protection by increasing the number of mechanized companies, allowing
17 temporary operating bases to close.
72. On 23 December 2020, the Security Council authorized the two-month
reinforcement, extended by an additional two months on 10 February 2021, of
MINUSCA in the context of inter-mission cooperation with UNMISS, as requested in
the letters from the Secretary-General dated 22 December 2020 (S/2020/1290) and
4 February 2021 (S/2021/126), following election-related violence. Two infantry
companies (300 personnel) arrived in Bangui on 24 December 2020, and military
utility helicopters on 30 December 2020 and 5 January 2021, for a to tal of two
UNMISS helicopters and 355 personnel.
73. The Mission took steps to optimize the use of available resources to counter
threats emerging from a deteriorating security situation. MINUSCA also took strong
measures to enhance performance and protect peacekeepers in the changing context,
in line with the Action for Peacekeeping initiative. Adjustments to the force posture
21-01548

11/20

S/2021/146

included utilizing all reserve units and quick reaction force units, especially in
Bambari, Bangassou, Bossembele, Bouar and Sibut. The defence plan for Bangui was
activated to strengthen the posture in the capital.
74. All of the military capabilities of MINUSCA are fully engaged, including the
temporary augmentation through intermission cooperation. In order to strengthen the
ability of MINUSCA to perform its priority mandated tasks as outlined in resolution
2552 (2020) in the evolving context, the Mission requires an increase of a maximum
of 2,750 additional troops. The objectives of this augmentation would be to control
and reverse the current instability while incentivizing compliance with the Political
Agreement, addressing threats to civilians and creating space for a revitalized
political process.
75. The additional capabilities will provide MINUSCA with greater anticipatory
capacity and enhanced actionable analysis ability to rapidly respond to threats to
civilians in priority geographic areas by reinforcing the Mission’s pre -emptive and
reactive posture. Their operational achievements would be integrated within
MINUSCA strategic efforts to protect civilians, facilitate humanitarian access and
enhance the safety and security of United Nations personnel. These reinforcements
would be deployed sequentially as outlined below, with capabilities prioritized and
based on regular reviews of the political and security situation. In the short and
medium term, the requested reinforcements would comprise an additional battalion
to secure the main supply route; four quick reaction forces to provide intervention
capacity to the four sectors; three companies to reinforce existing battalions; force
and sector staff officers; and analysts, including imagery analysts. In the longer term,
the requested reinforcements would include additional horizontal engineering
capacity for mobility and bridging; air assets for air-to-ground targeting; and mobile
unmanned aerial vehicles to enhance operations and intelligence surveillance
reconnaissance capacity.
Police component
76. As at 1 February, MINUSCA police component was 2,057 personnel (12.98 per
cent women), out of an authorized strength of 2,080, including 383 individual police
officers (105 women) and 1,674 personnel (162 women) in 11 formed police units,
including one with embedded special weapons and tactics (SWAT) capacity and one
protection support unit. The protection support unit, along with six formed police
units, are in Bangui under the joint task force. Five formed police units, are deployed
in Bambari, Berberati, Bouar, Bria and Kaga Bandoro. Part of the Kaga Bandoro unit
remains deployed in Batangafo to improve the protection of civilians and support the
delivery of humanitarian assistance.
77. Given the evolving context, the police component would require an additional
940 personnel, including, in the immediate term, officers to reinforce five formed
police units, deployed outside Bangui and individual police officers to increase
footprint while supporting internal security forces; and in the medium term, three new
formed police units, with SWAT embedded capabilities, which would deploy in
Bangassou, Bossangoa and Ndélé.
78. The additional capabilities would support MINUSCA efforts to help maintain
law and order, including through urgent temporary measures; facilitate humanitarian
access, including in camps for internally displaced persons, and enhance the
protection of United Nations personnel and assets. In the light of the weaknesses
revealed by the elections in the internal security forces, MINUSCA will work with
partners to review and adjust security sector reform efforts, while supporting internal
security forces by improving police monitoring, mentoring and advisory capabilities,
including community-oriented policing.

12/20

21-01548

S/2021/146

Civilian personnel
79. As at 1 February, 1,477 civilian personnel (26 per cent of whom were women),
including 252 United Nations Volunteers and 104 government-provided correctional
personnel, served with MINUSCA. This represents 91 per cent of 1,624 approved
positions.
Status of forces agreement
80. On 7 November 2020, a MINUSCA national staff member was arrested without
charge by the director of the Presidential Guard based on a complaint that the staff
member had filed for theft against an associate of the director. The Bangui General
Prosecutor ordered the staff member’s release on 9 November, following MINUSCA
intervention.
81. Despite the Mission’s interventions for the release of explosives intended for
the purposes of training national armed forces, the national authorities have continued
to date to retain the materiel, which was seized on 25 August 2020.
Safety and security of United Nations personnel
82. Between 1 October 2020 and 1 February 2021, 196 security incidents involving
United Nations personnel were recorded. Twelve personnel died, including seven
peacekeepers killed during operations, three in a road traffic accident and two from
illness. Thirty-seven personnel were injured, including 26 in road traffic accidents,
six from physical assault and five during military operations. Movements of United
Nations personnel were restricted in some locations owing to increased security risks.
Non-essential movement in the Mission area has been prohibited since 17 December
owing to risks associated with the electoral period.
83. As at 1 February, MINUSCA recorded a total of 573 confirmed COVID -19
cases, including 11 active cases, 548 recoveries and five deaths; United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes registered 54 confirmed COVID -19 cases, with
50 recoveries and four active cases. MINUSCA has established proactive preventive
guidelines and measures for personnel, which include self-isolation as necessary and
testing.
Serious misconduct, including sexual exploitation and abuse
84. Between 1 October 2020 and 31 December 2020, nine allegations of sexual
exploitation and abuse were reported against MINUSCA military personnel. A total
of 27 allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse were recorded in 2020, 20 of which
related to incidents allegedly committed in previous years (or in one instance at an
unknown time). The MINUSCA 24-hour hotline continued to serve as a critical tool
in reporting misconduct.
85. Training on the Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation
and abuse and other serious misconduct continued to be delivered remotely owing to
COVID-19. MINUSCA provided guidance and material for military and police
contingents to conduct self-training at post locations and supported them in
undertaking self-risk assessments focused on sexual exploitation and abuse, as well
as other forms of misconduct.
86. MINUSCA continued to disseminate messages on prevention and response to
sexual exploitation and abuse, reaching out through 27 community -based complaint
networks, local radio and text messages, and working in partnership with
communities. Newly identified victims were referred for needs assessment and
assistance, while previously recorded victims continued to be assisted.

21-01548

13/20

S/2021/146

Support considerations
87. MINUSCA continued to reduce its environmental footprint. 57 wastewater
treatment plants are fully operational. Remediation of the Kolongo landfill project
continued, and equipment is being procured for 13 waste management yards.
MINUSCA reduced its energy consumption by synchronizing generators at 12 of its
14 sites where synchronization is possible and installed renewable energy systems,
including a full solar system, at one base.
Action for peacekeeping and performance optimization
88. Through the good offices of the Special Representative, MINUSCA sought
political solutions to the increased tensions and election-related violence,
collaborating closely with partners. Enabling political dialogue among relevant
national stakeholders remained a priority.
89. No training evaluation or operational readiness assessments were carried out
during the reporting period, owing to the force’s engagement in election -related
security operations. MINUSCA submitted evaluations of seven formed police units;
six of them were deemed satisfactory on the basis of readiness, COVID -19 prevention
measures and good discipline and morale. The unit rated below satisfactory overall
had shortfalls in sustainment, which is being rectified.
90. MINUSCA increased its use of analysis from the comprehensive planning and
performance assessment system to support mission planning, decision -making,
strategy development and budget formulation. MINUSCA continues to broaden its
database of data visuals and long-term data analysis to support adaptive planning and
decision-making.

X. Financial considerations
91. The General Assembly, by its resolution 74/284 and decision 74/571 of 30 June
2020, appropriated the amount of $937.7 million for the maintenance of the Mission
for the period from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2021. As at 2 February 2021, unpaid
assessed contributions to the Special Account for MINUSCA amounted to
$488.3 million. The total outstanding assessed contributions for all peacekeeping
operations as at that date amounted to $3,212.8 million. Reimbursement of troop and
formed police costs has been made for the period up to 30 September 2020, while
reimbursement of the costs of contingent-owned equipment has been made for the
period up to 30 June 2020, in accordance with the quarterly payment schedule.

XI. Observations
92. The courage demonstrated by the people of the Central African Republic when
they cast their ballots on 27 December provides hope for the country’s fragile
democracy. Citizens who were not obstructed by disenfranchisement or violence
fulfilled their fundamental civic responsibility, sometimes at a grievously high cost.
In doing so, many braved insecurity, violence and threats. I salute in particular the
Central African women who insisted on contributing to the electoral process despite
systemic and other obstacles.
93. I strongly condemn by the attacks on peacekeepers, which may amount to war
crimes that can be prosecuted before national or international courts. I salute the
memory of the seven peacekeepers who paid the ultimate price since 25 December
and call on the Central African authorities to fully investigate these crimes to ensure

14/20

21-01548

S/2021/146

that those responsible are held accountable. I pay tribute to the courage and sacrifice
of all who continue to operate in highly challenging conditions in the service of peace.
That collective courage and sacrifice to help preserve democratic order must be
honoured, most importantly by commensurate demonstrations of resolve from Central
African leadership.
94. The Central African Republic is at a critical juncture that will determine if p eace
and stability will be restored and put on a firmer footing. Only a political solution
will achieve sustainable peace and development, and only the Central African leaders
and people can determine and follow that path. It is critical to advance efforts to end
the current crisis though broad and inclusive dialogue involving the voices of women,
youth and religious leaders, as well as confidence-building initiatives, including
accountability for perpetrators of violence, their supporters and enablers. I e ncourage
all Central Africans to take the path of reconciliation and justice rather than revenge.
Achieving and sustaining peace will require inclusive national efforts to broaden
political space, continue institutional reforms and develop a shared nationa l identity
that fully embraces the rich diversity of the population. I call on President Touadéra
to consolidate his legacy by prioritizing leading and consolidating national
reconciliation and dialogue efforts in his second term.
95. I am encouraged by the holding of the presidential and first round of legislative
elections in accordance with constitutional timelines. The timely conduct of elections
was critical in preserving the country’s constitutional order. I call on all political
leaders to use peaceful means to resolve their differences and to commit to
contributing to an environment conducive to the timely and peaceful completion of
the remaining electoral process. I welcome the invaluable political and financial
support of the international community and invite continued generosity for upcoming
electoral processes.
96. I condemn the violence which has persisted since the invalidation of Bozizé’s
presidential candidacy in early December. It has had an incalculable toll on civilian
lives and national institutions, including in localities that had achieved important
progress toward reconciliation and the establishment of state authority. I am also
concerned about the severe humanitarian and economic impact of the disruption of
vital supply routes by armed groups. This violence must stop immediately, and all
involved should engage in dialogue to advance the political process, preserve fragile
gains and fulfil the people’s aspiration for lasting peace . I welcome the participation
of the Central African population in all its diversity and the involvement of religious
platforms and civil society organizations in calling for non -violence. Social cohesion
needs to be the goal of all political efforts.
97. The people of the Central African Republic have consisten tly demanded justice
for those who have perpetrated serious crimes and violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law. I am deeply concerned by the increase in human rights
violations due to electoral violence and strongly condemn all perpet rators of these
violations. Furthermore, the recent targeted attacks on prisons resulting from electoral
violence have undermined efforts to advance accountability. I call on national
authorities to increase efforts, through the justice system, in pursuit of accountability
and to advance the fight against impunity in an impartial and independent manner. I
call on national authorities to denounce and prosecute any instances of hate speech
and incitement to violence, including against MINUSCA and partners, an d lead the
country in a spirit of national healing. In this regard, I am encouraged by further steps
taken towards the establishment of the truth, justice, reparation and reconciliation
commission.
98. Though the second anniversary of the Political Agreement was marred by
political tension and instability, important progress should be recognized. I am
21-01548

15/20

S/2021/146

encouraged that the Agreement’s various implementation mechanisms have proven
resilient, playing an important role in facilitating the holding of elections in some
parts of the country. I call on the Government to work together with signatory armed
groups to re-energize the Political Agreement’s full, effective and timely
implementation as the only viable path to addressing the crisis in the country,
including by taking stock of the achievements and challenges thus far. I further call
on newly elected parliamentarians to advance political reforms. I welcome the
dialogue initiative of the Government resulting in a reconciliation pact among
communities in the north-east.
99. During the tense electoral period, members of the Central African defence and
internal security forces deserted their positions while facing pressure by armed
elements, undermining the population’s trust and confidence. This has underscored
the important work that remains for Central African authorities to ensure that national
institutions assume their sovereign responsibility to protect the population through an
effective reform process. In addition to political will, it is essential to streng then
security sector governance and expenditure management so that the national defence
and internal security forces can achieve the necessary operational readiness. I call on
national authorities and international partners to draw lessons from the current reform
process and to adjust their approach to security sector reform accordingly. I further
call on national defence and internal security forces to abide by the rule of law and
international human rights principles, including during the current state of emergency.
100. MINUSCA provided important support to defend democratic order and prevent
armed groups from advancing towards Bangui, while also protecting civilians and
State authorities in many locations across the country, assuming a greater share of t he
burden than envisaged. The deployment of troops under a bilateral agreement with
the Government has helped to address the challenging security situation. I call on
national authorities to continue efforts to ensure close coordination among all security
partners operating in the country, including troops deployed under bilateral
agreements, in order to ensure the protection of peacekeepers and to facilitate
humanitarian access.
101. The electoral violence further deepened the protracted humanitarian crisi s in the
country. I am concerned by the resulting massive population displacement and the
added constraints on an already fragile food supply. It is essential to prioritize
sustaining peace and development dividends to local development interventions and
durable solutions for refugees and internally displaced persons. I condemn in the
strongest terms increased attacks against humanitarian workers and pay tribute to
those who have lost their lives or suffered injuries to ensure life -saving assistance to
millions. I invite all donors to generously contribute to the 2021 humanitarian
response plan. I further call on all parties to respect their obligations under
international humanitarian law and ensure humanitarian access.
102. Pre-existing vulnerabilities within the economy, now exacerbated by COVID-19
and the deterioration of the security situation, threaten the progress achieved through
the national reconciliation and recovery plan. To further socioeconomic development,
there is a need to enhance the economy’s resilience and expand efforts to provide
disenfranchised youth with access to economic opportunities. The country’s
infrastructure remains in urgent need of significant investment. I call on national
authorities to prioritize in the national budget the needs of the population and to
continue strengthening the nation’s institutions and governance mechanisms to
address structural issues that fuel violence, such as marginalization, discrimination,
corruption and uneven development.
103. As the Central African Republic finds itself at a crucial turning point, the
continued engagement of its international partners, particularly countries of the
16/20

21-01548

S/2021/146

region, remains essential to sustain peace and stability. The crisis in the country is
inextricably linked to the dynamics in the Central African region. I call upon the
region to use all means at its disposal to revitalize the political and joint security
mechanisms, particularly for enhanced border security. I welcome the imminent
appointment of an ECCAS permanent mediator for the Central African Republic, as
well the engagement of the heads of state and government of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region.
104. As indicated above, I recommend an increase of 2,750 military and 940 police
personnel, bringing the authorized ceilings for MINUSCA to 14,400 and 3,020,
respectively. These reinforcements are aimed at enhancing the ability of MINUSCA
to perform its priority mandated tasks in the current evolving context and at enabling
the Mission to enhance its capacity to prevent and reverse further deterioration in the
security situation while creating space for the political process to advance. These new
capabilities are not a substitute for the national authorities’ primary responsibility to
advance the peace process and protect the population and are not intended as a means
for a military solution to the present challenges. I recommend that the deployment of
these reinforcements be sequenced and based on regular reviews of the evolving
political and security context, in the framework of my regular progress reports to the
Security Council. In order to ensure the lasting impact of these capabilities, it will be
crucial to integrate their operational achievements within the wider strategic efforts
of the Mission.
105. Finally, I would like to express my deep appreciation to my Special
Representative for the Central African Republic and Head of MINUSCA, Mankeur
Ndiaye, for his leadership. I further express my gratitude to the United Nations
civilian and uniformed personnel for their determination and commitment. I also
thank all troop- and police-contributing countries, donor countries, regional and
multilateral organizations, non-governmental organizations and all other partners for
their invaluable support in contributing to peace and stability in the Central African
Republic. In particular, I wish to express my gratitude to the Political Agreement
guarantors, the African Union and ECCAS, and to the regional partners for their
continued strong engagement.

21-01548

17/20

S/2021/146

Annex I
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic: military and police
strength as at 1 February 2021
Military component

Police component

Experts on
Mission

Staff officers

Troops

Total

Argentina

0

2

0

2

Bangladesh

9

22

1 282

1 313

Benin

3

3

0

6

Bhutan

2

3

0

5

Bolivia (Plurinational State of)

3

2

0

5

Brazil

1

3

0

4

1

Burkina Faso

0

6

0

6

31

Burundi

8

10

746

764

Cambodia

2

2

204

208

Cameroon

2

5

750

757

Colombia

2

0

0

2

Congo

4

6

0

10

Côte d’Ivoire

0

1

0

1

Czechia

3

0

0

3

Djibouti

0

0

0

0

Egypt

6

23

984

1 013

France

0

9

0

9

Gabon

0

3

446

449

Gambia

3

4

0

7

11

Ghana

2

4

0

6

7

Guatemala

1

2

0

3

Guinea

0

0

0

0

Indonesia

7

8

200

215

Jordan

1

7

0

8

Kenya

7

8

0

15

Madagascar

0

0

0

0

Mali

0

0

0

0

Mauritania

8

7

450

465

Mexico

1

1

0

2

Morocco

2

18

749

769

Nepal

4

12

718

734

Niger

1

4

0

5

31

Nigeria

0

4

0

4

3

Pakistan

9

30

1 213

1 252

Paraguay

1

1

0

2

Peru

7

2

198

207

Philippines

2

0

0

2

Country

18/20

Formed Police
Units

Individual police
officers

20

280

26

138

0
27
6

140

19
6

11
140

1
31
1
16

278

21-01548

S/2021/146
Military component

Police component

Experts on
Mission

Staff officers

Troops

Total

Portugal

0

7

180

187

Republic of Moldova

3

1

0

4

Romania

0

0

0

0

Russian Federation

3

10

0

13

Rwanda

6

18

1 356

1 380

418

28

Senegal

0

5

0

5

280

22

Serbia

2

2

72

76

Sierra Leone

4

0

0

4

Spain

0

0

0

0

Sri Lanka

0

3

110

113

Sweden

0

0

0

0

3

Togo

4

5

0

9

31

Tunisia

2

0

0

2

37

United Republic of Tanzania

0

5

450

455

United States of America

0

8

0

8

Uruguay

0

2

0

2

Viet Nam

1

6

0

7

Zambia

9

13

910

932

Zimbabwe

1

0

0

1

Total

136

297

11 018

11 451

Country

21-01548

Formed Police
Units

Individual police
officers

2
9

3

1 674

383

19/20

S/2021/146

Annex II
Map

20/20

21-01548
