A /75/PV.50

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fifth session

50th plenary meeting

Thursday, 21 January 2021, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bozkir  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Turkey)

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 145 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/75/661/Add.1)
The President: Before proceeding to the item on
our agenda, I would like, in keeping with established
practice, to draw the attention of the General Assembly
to document A/75/661/Add.1, in which the SecretaryGeneral informs the President of the General Assembly
that since the issuance of his communication contained
in document A/75/661, Libya, the Niger and Zimbabwe
have made the payment necessary to reduce their arrears
below the amount specified in Article 19 of the Charter.
May I therefore take it that the General Assembly
takes note of the information contained in document
A/75/661/Add.1?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 15 (continued)
Culture of peace
Draft resolution (A/75/L.54)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saudi Arabia to introduce draft
resolution A/75/L.54.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in
Arabic): It is my pleasure today to address the General
Assembly on behalf of my country, the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia, and on behalf of the Kingdom of Morocco,

the Arab Republic of Egypt, the Kingdom of Bahrain,
the Sultanate of Oman, the United Arab Emirates, the
Republic of Yemen, the Islamic Republic of Pakistan
and scores of other friendly countries co-sponsoring
draft resolution A/75/L.54, entitled “Promoting a
culture of peace and tolerance to safeguard religious
sites”, which was drafted based on the United Nations
initiative to protect religious sites.
The draft resolution seeks to achieve a number of
objectives, including the following.
The first objective is to develop a culture of peace
regarding the relations among individuals, groups and
States and make that culture a strong shield against
extremism, hatred and violence, especially when they
are based on racial, religious and cultural differences.
Secondly is the harnessing of the culture of peace
to protect religious sites and symbols against acts of
violence, provocation and mockery.
The third goal is to avert a clash between religious
values and beliefs on the one hand and tolerance and
freedom of expression on the other hand, through
mutual respect and self-awareness of the limits that
should be respected to prevent any strife or provocation.
Fourthly, it asserts that there can be no justification
at all for the use of violence to express points of view,
especially in the case of respecting differences of
religions and beliefs.
And, fifthly, it stresses the great importance and
lofty status of religious sites and the need to maintain

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-01744 (E)

*2101744*

A/75/PV.50

and protect them as places of peace, enlightenment
and history.
Human bonds are the basis for equal rights and
dignity for all peoples. The main responsibility for that
is shared by all the countries of the world, as they are
committed to the purposes and principles enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations.
Religious sites are places of peace and worship.
They represent the history and social fabric of peoples.
It is painful to see religious sites being threatened
or destroyed, whether Muslim mosques, Christian
churches, Jewish synagogues or Sikh and Hindu temples.
We condemn any insult, mockery and
underestimation of religious symbols and respected
figures. We believe that freedoms should not be used as
a tool for provocation and clashes but rather as a catalyst
for understanding, dialogue and acceptance of others.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia stresses its firm
principled positions of respecting differences and
condemning aggression and terrorism whatever the
source or justification. We condemn anything that
could help in the commission of an act of terrorism,
whether by providing direct support to terrorists or by
provoking and inciting them, directly or indirectly, to
carry out criminal acts.
Today we submit this draft resolution, as its
sponsoring countries have worked together with all
Member States and regional groups in an inclusive
and transparent manner. We held lengthy discussions
for nearly four months to ensure that members’
concerns and proposals were taken into consideration
and included, in the best way possible, in the draft
resolution, which we hope will be adopted by consensus.
The aim is to promote unity and solidarity and to stress
to the world that we all stand united against terrorism
and extremism. We stand united to protect human
values and religious sites. We stand united to protect
fundamental human rights, including the freedom of
belief, freedom of opinion and freedom of expression,
within the framework of mutual respect, tolerance and
continuous dialogue.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/75/L.54. Before giving the floor for
explanations of vote before the voting, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
2/5

21/01/2021

Mr. Lopes da Graça (Portugal): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and
its 27 member States. The candidate countries the
Republic of North Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate to the EU
Bosnia and Herzegovina; and the European Free Trade
Association member country Liechtenstein, member of
the European Economic Area, as well as the Republic
of Moldova, align themselves with this statement.
It is also my honour to speak on behalf of the
following countries: Argentina, Australia, Brazil,
Canada, Mexico, Norway, New Zealand, Switzerland,
the United Kingdom and the United States. Together
we wish to explain our position on the draft resolution
contained in document A/75/L.54.
We value the importance of safeguarding cultural
heritage and religious sites. We recognize that this
subject was last addressed by the General Assembly
in 2001, while the Security Council adopted resolution
2347 (2017), and the issue is regularly addressed by
UNESCO. We are also staunch supporters of freedom
of religion or belief and actively encourage and support
interreligious and intercultural dialogue. These values
are at the core of our action at the United Nations.
In that regard, we would recall two landmark
periodic resolutions recently adopted by the General
Assembly, namely, on the freedom of religion or belief
(resolution 75/188) and on combating intolerance,
negative stereotyping, stigmatization, discrimination,
incitement to violence and violence against persons,
based on religion or belief (resolution 75/187). We
consider those texts to be the main references for
all matters relating to freedom of religion or belief,
interreligious and intercultural dialogue, understanding
and cooperation for peace. The resolutions have been
carefully negotiated by the Third Committee throughout
the years, at it is important to maintain the delicate
balance achieved. We firmly believe that the Third
Committee is the right forum to consider these issues.
At the same time, we would like to underline the
importance of freedom of expression. Everyone has the
right to freedom of expression and the freedom to hold
opinions, including on religion, and to receive and impart
information and ideas without interference by public
authorities. Furthermore, freedom of expression and
the role of media as platforms for expression represent
one of the most important pillars of democracy. Without
21-01744

21/01/2021

A/75/PV.50

freedom of expression and freedom of the media, an
informed, active and engaged citizenry is impossible.
In consideration of the aforementioned, we would
have wished that the draft resolution submitted for
adoption today had focused on the safeguarding
of religious sites in order to avoid duplication with
long-standing agreed texts and the cherry-picking of
resolutions. For that reason, throughout the negotiations
the proposals that we put forward were aimed at keeping
the focus mainly on the safeguarding of religious sites,
having in mind the overall balance of the text. We
also stressed the necessity of safeguarding important
human rights such as the freedom of expression and the
freedom of religion or belief against attempts to curtail
or redefine them.
We also strongly maintain that freedom of religion
and belief, including the right not to believe and to
change one’s religion or belief, belongs to individuals.
As enshrined in the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights, freedom of thought, conscience and
religion includes the freedom to practice religions either
individually or in community with others, in public or
in private. We stressed the notion that individuals, not
religions or belief systems and their symbols, are the
holders of rights.
The text in front of us today has been considerably
improved from the initial version thanks to inclusive
and transparent negotiations that allowed us to express
our concerns throughout the process. For that reason,
we will join the consensus today, with the clarifications
and understandings we have just expressed.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position before taking action.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/75/L.54, entitled “Promoting a culture of
peace and tolerance to safeguard religious sites”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/75/L.54, and in addition to those delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have also become
sponsors of draft resolution A/75/L.54: Azerbaijan,
Cameroon, Guatemala, Indonesia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Libya, Madagascar, Nicaragua, Qatar, Senegal
and Tunisia.

The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.54?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 75/258).

A/75/L.54

was

adopted

The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of position, may remind delegations that
explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Messenger (United States of America): The
United States strongly believes in encouraging a culture
of peace through the promotion of justice democracy,
human rights and fundamental freedoms, as well as
by rejecting violence and addressing the root causes of
conflict. In recognition of those values, we support the
resolution just adopted on promoting a culture of peace
and tolerance to safeguard religious sites (resolution
75/258). We thank the Kingdoms of Saudi Arabia and
Morocco for their leadership on the text and for their
work to ensure that it reflected the views of all United
Nations delegations.
The United States is a strong proponent of the
protection of religious sites and was a sponsor of
resolution 55/254 on this subject. We continue to
support the underlying premise of the resolution but
are concerned about its many references to limits on or
condemning speech and at times equating speech to acts
of violence. Odious or offensive speech is not in itself
a form of violence, and describing it as such should not
be used as a means to justify the suppression of speech
or the exercise of the right to freedom of expression.
Rather than seek restrictions to expression to deal
with intolerance and hate speech, the United States
advocates robust protections of speech as well as the
enforcement of appropriate legal regimes that deal
with discriminatory acts and hate crimes. We remind
Member States that, as recognized in the Istanbul
Process, the open, constructive and respectful debate
of ideas, as well as interfaith and intercultural dialogue
at the local, national, and international level, can play a
positive role in combating violence and religious hatred.
With regard to the reference in paragraph 8 to
“programmes and agendas pursued by extremist
individuals”, the United States understands the
paragraph to refer specifically to violent extremist
individuals. In addition, the United States is pleased to
join the European Union statement on this resolution
and recalls that the right to freedom of religion or belief

21-017443/5

A/75/PV.50

and freedom of expression are mutually reinforcing
and complementary. Any restrictions on these rights
must be consistent with States’ obligations under the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
Mr. Sharma (India): I thank the President for giving
me the opportunity to explain our position on resolution
75/258. At the outset, we sincerely acknowledge the
efforts of the facilitators of the negotiations, Saudi
Arabia and Morocco, for their inclusive and transparent
approach during the negotiations. India joined the
consensus today on the adoption of the resolution.
India attaches great importance to the safeguarding
of cultural heritage and religious sites. The Preamble
of the Indian Constitution declares India as a sovereign
socialist secular democratic republic, which secures to
all its citizens liberty of thought, expression, belief, faith
and worship. The Constitution prohibits discrimination
on the grounds of religion and guarantees all citizens
the right to equal treatment before the law and the
right to equal protection of the law. Article 25 of
the Constitution accords everybody the freedom of
conscience and the right to practice, propagate and
preach their religion.
India also has a strong legal framework for acts of
violence and discrimination based on religion, including
violence targeted at places of worship. The Places of
Worship (Special Provisions) Act of 1991 prohibits the
conversion of any place of worship and provides for
the maintenance of the religious character of any place
of worship. The Religious Institutions (Prevention of
Misuse) Act of 1988 prohibits the use of any premises
of any religious institution for any act that promotes or
attempts to promote disharmony or feelings of enmity
or hatred between different religious, racial, language
or regional groups.
In this world of growing terrorism, violent
extremism, radicalization and intolerance, religious
sites and cultural heritage sites remain vulnerable to
terrorist acts, violence and destruction. The images
of the shattering of the iconic Bamiyan Buddhas by
fundamentalists are still vivid in memory for every one
of us. The terrorist bombing of the Sikh Gurdwara in
Afghanistan, where 25 Sikh worshippers were killed,
is yet another example of this vulnerability. Most
recently, in December 2020, a historic Hindu temple
was attacked and set on fire by a mob in the Karak
district in Pakistan, with the explicit support of and
4/5

21/01/2021

connivance with law enforcement agencies. We stood
as mute spectators while the historic temple was razed.
India reiterates its call for the application of
the principles of objectivity, non-selectivity and
impartiality to form the basis of discussions in the
United Nations, especially on the issue of religion. The
United Nations, including the United Nations Alliance
of Civilizations, should not take sides, and as long as
such selectivity exists, the world can never truly foster
a culture of peace. We must stand united against the
forces that supplant dialogue and peace with hatred
and violence.
It is a matter of great irony that the country where
the most recent attack and demolition of a Hindu temple
took place, in a series of such attacks, and where the
rights of minorities are being crippled is one of the
sponsors of the resolution just adopted under the
agenda item “Culture of peace”. Resolution 75/258
cannot be a smokescreen for countries such as Pakistan
to hide behind.
In conclusion, my delegation once again
acknowledges the efforts of Saudi Arabia and Morocco
to pilot the delicate negotiations for achieving a
consensus text for resolution 75/258.
The President: We have heard the last speaker
in explanation of position after adoption of resolution
75/258. We will now hear statements after the adoption
of the resolution.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow me
at the outset to take this opportunity to congratulate all
of us on the adoption by consensus of resolution 75/258,
entitled “Promoting a culture of peace and tolerance to
safeguard religious sites”.
I would also like to extend my warmest
congratulations and thanks to the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia for taking the initiative to submit this important
resolution to the General Assembly. This initiative of
Saudi Arabia reflects the attention and commitment
of the Kingdom to counter all forms of extremism,
violence and radicalism and to act in favour of the
culture of peace, coexistence and living together.
The multiple attacks perpetrated against mosques,
churches, synagogues and temples are always fresh in
our memory to remind us of the imperative of acting
together to face this scourge. These are abject acts that
call for a collective response, hence the relevance and
importance of the resolution we just adopted.
21-01744

21/01/2021

The resolution reaffirms the importance of
strengthening international, regional and subregional
cooperation in order to improve the capacity of Member
States to effectively prevent and repress attacks on
places of worship or religious sites. It therefore remains
a substantial and relevant means of achieving this
noble cause.
The Kingdom of Morocco was actively engaged in
the negotiation process with the core group of sponsors
and with all Member States throughout the last four
months and welcomes this very significant adoption,
which marks the firm and solid commitment of the
international community to the protection of religious
sites throughout the world. My country also recalls its
unwavering commitment to full respect of the special
status of holy sites and the need to work together to
ensure their upkeep and protection, as we consider
them to be oases of serenity, spaces for enlightenment
and places for the blossoming of culture, peace, living
together and coexistence.
Morocco would like to commend the leading role
played by the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations,
which has developed, inter alia, the United Nations Plan
of Action to Safeguard Religious Sites, its important
initiatives to promote intercultural and interreligious
dialogue, and its activities to further a culture of peace
and non-violence.
Finally, Morocco wishes to express once again its
thanks to the members of the core group, in particular to
my colleague and brother the Permanent Representative
of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, and to all delegations
and partners for their commendable efforts, which were
constructive and showed commitment and flexibility in
the interest of all to reach a consensus text.
The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in exercise of the right of reply, may I remind delegations
that statements in the exercise of the right of reply are
limited to 10 minutes for the first intervention and to
five minutes for the second intervention and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Zulqarnain (Pakistan): I am obliged to take
the floor in response to the statement made by the
representative of India.

A/75/PV.50

Pakistan
categorically
rejects
completely
unwarranted assertions by the Indian delegation in
connection with the Hindu temple incident in Karak.
This is not the first time that India has tried to feign
concern for minority rights elsewhere while being
itself the most egregious and persistent violator of
minority rights. From the discriminatory Citizenship
(Amendment) Act to the National Register of Citizens,
from the Gujarat massacre of 2002 to the Delhi pogrom
of 2020, from the reprehensible demolition of Babri
Mosque in 1992 to the despicable acquittal of all the
accused by the Indian Court in 2020, from blaming
Muslims for spreading coronavirus to banning interfaith
marriages and raising the bogey of love jihad, from cow
vigilantism and mob lynching to calling the Muslims
of West Bengal “termites” and threatening to throw
them into the Bay of Bengal, from extrajudicial killings
of innocent Kashmiris to blatant attempts to turn
Kashmiris into a minority in their own land through
distribution of fake domicile certificates, the Rashtriya
Swayamsevak Sangh-Bharatiya Janata Party regime’s
record is replete with instances of gross and systemic
violations of the rights of minorities, in particular
Muslims. As a perennial purveyor of State-sponsored
discrimination against its minorities, India is in no
position to pontificate on the issue of minority rights.
The clear difference between India and Pakistan in
respect of minority rights can be gauged from the fact
that the accused in the Karak incident was immediately
arrested, orders were issued for repair of the temple,
the highest level of judiciary took immediate notice
and senior political leadership condemned the incident,
whereas in India the blatant acts of discrimination
against Muslims and other minorities take place with
State complicity. The Indian leadership has yet to
condemn the perpetrators of the Delhi massacre in
February 2020, let alone bring those criminals to justice.
Given those incontrovertible facts, the Indian
Government would be well-advised to set its own
house in order rather than feign concerns for minority
rights elsewhere.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 15.
The meeting rose at 3.35 p.m.

21-017445/5
