A/65/937–S/2011/516

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
1 September 2011
Original: English

General Assembly
Sixty-fifth session
Agenda item 122 (e)
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and other organizations: cooperation between the United
Nations and the Caribbean Community

Security Council
Sixty-sixth year

Identical letters dated 12 August 2011 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the General Assembly and the
President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit to you herewith the text of the joint statement
adopted by the participants of the sixth general meeting between the United Nations
system and the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) and its associated institutions,
which was held at the CARICOM headquarters in Georgetown, on 28 and 29 July
2011 (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would arrange for the present letter and its annex to
be circulated as a document of the General Assembly under sub-item (e) of agenda
item 122. I would also ask that the joint statement be circulated as a document of the
Security Council in response to its resolutions 1631 (2005) and 1809 (2008),
particularly paragraph 17 of resolution 1809 (2008).
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

11-48543 (E) 060911

*1148543*

A/65/937
S/2011/516

Annex
Joint statement of the sixth general meeting between representatives
of the Caribbean Community and the United Nations system
28 and 29 July 2011, Georgetown, Guyana
1.
The sixth general meeting between the United Nations system and the
Caribbean Community (CARICOM) and its associated institutions was convened at
the headquarters of the CARICOM secretariat in Georgetown, on 28 and 29 July
2011. Opening remarks were made by Acting Secretary-General of CARICOM,
Ambassador Lolita Applewhaite. The Secretary-General of the United Nations sent a
message that was delivered by the Head of the United Nations delegation, Mr. Oscar
Fernandez-Taranco, Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs. The meeting,
which enjoyed wide participation from representatives of the CARICOM secretariat
and its associated institutions as well as from representatives of the United Nations
system, was co-chaired by Ambassador Colin Granderson, Assistant
Secretary-General, Foreign and Community Relations of the CARICOM secretariat,
and Mr. Fernandez-Taranco.
2.
The Acting Secretary-General of CARICOM underlined the usefulness of the
sixth general meeting, lauding the biennial encounters as invaluable for the review
of cooperation between the United Nations and CARICOM, as the general meetings
permitted the frank exchange between the partners and facilitated strategic planning
for the enhancement of future collaboration. She expressed appreciation for the
continued support and collaboration that CARICOM has received from the United
Nations system in the region’s efforts towards sustained social and economic
development. She informed of the recent decisions of the Conference of Heads of
Government of CARICOM regarding the matter of prioritizing the focus and
direction of the community and underscored the need to identify concrete projects in
specific areas of priority that will yield impact on the ground, ensuring maximum,
measurable and concrete benefits to the citizens of the CARICOM region. In this
regard, she acknowledged the discussions regarding the utility of the regional
strategic framework, as reflected in the interim and final reports, and reiterated
CARICOM support for follow-up with a view to ensuring that it is the appropriate
mechanism to deepen collaboration between the United Nations and CARICOM.
She also reiterated CARICOM concern regarding the decrease in United Nations
representation in the region in certain critical areas, such as security and regional
development, and deplored the closures of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime and United Nations Development Programme offices and the protracted
absence of a Chief of the Economic Commission for Latin America and the
Caribbean subregional headquarters.
3.
The Secretary-General of the United Nations welcomed the opportunity to
deepen cooperation between the United Nations system and CARICOM. He thanked
CARICOM countries for their commitment to multilateralism and regional
cooperation, as well as their leadership on climate change and on the issue of
non-communicable diseases. He also commended the progress made by the
Caribbean region towards the Millennium Development Goals, yet expressed
concern at the negative effects that the global financial crisis, climate change and
organized crime were having in the region. The Secretary-General reiterated the
strong commitment of the United Nations to strengthening its partnership with

2

11-48543

A/65/937
S/2011/516

CARICOM. In particular, he welcomed the recommendations on the United Nations
and CARICOM regional strategic framework and expressed the hope that a dialogue
would proceed on how best to enhance the coherence of United Nations engagement
in the region.
4.
The meeting received a report on progress achieved in the implementation of
commitments made at the fifth general meeting, held in New York, in February
2009. The main outcome of that meeting was the decision to implement the United
Nations and CARICOM Regional Strategic Framework in order to provide for
enhanced coordination between the two organizations. Accordingly, an interim
report was jointly completed, in 2010, by the Department of Political Affairs and the
Foreign and Community Relations Directorate of the CARICOM secretariat and a
final report was produced in 2011. Both reports reflected extensive consultations
with participating United Nations agencies, departments, funds and programmes, as
well as with the CARICOM secretariat and community institutions. The sixth
general meeting considered these two reports on the implementation of the
Framework. The reports showed that CARICOM and the United Nations are
working together in many areas that had been agreed to be of critical importance to
the region’s development and security objectives. Indeed, ongoing United Nations
programmes cover a broad spectrum of activity, and contribute to the four strategic
objectives of the Regional Strategic Framework, namely: (a) maintaining
momentum towards achievement of the Millennium Development Goals;
(b) supporting regional economic integration, growth and development; (c) creating
a safe and secure environment for citizens and respect for the rights of all; and
(d) enhancing governance, transparency and accountability in CARICOM.
5.
Through the consultation processes that underpinned the two reports, it was
recognized that the Regional Strategic Framework had served a useful purpose in
raising awareness about the need for a more coherent United Nations approach to
cooperation in the Caribbean region. The Framework was also helpful in identifying
the areas where cooperation was aligned with CARICOM priorities and areas where
United Nations involvement could be strengthened. The above notwithstanding,
there was broad consensus that the current Framework mechanism, as managed by
the Department of Political Affairs and the Foreign and Community Relations
Directorate, was no longer the most appropriate instrument for coordinating United
Nations activities in the region. Indeed, since the Framework was first proposed in
2007, the United Nations system had established and enhanced other frameworks
and mechanisms for cooperating with CARICOM and CARICOM member States.
6.
As a result, the final report on the Regional Strategic Framework
recommended that (a) the Department of Political Affairs and the Foreign and
Community Relations Directorate focus their follow-up on the specific
commitments for cooperation between the United Nations and CARICOM made
during the general meetings, with the result that the Framework in its current form
was no longer required; and (b) a discussion be initiated on how the United Nations
system could achieve greater coherence in the Caribbean region, in partnership with
the CARICOM secretariat and in support of CARICOM member States. Both
recommendations were adopted at the sixth general meeting. Participating United
Nations agencies, departments, funds and programmes committed themselves to
initiating a dialogue on the nature of a more appropriate coordination mechanism to
enhance coherence and effectiveness within United Nations system engagement in

11-48543

3

A/65/937
S/2011/516

the Caribbean, in partnership with the CARICOM secretariat and community
institutions.
7.
The meeting was apprised of CARICOM regional priorities and of the new
thrust identified by the Conference of Heads of Government, in May 2011. An
overview of the regional agenda was provided and indications were given as to how
the CARICOM secretariat and its associated institutions envisaged implementing
the agenda.
8.
Of those regional priorities, seven broad thematic areas were identified as
crucial areas for collaboration between the United Nations and CARICOM,
including the implementation of the CARICOM Single Market and Economy and
institutional development matters. Other priorities were climate change, sustainable
development and disaster management, energy, regional security, food security and
food safety, human development, including health, education, gender and youth, and
the role of information and communications technology for development.
CARICOM reiterated the need to identify concrete projects in specific areas of
priority that will yield impact on the ground, ensuring maximum, measurable and
concrete benefits to the citizens of the CARICOM region.
9.
It was recognized that the United Nations system was engaged in significant
work in such areas at either the global or national level; the challenge was to
identify areas within the framework of cooperation between the United Nations and
CARICOM, where a regional approach would offer added value to ongoing national
partnerships. CARICOM and United Nations participants thus engaged in
discussions on how to strategically focus their cooperation to maximize progress in
the priority areas in view of the transnational scope of such challenges, CARICOM
and United Nations participants emphasized information-sharing, capacity-building
and institutional strengthening as key tools for implementing their respective
mandates. In this regard, they agreed that there was a need for early engagement to
develop modalities for moving forward. Overall, the meeting provided a useful
opportunity to move towards more coherent engagement in the organizations’
long-standing partnership.
10. The meeting agreed that the seventh general meeting would take place at
United Nations Headquarters, in New York, in 2013.

4

11-48543
