S/PV.9435

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9435th meeting

Thursday, 12 October 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. França Danese. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Brazil)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . .
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. De Rivière
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Mr. Agyeman
Mrs. Shino
Mrs. Frazier
Mr. Afonso
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mr. Hauri
Mr. Abushahab
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. Kelley

Agenda
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations
in maintaining international peace and security
African Union
Report of the Secretary-General on strengthening the partnership between
the United Nations and the African Union on issues of peace and security in
Africa, including the work of the United Nations Office to the African Union
(S/2023/629)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-30138 (E)
*2330138*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9435

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

in the area of peace and security. I also pay tribute to
the Managing Director of Amani Africa, Mr. Solomon
Ayele Dersso, whose organization carries out excellent
research in support of the African Union and its partners
in Addis Ababa.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security
African Union
Report of the Secretary-General on
strengthening the partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union on issues
of peace and security in Africa, including
the work of the United Nations Office to the
African Union (S/2023/629)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Office to the African Union; Her Excellency Ms. Fatima
Kyari Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations; and Mr. Solomon Ayele
Dersso, Managing Director of Amani Africa.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2023/629, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on strengthening the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union on
issues of peace and security in Africa, including the
work of the United Nations Office to the African Union.
I now give the floor to Mr. Onanga-Anyanga.
Mr. Onanga-Anyanga: At the outset, I would
like to thank the President of the Security Council for
convening this important meeting on the cooperation
between the United nations and regional and subregional
organizations, specifically the African Union (AU).
I would like to welcome the presence among us of
Ambassador Fatima Kyari Mohammed, Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations,
and to acknowledge the crucial role of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission, His Excellency
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, and of Secretary-General
António Guterres in strengthening the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union
2/20

12/10/2023

The Security Council has before it the report
of the Secretary-General entitled “Strengthening
the partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union on issues of peace and security in
Africa, including the work of the United Nations Office
to the African Union” (S/2023/629). I welcome the
opportunity afforded to me to present it.
I would like to commend the members of the
Security Council for the valuable exchanges that
took place last week here in Addis Ababa with their
counterparts in the African Union Peace and Security
Council. Their visit to Addis Ababa, the constructive
and substantive nature of the discussion and the joint
communiqué that endorsed their work reflects the firm
commitment of both Councils to overcome peace and
security challenges in Africa through close cooperation
and in a spirit of mutual respect and solidarity.
Their discussions also confirmed the assessment
in the report of the Secretary-General according to
which robust partnerships between the United Nations
and regional organizations, in particular the African
Union; regional economic communities and regional
mechanisms are essential for effective multilateralism.
The strategic United Nations-AU partnership is
based on the twin principles of complementarity and
relative advantages, drawing on the strengths of each
organization to more effectively achieve their shared
goals of peace and stability in Africa. It emphasizes
preventive diplomacy and mediation initiatives.
We are grateful to the President and the members
of the Security Council for having visited the continent
at a time when it is facing major changes, the full
implications of which are not fully appreciated. There
has been a resurgence of extremely violent internal
conflicts in which the logic of war has taken over; a
resurgence in the threat of terrorism and extremist
violence, creating a breeding ground for terrorism;
and a succession of unconstitutional changes of power
which often reflect serious failings in inclusive and
responsible governance. However, that is not all. Never
before have we seen nature unleashed with such ferocity
owing to the serious disturbances caused by climate
change, leaving destruction and desolation in its wake,
23-30138

12/10/2023

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

which reflects States’ improbable ability to adapt to an
increasingly incandescent planet, in which soil aridity
and precariousness are accelerating, accentuating at
the same time the sometimes-conflicting competition
for scarce resources in spaces that have become
inhospitable. I will come back to those issues in more
detail in a moment.
In short, their visit took place against a worrisome
backdrop that threatens to reverse the meagre gains
achieved in the years preceding the outbreak of the
coronavirus disease, at a time when recovery efforts
in the face of an economic recession are struggling to
produce the expected effects, leaving the majority of
African States under severe fiscal stress, over-indebted
and stretched to the limit in their quest to achieve the
Sustainable Development Goals. Therein lies the close
link, in all its complexity, between development, peace
and security, hence the Secretary-General’s call for
a holistic approach to conflict prevention efforts, in
particular in Africa.
Faced with that situation, and at the express request
of the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission, the Deputy SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations and the Deputy
Chairperson of the African Union Commission have
undertaken to better coordinate the efforts of our
institutions with a view to strengthening the impact
of development programmes, with a shared vision
supported by two agendas: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and Agenda 2063.
(spoke in English)
Today the United Nations-African Union
partnership stands out as a pillar of multilateralism with
collaboration continuing to grow in scope and depth.
Furthermore, I am also encouraged by the convergence
of perspectives and analysis by the two Councils on
some of the key issues on their respective agendas.
That presents both Councils an opportunity for even
greater collaboration, in particular on some of the most
complex issues.
Allow me to touch on three key issues highlighted
in the report of the Secretary-General.
First, the conflict landscape on the continent is
becoming increasingly complex and multifaceted and,
in most cases, also intractable. As outlined in the report,
the primary structural challenges to achieving lasting
peace and security in Africa continue to be political

S/PV.9435

and social economic exclusion, including gender
inequality, weak governance institutions, particularly
regarding human rights, the rule of law and electoral
democracy; the inadequate delivery of basic services
and the inequitable management of natural resources;
as well as terrorism, violent extremism and organized
crime. Those are compounded by a range of factors,
including climate change; food and energy insecurity;
rising and entrenched inequalities in finance, trade,
technology and security, both within and among
nations; and external threats and shocks to which most
African countries are least prepared to tackle.
As the report illustrates, there is an alarming rise
in political contestation, turning violent or fuelling
intra-State conflict, as well as in acts of terrorism and
violent extremism, which expose systemic governance
deficits associated with weak or absent State institutions.
We have witnessed a spate of unconstitutional changes
of Government on the continent. In the Sahel, the
coups d’état are further destabilizing the region, while
terrorism and violent extremism continue to result in
grave human rights violations and abuses and exacerbate
already dire humanitarian situations. In the Sudan,
the conflict is creating a catastrophic humanitarian
situation. In eastern Democratic Republic of Congo, the
security and humanitarian situation remains a major
concern as the country heads towards elections.
Today’s challenges call for renewed effort to make
collective security more effective, in line with the
recommendations in the Secretary-General’s policy
brief, a New Agenda for Peace, of July. The emphasis
should be on global and regional early-warning and
prevention efforts, boosting preventive diplomacy
and supporting regional peace, support and peace
enforcement operations, an area in which admittedly the
African Union is showing commendable leadership. The
new collective security machinery should be bold and
fit for purpose. It should be able to respond effectively
to contemporary threats to peace and security.
That leads me to my second point on the financing of
AU-led peace support operations. In Council members’
reflections and planning for a more effective collective
security machinery, responses must be commensurate
with the formidable challenges we face. As noted in
the report of the Secretary-General, the role of regional
organizations in addressing contemporary threats across
the conflict cycle, including through peace enforcement
missions, will be critical going forward. However, such
missions will be effective only if underpinned by the

23-301383/20

S/PV.9435

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

availability of requisite human and financial resources
through predictable, sustainable and flexible financing
of African Union-led peace support operations. The
Security Council would be encouraged to consider an
empowered and resourced AU-peace support operation
capability as an integral part of the collective security
machinery — part of a toolkit with an ability to deploy
peace missions relatively quickly when needed, with
the aim of effectively supporting sustainable peace on
the ground. In other words, by empowering AU-led
peace support operations, the Security Council will in
fact also be empowering itself, strengthening its own
hand in fulfilling the functions and powers outlined in
Article 24 of the Charter of the United Nations.
As the Security Council works towards the
consideration and adoption of a framework draft
resolution on financing for African Union-led peace
support operations, it is essential for international
partners to join hands with the African Union to further
enhance its capacities and agency to effectively address
the complex and dynamic threats to peace and security
on the continent. Working through the established
mechanisms of the African Governance Architecture
and the African Peace and Security Architecture, the
full range of responses to conflict can be effectively
supported and strengthened to deliver peace. The United
Nations-African Union will contribute to facilitate
support to the African Union in the areas of joint
planning and analysis, assessment and management of
African Union-led peace support operations, as well
as the development and implementation of the African
Union Compliance and Accountability Framework
for Peace Support Operations and other initiatives to
ensure that the foundation is laid for the effective and
efficient management of such operations.
I would also like to reiterate the importance that
the Secretary-General has placed on the primacy of
politics. Responses to peace and security challenges,
including through peacekeeping or peace enforcement
operations, need to be comprehensive and holistic,
with political solutions at their core, so that they can
eliminate deficits in governance and foster nationally
owned and inclusive political systems in which all key
stakeholders, particularly women and young people,
play a meaningful role. Political solutions should
involve continual early warning and engagement,
mediation and peacebuilding as the cornerstones of
effective responses to conflicts. We look forward to the
Security Council’s consideration of the draft framework
4/20

12/10/2023

resolution on the financing of African Union-led peace
support operations in the period ahead.
Following the two previously discussed points,
my third and last concerns collaboration between the
United Nations Security Council and the African Union
Peace and Security Council. I welcome the strong
commitment expressed last week on strengthening
collaboration between the two bodies, and I
acknowledge and congratulate the Security Council on
the progress that has been made in the last few years in
that regard. I am particularly encouraged by the strong
support expressed for joint field visits by the Councils
to countries and regions of mutual concern and interest.
I have no doubt that with the same level of political will,
the Security Council will indeed be able to work out
the required modalities. Such visits could help advance
a common understanding of the complex dynamics
at work in conflict situations, explore measures for
prevention and, where appropriate, mitigation, and
provide opportunities to deliver common messages. I
commend the two Councils for endeavouring to hold
monthly informal coordination meetings between
the incoming President of the Security Council and
the incoming Chairperson of the Peace and Security
Council, which provide an opportunity to discuss
priorities and programmes of work, promote synergies
and share perspectives on issues of common interest,
with a view to enhancing strategic coordination
and complementarity.
At last week’s informal joint seminar, members
of both Councils expressed support for making the
meetings more regular and structured in order to
maximize their usefulness. Support was also expressed
for informal consultative meetings at the expert level,
especially in advance of key decisions or events. Such
informal meetings could provide an opportunity to
harmonize positions and contribute to strengthening
coordination and consultations between the two
Councils. The meetings of the Ad Hoc Working Group
of the Security Council and the Committee of Experts
of the AU Peace and Security Council in advance of
the annual meetings last week paved the way for
successful deliberations between the principals, as well
as the swift adoption of the joint communiqué at the
end of the meeting. I would like to reiterate that the
United Nations, including the United Nations Office
to the African Union, stands ready to provide support
to those initiatives, which seem ripe for exploitation
as we continue to strengthen our cooperation with the
23-30138

12/10/2023

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

African Union and subregional organizations to help
prevent conflict and sustain peace in Africa.
Let me conclude by expressing my thanks to the
Council once more for its continued support for the
United Nations-AU partnership on peace and security
in Africa and the work of the United Nations Office to
the African Union, which I have the immense privilege
of leading.
The President: I thank Mr. Onanga-Anyanga for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mohammed.
Ms. Mohammed: Permit me to start by thanking
you, Mr. President, for the invitation to brief the Council,
and by recognizing the other briefers, my counterpart
at the United Nations Office to the African Union (AU),
Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General to the African Union, and
Mr. Solomon Ayele Dersso of Amani Africa.
I have the honour to deliver the following
remarks on behalf of His Excellency Mr. Moussa
Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, who unfortunately could not join due to
competing commitments.
I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of October and for your effective leadership
as co-Chair of the Annual Joint Consultative Meeting
between the Security Council and the AU Peace and
Security Council, which was successfully held in Addis
Ababa a few days ago. It remains an effective platform
for continued and strengthening cooperation between
the two Councils.
Today’s meeting focuses on the critical topic
of cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in maintaining
international peace and security. That recurring theme
is even more compelling at a time when the world is
confronted with unprecedented challenges that demand
that we pool our efforts in order to generate appropriate
synergies and momentum to manage ongoing crises
and prevent future conflicts. Guided by the Charter
of the United Nations, the Constitutive Act of the AU
and international law, we need to deepen the spirit of
multilateralism, mutual solidarity and cooperation with
the United Nations and our continental and subregional
organizations if we are to gain traction in effectively
promoting the international peace and security agenda.

S/PV.9435

In our shared responsibility for ensuring smooth
multilevel governance in the world, we reiterate our call
for a review of the global governance system, especially
of the United Nations Security Council itself, with a
view to ensuring fairness, inclusivity and enhanced
institutional effectiveness in the face of daunting crises
that are either protracted or emerging. The African
Union remains extremely concerned with the outbreaks
of conflict in many parts of the world, which have added
to a cocktail of protracted crises, unconstitutional
changes of Government, terrorism, the challenge
posed by climate change, and difficult socioeconomic
problems globally, marked by hyperinflation and dual
crises of declining growth and limited financing.
Since the signing of the 2017 Joint United NationsAfrican Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security, our two organizations have
worked collaboratively in preventive diplomacy,
peacemaking, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and peace
enforcement. More recently, albeit as a work in progress,
we have enhanced our cooperation and collaboration
with the regional economic communities and regional
mechanisms based on the principles of subsidiarity and
shared values. Going forward, at least five key points
should be emphasized.
First, we need to strengthen and enhance our
collaboration in preventing conflicts, managing crises
and State-building. From Libya to the Sahel, the Horn
of Africa, Central Africa and the Great Lakes, we need
unity of purpose and joint action while ensuring that the
parties to conflicts do not drive a wedge between our
organizations in order to advance their own agendas.
As Secretary-General Guterres outlined in the New
Agenda for Peace, we now need regional frameworks
and organizations, in accordance with Chapter VIII
of the Charter, more than ever if we are to promote
trust-building and transparency. That is essential to
addressing conflicts amid growing global competition
and threats that are increasingly transnational in nature,
as well as to achieving Agenda 2063, the Silencing
the Guns in Africa initiative and the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
Secondly, we need to pool our resources in a time
of economic crisis and do away with heavy bureaucracy
so as to be able to respond swiftly and decisively in
addressing crises. In that connection, I would like
to highlight the recent request from the Federal
Government of Somalia for a technical pause in the
drawdown of the African Union Mission in Somalia

23-301385/20

S/PV.9435

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

for three months. While there is consensus among the
troop-contributing countries and the AU Peace and
Security Council on that technical pause, I call on
the international community to provide the necessary
resources to make it a reality and ensure that we
safeguard the hard-earned gains that have been made in
Somalia. In line with that, it is my hope that in the very
near future we will get a Security Council resolution
on financing AU-led peace-support operations through
United Nations assessed contributions so as to ensure
that the AU is capable of fulfilling its commitments and
responsibilities with regard to peace and security.
Thirdly, we need to be innovative in our peacemaking
efforts. As several United Nations peacekeeping
missions draw down, their logistical resources can
be made available to regional mechanisms, which are
increasingly stepping up to manage conflicts throughout
the continent. By redirecting those resources, we can
enhance regional efforts to take a more prominent lead
in conflict management and resolution.
Fourthly, we must address the crisis of the State, not
only on our continent but worldwide. As multilateral
institutions, we need to rethink how to support States
to become more viable and capable of meeting the basic
human security needs of their citizens. The root causes
of conflict often stem from the failure or inability
to ensure inclusive governance and the delivery of
essential goods and services. We should therefore
invest more time, efforts and resources into building
the resilience and capacity of States and enhancing
their governance and development potential. To that
end, I call on partners to buy into the facility recently
launched jointly by the African Union and the United
Nations Development Programme: the Africa Facility
to Support Inclusive Transitions. This is an innovative
initiative designed to enhance our support for States
going through critical political transitions.
Fifthly, the recent inclusion of the African Union
in the Group of 20 marks a noteworthy milestone that
amplifies African perspectives and voices on the global
stage. However, as I stated earlier, our commitment
to reforming the global governance architecture is
enduring. The full potential of collaboration between
the United Nations and regional mechanisms can only
be harnessed when we have addressed the imperative
of reform. The African Union remains dedicated to
reforming the Security Council to ensure greater
representation, inclusivity and fairness.
6/20

12/10/2023

In conclusion, the world is in a state of flux,
and we are confronted by unprecedented challenges
that require us to rise to the occasion, including
going beyond our comfort zones. I look forward to a
continued, constructive and fruitful outcome-oriented
working relationship with the United Nations, the
African Union and subregional organizations. It is my
hope that, together, we can deliver as one, harmonizing
our efforts, transcending limitations and surmounting
obstacles to create a more just, secure, prosperous and
peaceful world for all.
The President: I thank Ms. Mohammed for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Dersso.
Mr. Dersso: I would like to start by thanking
Brazil’s presidency for the invitation extended to me
to deliver this briefing on behalf of my organization,
Amani Africa Media and Research Services. I would
also like to recognize the members of the Security
Council and the preceding briefers: my brother,
Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, and Her Excellency
Ambassador Fatima Kyari Mohammed.
Amani Africa, a pan-African policy research,
training and consulting think tank that works on
multilateral processes of concern and interest for
Africa, is the leading source of information and analysis
on matters of the African Union (AU) in general and its
Peace and Security Council in particular, including the
AU’s strategic partnership with the United Nations. It is
accordingly a particular honour for me to draw on our
work for my briefing today.
At this historic moment, deepening the partnership
between the United Nations and the AU is not a matter
of choice, nor is it merely something nice to do. We
believe that, rather, it is a prerequisite for delivering on
the peace and security and development objectives of
the Charter of the United Nations. There is a pressing
and growing need for both more crisis management
and enhanced effectiveness of crisis management more
today than in the past. No single actor can meet those
pressing demands alone. The continued relevance of
the United Nations and the AU in the maintenance of
international peace and security in Africa therefore
depends on them pulling their comparative advantages
together and systematically coordinating their actions
across files and portfolios. The Secretary-General’s
Our Common Agenda (A/75/982) affirms that regional
organizations “fill a critical gap in our global peace and
23-30138

12/10/2023

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

security architecture”. His report on United NationsAU partnership (S/2023/629) highlights that there is no
other organization that better reflects those attributes
than the African Union.
Yet the state of the United Nations-AU partnership
is far from adequate for the AU to effectively fill that
critical gap. As we pointed out in one of our recent
works, one manifestation of that inadequacy is the
lack of a systematic and institutionalized global
arrangement for harnessing the full potential and role
of the AU as part of the global collective security
system anchored in the Charter. Therefore, despite
the progress registered in the United Nations-AU
partnership, the mobilization of resources by the two
organizations largely reflects an ad hoc and case-bycase basis approach. For example, they are unable to
collaboratively institute peace support operations that
not only have stabilization and peace enforcement
mandates and capabilities but also are willing and able
to act on their peace-enforcement mandates that the
security conditions on the ground warrant.
Critical to elevating the United Nations-AU
partnership in that context is to establish a systematic
and institutionalized arrangement that affirms the peace
and security tools of the African Union as part of the
toolkit of the global collective security system under the
Charter. That echoes the Secretary-General’s proposal
for the Security Council to break new ground through:
“a new generation of African Union-led, United
Nations-supported peace operations on the African
continent that blend the respective strength of both
organizations in a manner that prioritizes political
solutions and maximizes the impact of both
uniformed and civilian capabilities.” (S/2023/303,
para. 43)
A necessary corollary to and an essential part of
that institutionalized arrangement is the shift that the
Council also has to make, as the Secretary-General put
it, from considering the use of United Nations-assessed
contributions for AU-led peace support operations as
exceptional circumstances to considering them “in a
more systematic manner.” (ibid., para. 38)
Today elevating the United Nations-AU partnership
to a higher level is also a strategic imperative for
the effective functioning of multilateralism. The
deepening polarization in the world, particularly
among major Powers, is among the key factors of
the increasing fracturing of the multilateral system.

S/PV.9435

The AU, the member States of which make up 28 per
cent of the United Nations, has a unique reservoir of
potential for playing a moderation role in the face of
such polarization. Tapping into the AU’s moderating
role and, indeed, Africa’s potentiality as the future
of multilateralism through the United Nations-AU
partnership is key, not just for arresting the fracturing
of the multilateral system — which we see today — but
also for making it fit for purpose. Our recent work
therefore emphasizes the need to bring regional
multilateral organizations such as the AU to the centre
of global peace and security diplomacy in a systematic
way rather than on an ad hoc basis.
Finally, the AU-United Nations partnership
needs to enhance its focus on the socioeconomic
and development dimensions of the maintenance of
international peace and security. It is now widely
accepted that the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs) and peace and security are deeply intertwined.
Achieving the SDGs for member States of the AU is
also directly tied to the reform of the multilateral
financial system. For example, Africa pays a 500 per
cent premium on borrowing from the market, and
reform could save Africa as much as $56 billion,
expanding access to much-needed resources to meet the
Sustainable Development Goals.
On more immediate issues of concern, it is of
paramount importance for the African Union and the
United Nations to urgently address the extraordinary,
painful humanitarian situation in the Sudan, and that
they can do through humanitarian diplomacy and by
establishing a dedicated mechanism to address the
humanitarian challenge and the plight of civilians in
those conditions. While we affirm and welcome the call
that has been made in the joint consultative meeting
between/by the Security Council of the United Nations
and the African Union Peace and Security Council, this
situation will not wait for those actors to heed the call
that has been made; hence the need for urgent action and
a dedicated mechanism for the humanitarian situation
in the Sudan.
With that, I would like to thank the Security
Council for the kind invitation extended to us, affirming
its openness to also bring in the views and voices of
non-State actors, which is critical in this time that we
are in.
The President: I thank Mr. Dersso for his briefing.

23-301387/20

S/PV.9435

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

12/10/2023

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Brazil.

both the United Nations and the African Union have
displayed in several areas.

I would like to thank Special Representative
Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, Ambassador Fatima Kyari
Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations, and Mr. Dersso for their
important briefings. Their interventions have shed
light on different angles of the cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union, enriching our
discussions and perceptions on this important topic on
the Security Council’s agenda.

The strengthened role of the African Union
should not amount to a weakening United Nations
presence. The assistance provided by United Nations
regional offices and agencies is essential on many
fronts. The Secretary-General’s report highlights the
extensive activities and programmes carried out by
the United Nations, the African Union and subregional
organizations to promote conflict prevention, mediation,
capacity-building, electoral support and humanitarian
assistance. We should also aim to strengthen the role
of the Peacebuilding Commission in supporting those
activities and programmes. That cooperation must
continue and be strengthened, especially in the cases
of Mali and the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
where the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali and the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo are, respectively, withdrawing
and transitioning. Those processes must be carried
forward in an orderly and secure manner, with the full
engagement of both Governments.

Brazil welcomes with appreciation the SecretaryGeneral’s report on strengthening the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union on
peace and security in Africa (S/2023/629).
As this meeting takes place in the aftermath of the
joint consultative meeting between the African Union
Peace and Security Council and the Security Council
of the United Nations, this is an opportunity to take
stock on the discussions held in Addis Ababa last week.
I would like to express my gratitude to the Republic
of the Congo and its Permanent Representative to
the African Union, Ambassador Daniel Owassa, for
co-chairing that meeting. The exchanges between the
two Councils helped to promote mutual understanding
on issues crucial to the maintenance of peace and
security in Africa.
I thank our African colleagues in Addis Ababa
for their warm welcome and their willingness to
engage in a fruitful dialogue, as reflected in the joint
communiqué we were able to approve at the end of the
meeting. We are indeed particularly satisfied with the
adoption of that document. I commend all Security
Council and Peace and Security Council members for
the display of flexibility that enabled us to achieve that
noteworthy outcome. I invite all delegations to review
that document.
The complexity of the current African security
challenges demands innovative solutions. That fact is
even more evident in a context in which the prevalent
model of peacekeeping operations has come under
severe criticism. The growing role of the African Union
and subregional organizations must be adequately
supported. Brazil is ready to engage positively in
the discussions on how to guarantee the necessary
resources for African Union-led peace operations. We
support arrangements that maximize the expertise that
8/20

We have many times called attention to the nexus
between security and sustainable development. In the
African case, that link is evident, as illustrated by the
security situations in the Sahel, the Sudan, Somalia
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The lack
of economic and social prospects, especially for
youth, creates breeding grounds for violent extremism
conducive to terrorism and intercommunal violence.
Also, the disproportionate impact of conflicts on women
and girls through conflict-related sexual violence leads
to their social and economic alienation. The persistent
disregard for development and inclusivity inevitably
results in divided societies prone to conflict.
The United Nations and the African Union should
continue to work together to reduce poverty and
inequality in Africa. The implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development is an important
step in that direction. United Nations support for
Agenda 2063 is also key, always respecting African
countries’ ownership of their development and
institutional processes. Brazil hopes that the United
Nations-African Union partnership will evolve in a way
that promotes stability on the continent, by increasingly
valuing African solutions to problems that, although
they are taking place in Africa, affect all of us.
23-30138

12/10/2023

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the three African
members of the Security Council (A3).
The A3 welcomes the convening of this important
briefing under the theme of cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations, with a focus on the cooperation with the
African Union. We thank Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to the
African Union and Head of the United Nations Office to
the African Union; Her Excellency Ambassador Fatima
Kyari Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations; and Mr. Solomon Ayele
Dersso, Managing Director of Amani Africa, for their
important insights and contributions to this debate.
In accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, chief among the four purposes of the United
Nations is the maintenance of international peace and
security. In proclaiming that paramount principle, the
Charter established a universal system of collective
security that stands as a shared common good of
humankind. Each State Member of the United Nations
and each region and organization are committed and
duty-bound to fulfil that purpose. This is the spirit in
which the letter of Article 53 was written:
“[t]he Security Council shall, where appropriate,
utilize such regional arrangements or agencies for
enforcement action under its authority”.
Since the adoption, in 2017, of the United NationsAfrican Union Joint Framework for an Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security, the two organs — the
United Nations Security Council and the African Union
Peace and Security Council — have developed a unique
partnership based on shared goals, mutual respect and
African ownership. It is a partnership that has become
a pillar of modern-day multilateralism.
It is in that context that the African Union Peace
and Security Council and the United Nations Security
Council just successfully concluded their seventeenth
Annual Joint Consultative Meeting, in Addis Ababa.
Its successful holding bears testimony to the fruitful
and constructive dialogue that exists between the
two organs.
In that connection, we welcome the Addis Ababa
joint communiqué, of 6 October, which reiterates the

S/PV.9435

pivotal role played by both organs in the maintenance
of peace and security in Africa, based on the principles
of complementarity, subsidiarity and burden- and
responsibility-sharing in facing the complexity
of today’s threats and challenges to global peace
and security.
We particularly echo the call made by the joint
communiqué in support of the Secretary-General’s
appeal for access to United Nations assessed
contributions by African Union-led peace support
operations in the quest for the maintenance of regional
and continental peace and security, as a matter of
urgency. It is in that spirit that the A3 has been
mandated by the African Union Peace and Security
Council to engage other members of the United Nations
Security Council and the United Nations membership
at large on the issue of financing African Union-led
peace supports operations.
Peace and security are a global good. They cannot
be bilateralized, fragmented or limited to a corner of
the world. A breach of peace in any part of the world is
a danger to global peace.
We therefore view the Secretary-General’s proposal
as highly constructive and well founded. It allows the
African continent to speak and act in a united manner
on matters related to peace and security on the African
continent and beyond. The A3 arrangement here, in the
Security Council, is a vivid illustration of the evolving
nature of that partnership.
The United Nations engagement with the African
Union covers a multitude of areas and issues that
constitute the global peace and security architecture.
We welcome the significant milestones registered
in our collaboration since the consolidation of that
partnership. That includes the holding of annual
consultative meetings between the two organs; the
frequent exchanges and dialogue between the SecretaryGeneral of United Nations and the Chairperson of the
African Union; The appointment of a regional Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Africa; the
establishment of representations of the United Nations
to the African Union and the Permanent Observer
Mission of the African Union to the United Nations; the
monthly meetings between the President of the Security
Council and the Chair of the African Union Peace and
Security Council and; finally, the establishment of the
Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and

23-301389/20

S/PV.9435

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

12/10/2023

Resolution in Africa, which Mozambique currently has
the honour to chair.

so as to better tackle the root causes of instability
and conflict.

The A3 believes that there is a room for a
quantitative and qualitative improvement in the
relationship between the United Nations and the
African Union. Recent discussions on the New Agenda
for Peace, particularly as it relates to peacekeeping;
the fight against terrorism and violent extremism; and
the nexus between peace, security and climate change
could benefit from a stronger imprint and voice of the
African continent.

The deliberations of the seventeenth Annual Joint
Consultative Meeting between the Security Council
and the AU Peace and Security Council, held last week
in Addis Ababa, and the adopted joint communiqué,
reflect a shared understanding of the progress made
thus far, as well as an awareness of emerging internal
challenges, exacerbated by external threats.

We strongly believe in the added value of that
partnership. It enables both organizations to deepen
their shared understanding and action on the root causes
of conflicts. We can make informed strategic decisions
that reflect a thorough knowledge of the conflict context,
aimed at finding lasting and sustainable solutions.
Let me conclude by reiterating the A3’s firm
conviction that the Council’s strong commitment to
financing African Union-led peace support operations
through United Nations assessed contributions
represents an opportunity to furthering the partnership
between the two organizations. It would lend enormous
substance and strength to the principle that we
cherish — “African solutions to African problems”.
It is our firm belief that the value of the United
Nations-African Union partnership will ultimately be
vindicated when the continent is fully represented, with
equal rights and responsibilities in this very organ,
through the long-desired and -anticipated reforms of
the Council.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): At the outset, I would like
to thank Brazil for convening today’s meeting, as well
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, Ambassador Mohammed and
Mr. Dersso for their briefings.
The foundations of the United Nations-African
Union (AU) partnership, based on the United NationsAfrican Union Joint Framework for an Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security, has grown in
scope and depth throughout the years. It needs to be
further strengthened.
The persistent and complex challenges that the
African continent is facing — from the west coast to the
Great Lakes region and the Horn of Africa to the north
in Libya — call for the need to reconsider and adapt
traditional, local, regional and international responses
10/20

The spiral of recent unconstitutional changes in
several African States and the onslaught of political
transitions in others are alarming indicators of weak
governance and failing institutions that are unable
to respond to the needs of the populations, deliver
services and ensure justice. Efforts to manipulate
democratic processes, attempts to modify and eliminate
constitutional term limits, continued social and political
exclusion, human rights violations and a lack of proper
responses to the mismanagement of Africa’s wealth of
natural resources should be resisted by actions rooted
in the law and through legitimate political processes.
Experience has shown convincingly that military coups
do not bring solutions. They only exacerbate problems
and offer short-lived false promises of much-needed
change. Compounding the situation are the severe
effects of climate change and international economic
pressures, including the global food insecurity caused
by the Russian aggression in Ukraine. That has fuelled
intercommunal violence, overstretched local economies
and exposed vulnerabilities, to the benefit of armed and
terrorist groups and foreign exploiters.
Albania believes that treating the root causes of
conflict goes hand in hand with the need for sustainable
development guided by the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the African Union’s Agenda 2063.
United Nations cooperation with the African Union
and other regional organizations can play a pivotal
role in preventing conflicts by supporting States’
capacities to detect and pre-empt them at the earliest
signs. The ongoing United Nations support for the
Silencing the Guns in Africa initiative remains crucial
to mediation and disarmament efforts, while boosting
women’s and young people’s empowerment and peace
education. Despite an overall mixed picture, it is
worth highlighting areas of progress. The agreement
of November 2022 for the permanent cessation of
hostilities in Ethiopia; the continued engagement with
Somalia towards the implementation of peacebuilding
and State-building priorities; and the implementation
23-30138

12/10/2023

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region,
as well as the Nairobi and Luanda processes, are good,
positive examples.
We recognize that some African countries have
fallen out with United Nations peacekeeping missions.
Widening gaps between actual mandates and the
expectations of local stakeholders have not helped
in that respect. While there is room for discussion
on the need to evolve from traditional peacekeeping
operations, we want to warn against falling for the
illusion of quick fixes by calling in the Wagner Group
or other mercenaries. Human rights violations, a total
lack of accountability and vested interests in exploiting
natural resources will be the price to pay. As we have
seen in the Sahel, terrorist acts have dramatically
increased. The situation is not getting better, and more
civilians are being harmed.
Albania recognizes the progress made in ensuring
predictable, sustainable and flexible resources for peace
support operations led by the African Union, including
through the Peace Fund, and welcomes the allocation
of $2 million each to the African Union Transition
Mission in Somalia and the East African Community
regional force in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We are encouraged by the AU’s efforts to guarantee
the continuity of planned and conducted peace support
operations in compliance with international human
rights and humanitarian law and applicable standards
of conduct.
Let me conclude by highlighting that we firmly
believe that the African Union, one of the world’s
largest regional organizations, can be a formidable tool
in the efforts to put an end to the immense suffering of
civilians across Africa — whether it results from the
fighting in the Sudan or the activities of terrorist groups
in the Sahel and elsewhere on the continent — and lead
its members towards peace, development and prosperity.
Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General to the African Union and Head
of the United Nations Office to the African Union,
Ambassador Fatima Kyari Mohammed, Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations,
and Mr. Solomon Ayele Dersso, Managing Director of
Amani Africa, for their briefings.
Regional organizations, in collaboration with
regional economic communities, play a crucial role

S/PV.9435

in peace and security. Strategic partnerships, close
cooperation and regular exchanges between the United
Nations and the African Union (AU) are essential to
efficient and effective multilateralism. The Council’s
trip to Addis Ababa demonstrated the vital nature of
collective action in conflict prevention, mediation,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. I would like to
highlight three points.
First, a shared understanding of conflicts and their
prevention and early identification is essential. We are
encouraged by the increasingly joint approaches that
the United Nations and the AU are taking with regard to
the analysis and prevention of conflicts in Africa. There
have never been so many assessments, working groups
and discussions aimed at understanding the current
dynamics of conflicts on the continent. Scientific
knowledge is very important in the context. The New
Agenda for Peace emphasizes global and regional
prevention efforts and strengthening preventive
diplomacy, trust and support for regional peace
operations. With that in mind, Switzerland supports
the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework
for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security,
which mobilizes collaboration at the first signs of a
potential conflict.
Secondly, we welcome the fact that for the first
time, the Security Council and the Peace and Security
Council held a debate last week on the role of young
people in advancing peace and security. We are seeing
positive signs that young people around the world are
demanding an opening of the political space, as well
as a greater say in the peace and security issues that
concern them. The two Councils should therefore
continue to facilitate the implementation of the youth
and peace and security agenda. Switzerland had several
exchanges in Addis Ababa with two young Ethiopian
activists, Bemnet Negussie and Melaku Hailu, who
organize model conferences in order to bring the AU
closer to young people. Their energy and willingness to
get involved made us realize that African youth represent
the real drivers of the continent’s development. We
must all ensure that their voices are heard and enable
them to play their part as well as possible.
Thirdly, in a changing world the tasks of
peacekeeping operations are also evolving, but they
remain an essential instrument of the Security Council
for peace and security. If they are to fulfil their mandates,
peace missions must be able to rely on predictable,
sustainable and flexible financing. That also applies

23-3013811/20

S/PV.9435

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

to regional missions authorized by the Council. The
role of the AU in managing the continent’s current and
emerging security challenges is vital. Switzerland has
always supported the AU in that role. That is why we
co-sponsored the draft resolution proposed in 2018 by
the three African members of the Security Council
(A3). We recognize the progress made by the AU on
the normative framework for peace support operations,
the Peace Fund and the provision of logistical support
to missions. We emphasize the importance of United
Nations due-diligence requirements with respect to
human rights and international humanitarian law.
Today we welcome the initiative of the A3 in favour of
a Security Council decision aimed at financing peace
operations led by Africa. Switzerland stands ready to
contribute constructively to that initiative, as it would
constitute a decisive step at a time when we are being
called on to rethink the future of peace operations.
Switzerland will continue its long-standing support
for the African Peace and Security Architecture. We look
forward to welcoming the Peace and Security Council
to New York in October 2024 under Switzerland’s
presidency and to continuing to deepen our exchanges.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French):
Following on from the consultations between the United
Nations Security Council and the African Union Peace
and Security Council that have just concluded in Addis
Ababa, I would like to emphasize three points.
First of all, we must further strengthen cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union in
accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations. In the Sudan, we welcome the efforts
made by the African Union to contribute to a resolution
of the conflict, and we encourage it to coordinate its
action with the various ongoing peace initiatives. With
regard to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we
welcomed the holding in Addis Ababa on Friday of a
quadripartite meeting on the coordination of various
regional initiatives, in which the Force Commander of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo participated.
In Somalia, the African Union and the United Nations
have been cooperating for many years to fight
Al-Shabaab by leveraging their respective strengths.
Those actions are all going in the right direction, but to
achieve our objectives we must go further.
My second point is that we must deepen cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union in
12/20

12/10/2023

the area of conflict prevention. Allow me to outline
a few ideas. France has followed the measures
that the African Union has adopted in response to
recent unconstitutional changes of Government. Its
extraordinary summit in Malabo, held in May 2022,
marked the firm rejection of African Heads of State
of such steps, which threaten peace and security on
the continent.
Another issue involves underfunding African
economies, including in order to address the effects
of climate change. France has been meaningfully
engaged in addressing the issue in recent years, as
was illustrated by the Paris Summit for a New Global
Financing Pact, which was held in June, while ensuring
close coordination among the United Nations, the
African Union and France’s efforts. France welcomes
the progress made in pairing climate and security
experts with regional organizations to strengthen earlywarning capacities in high-risk areas. We encourage the
United Nations to strengthen its ties with the African
Union in that important area in order to address the root
causes of conflict.
My third and last message is that France fully
supports the adoption of a draft resolution on the
sustainable financing of African peacekeeping
operations. France has always supported the principle
of funding African peacekeeping operations through
mandatory contributions, and it stands ready today to
commit to negotiating a text with African countries.
Such a resolution must enable reaffirming the added
value of African peacekeeping operations led by African
soldiers and strengthening the continent’s ownership of
such operations through financial support, which was
reiterated by the African Union Peace and Security
Council on 23 September. It must also enable us to move
towards a planning and decision-making mechanism
and take stock of the efforts that remain to be made in
terms of international human rights law, international
humanitarian law and troops’ conduct and discipline.
I would like to take this opportunity to commend the
work done by the African Union in recent months, which
enabled the adoption of the African Union compliance
and accountability framework, with the support of
the United Nations and thanks to funding from the
European Union. I welcome that joint commitment to
boosting African peacekeeping operations.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I join others in thanking the Special Representative
23-30138

12/10/2023

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

of the Secretary-General, the Permanent Observer
of the African Union (AU) to the United Nations and
Mr. Dersso for their briefings.
United Nations-African Union cooperation is
fundamental to achieving our shared goal of a freer,
more secure, more prosperous, greener and healthier
continent. And I am delighted that we demonstrated
our shared commitment by agreeing a communiqué at
last week’s African Union Peace and Security CouncilSecurity Council meeting in Addis Ababa.
I want to highlight three points about the partnership.
First, following nine coups on the continent since
2020, efforts to tackle that scourge and its underlying
causes have become critical. The decisive action of the
AU Peace and Security Council in that regard has been
important. I reiterate the United Kingdom’s support
for efforts by the AU and subregional organizations,
including the Economic Community of West African
States, to bring about inclusive political dialogue
and a peaceful return to constitutional rule. We
look forward to deepening that dialogue, including
exploring the potential of the New Agenda for Peace,
as the representative of Mozambique outlined earlier on
behalf of the African members of the Security Council.
Secondly, coordination among the AU, the United
Nations, subregional organizations and international
partners is critical to ending conflict and promoting
stability. That is why the United Kingdom has long
supported permanent African representation on the
Security Council. And it is why we look forward to
working with Council colleagues on a framework draft
resolution about United Nations financing for AU-led
missions. We reiterate our concern about the potential
for terrorism in the Sahel to spread to coastal States
in West Africa. We also express our resolute support
for efforts to tackle that, particularly regionally led
solutions, such as the Accra Initiative. We remain
committed to the current sustainable drawdown of
the African Union Transition Mission in Somalia, and
thank the AU Commission and troop-contributing
countries for their tireless work in supporting Somalia’s
security. Since 2022, we have given more $60 million
in funding, and we will once again contribute this year.
We also support a coordinated African-led response to
the crisis in the Sudan that harnesses a supporting role
for the United Nations.
of

Thirdly, I welcome the continued implementation
the AU-United Nations framework for the

S/PV.9435

implementation of Agenda 2063, the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and the Silencing the Guns in
Africa initiative. In order to realize their shared vision
of inclusive and sustainable economic development, we
must increase international cooperation. Collaboration
is instrumental in addressing the humanitarian
challenges on the continent, such as food insecurity,
where more than 160 million people in Africa are
acutely vulnerable. Next month, we will be partnering
with Somalia and the United Arab Emirates to host
a global food security summit, bringing together
international expertise to galvanize action to prevent
food insecurity and malnutrition and save lives.
We look forward to developing and deepening
cooperation between the AU and the United Nations in
pursuit of our shared goals.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Representative Onanga-Anyanga and
Ambassador Mohammed for their briefings. I listened
closely to the briefing by Mr. Dersso.
In recent years, as a champion of multilateralism
and solidarity among developing countries, the African
Union (AU) has been leading African countries
forward along the path of development, revitalization
and integration. We welcome the strengthened efforts
to enlarge the African Continental Free Trade Area.
The African Union has formally acceded to the Group
of 20, its first Climate Summit was held in Africa
and Ethiopia and Egypt have joined the cooperation
mechanism of the group of Brazil, Russia, India, China
and South Africa, all of which that attest to Africa’s
growing global influence, as an important pole in
the world.
Last week, members of Security Council visited
Addis Ababa, where it held its annual consultations with
the AU Peace and Security Council. The consultations
produced a series of new ideas and recommendations
giving new impetus to cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union. In addressing complex
and intertwined global challenges, the United Nations,
the African Union and other subregional organizations
in Africa must strengthen their solidarity and
cooperation and build a strong partnership.
First, we must build a partnership on an equal
footing, with mutual respect and understanding. In
recent years, the African Union and all subregional
organizations have been actively engaged in addressing
peace and security challenges and promoting the

23-3013813/20

S/PV.9435

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

12/10/2023

approach of African solutions to African problems.
In the northern part of Mozambique, through joint
operations, the Government’s forces and the Southern
African Development Community have eradicated local
terrorist forces and restored peace and stability. The
African Union and subregional peacekeeping operations
have focused on pragmatic and efficient operations
and have achieved widely acknowledged remarkable
results. In the face of global and regional challenges,
the Council should continue to support the African
Union in leveraging its advantages and enlarging its
role. United Nations peacekeeping operations should
be informed by AU’s useful practices, adapt to the
changing situation on the ground and play its role,
as required. The United Nations and the AU enjoy an
equal relationship of cooperation and there is therefore
no hierarchy in terms of leadership or command. Socalled standards should not be imposed on Africa in the
name of the United Nations. Such a practice interferes
in Africa’s internal affairs and is not conducive to
cooperation between the AU and the United Nations.

to play in urging that political commitments to Africa
are effectively translated into concrete actions.

Secondly, we must build a partnership of mutual
support and shared responsibility. The negative impact
of the long-lasting legacy of colonialism and hegemony
on peace and stability in Africa is far from over, as
global crises and geopolitical conflicts bring further
harm to Africa. The international community should
prioritize the maintenance of peace and stability in
Africa. The United Nations should focus on responding
to the concerns of the AU, while some developed
countries should assume greater responsibility in terms
of settling their historical debt as soon as possible rather
than shifting blame or simply doing nothing.

Since the very beginning, China has supported
Africa’s capacity-building, which is an important
element of its cooperation with Africa, and it is
committed to helping Africa achieve industrialization,
modernization and sustainable development. In Nigeria,
the Lekki sea port, built by a Chinese company, has
officially begun operations, facilitating local shipping
channels and creating hundreds of thousands of jobs. In
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the construction
of the Kinsuka substation’s underground transmission
lines is being stepped up, with the substation expected
to address the power shortage in the local transmission
area. In more than 10 countries, including Ghana and
Djibouti, the Luban Workshop has been training and
cultivating a large number of talented young people in
the local community, which benefits local development.
In the capital of Ethiopia, the Africa Centres for Disease
Control and Prevention, built with China’s assistance,
has been formally completed and is now making new
contributions to the prevention and control of diseases
in Africa and the protection of public health in Africa.

African countries have devoted themselves to
AU peacekeeping operations and, to that end, have
called on international communities to provide
predictable and sustainable funding. Traditionally
developed country donors should maintain their high
level of support, and the United Nations should push
for substantial progress in resolving relevant issues
without delay. The Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Somalia, South Sudan and the Sahel are significantly
underfunded in terms of humanitarian operations.
Therefore, the concerned parties should fulfil their
humanitarian commitments in a timely and complete
manner. At the first Africa Climate Summit, African
leaders collectively demanded that developed countries
honour their commitments to climate financing, which
have been delayed for 14 years. The Council has a role
14/20

Thirdly, it is necessary to build a partnership
anchored in the fundamentals that focuses on the long
term. At present, the complexity and intractability
of the hotspot issues in the Horn of Africa, the
recurring political turmoil in West Africa and the
Sahel countries, and the rampant violent and terrorist
activities in the Great Lakes and Lake Chad regions
have all contributed to a situation of recurring
conflicts that deserve our in-depth consideration. The
international community should help the countries
concerned to strengthen capacity-building in such
areas as government governance, security sector
reforms, sustainable development and human resources
development. The United Nations should provide
vigorous support to Africa’s implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and make
more tangible efforts to eradicate poverty, guarantee
food security, strengthen infrastructure development
and increase employment.

While attending the China-Africa leadership
dialogue in South Africa in August, President Xi
Jinping announced three initiatives, namely the
African industrialization initiative, the agricultural
modernization programme and the talent cultivation
cooperation programme, which will give added
impetus to Africa’s integration and modernization
23-30138

12/10/2023

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

processes. Next year, China will host a new session
of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation and will
take the opportunity to continue to play an active
role in achieving peaceful development in Africa and
increasing international cooperation with Africa.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We wish to thank Mr. Parfait OnangaAnyanga, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Office to the
African Union (AU), Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed,
Permanent Observer of the AU to the United Nations,
and the civil society representative for their briefings.
We wish to emphasize the words of our briefers with
regard to the priority need to seek political solutions.
The Russian Federation welcomes the strengthening
of the partnership between the United Nations and the
AU on issues related to peace and security in Africa.
Today that cooperation is genuinely developing at all
levels. Both organizations conduct regular conferences,
and special representatives and special envoys brief
the main bodies. The United Nations Security Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council
convene for joint meetings annually. The most recent
round of such meetings was held last week in Addis
Ababa. We welcome the historic first visit of the
Ad Hoc Working Group of the Security Council on
Conflict Prevention in Africa to the Ethiopian capital.
The discussions held gave us an opportunity to deepen
our understanding of persistent problems in Africa and
of results achieved in establishing the African peace
and security architecture. We firmly believe that the
potential for cooperation between United Nations and
the AU has not yet been fully unlocked. We share the
aspiration of the AU to make the dialogue between the
Councils of both organizations more substantive and
animated, as well as to harmonize their agenda with
issues plaguing Africa.
At the same time, we agree with the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2023/629) that the situation in many
regions of Africa remains highly volatile. In a number
of countries, there are acute and persistent political and
socioeconomic crises. The traditional sets of systemic
problems have limited the achievement of sustainable
peace and security and exacerbated new challenges.
Conflicts among nations and among ethnic groups
remain unresolved, and many terrorist organizations
continue to be highly active, including the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant, Al-Qaeda, Boko Haram
and Al-Shabaab. Local authorities face the weakness

S/PV.9435

and instability of institutions of State governance and
the limited military capability of national armed forces
and law enforcement. Therefore, local authorities are
unable to provide internal security and stability. The
situation is compounded by the illegitimate unilateral
sanctions restrictions, which persist in certain African
States, undermining socioeconomic well-being of
the population.
We note the progress achieved in surmounting
some crises. A major role was played by the AU’s
efforts, most notably in November 2022 when, with the
AU’s support, a cessation of hostilities agreement was
reached for northern Ethiopia and there was joint work
by the United Nations and AU in Somalia. We also
note the important role of subregional organizations
in strengthening regional peace and security. At the
same time, unfortunately, we recall that there are many
examples of African mediation efforts being relegated
to the background or deliberately derailed by external
players. It seemed that the experience of Libya in 2011
should have taught us a great deal, but we continue to
see similar examples today.
Significant progress has been achieved in ensuring
predictable, sustained and flexible financing for
African peace-support operations on the continent. In
that regard, the consensus paper adopted by the African
Union in February was a watershed, as was the report
of the Secretary-General issued at the end of April. The
Russian Federation supports the position of African
countries on the need to adopt effective measures to
that end. We consider abnormal the situation in which
peace and security in Africa depend on irregular
assistance from certain States and organizations.
The United Nations has already repeatedly provided
material and financial support for African efforts in
the area of international peace and security, including
through the use of assessed contributions from Member
States. In that connection, we commend the decisions
taken by the African Union to leverage the resources
of the Peace Fund and the Reserve Fund to resolve a
number of crises. That step confirms — not in words,
but in deeds — the principle of African solutions to
African problems.
We stand ready to continue to discuss the existing
proposals for a possible future process for planning
and joint decision-making on African peacekeeping
missions in Africa, including more viable funding
models, within the context of the forthcoming

23-3013815/20

S/PV.9435

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

12/10/2023

negotiations process on a future specialized Security
Council draft resolution.

the promotion and protection of human rights and the
implementation of the sustainable development agenda.

I would also like to emphasize that the key to the
success of regional efforts is the solidarity of African
countries in assessing political solutions to problems
and threats, as well as their willingness to assume the
risks in addressing those problems and to establish
effective command and control systems.

Just last week, I had the honour of participating in
the Council’s visit to the headquarters of the African
Union in Addis Ababa. I was able to see first-hand how
the African Union Peace and Security Council and
the Security Council have strengthened their strategic
partnership to address the challenges related to peace
and security in Africa and are making continuous efforts
to enhance coordination and information-sharing to
achieve common objectives. I was also able to observe
first-hand the important work of the United Nations
Office to the African Union and receive valuable
information from its head, Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga,
and the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the
Horn of Africa, Ms. Hanna Tetteh.

With regard to financing, regardless of which
modalities are appropriate to the situation and are
being discussed today, only independence in terms of
the resources of African States will afford the countries
of the continent genuine space to make their own
political decisions on how to address threats. That is a
long and difficult path, but it is certainly the strategic
goal of our African friends in order to overcome the
consequences of the colonial past and contemporary
neocolonial practices.
The Russian Federation is providing multifaceted
support to African peacekeeping efforts on the continent,
both bilaterally and through the training of African
military and law enforcement personnel in Russian
institutions of higher education. We note the training
of peacekeepers, including African peacekeepers, at
the All-Russian Institute for Advanced Training of the
Ministry of Internal Affairs of the Russian Federation,
which has been certified by the United Nations, as well
as at the military training centre for ground troops,
which is part of the Russian Ministry of Defence.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the Russian
Federation’s readiness to continue cooperating with
its African partners on an equal footing and focus on
strengthening their capacities in accordance with the
outcomes of the Russia-Africa summits in Sochi and
Saint Petersburg.

As I said in my visit to Addis Ababa, Ecuador and
the African Union share priorities such as the youth,
peace and security agenda. In that regard, we commend
the progress made by the African Union, in particular
the implementation of the Continental Framework
for Youth, Peace and Security, the appointment of a
Youth Envoy and five African Youth Ambassadors for
Peace — one for each region of the African continent,
the creation of the Youth for Peace Africa Programme
and the institutionalization of the participation of
young people in the African Union’s decision-making
processes through an advisory council with a defined
budget and mandate. We believe that those good
practices should be disseminated and shared with
other regional organizations, the United Nations and
other strategic partners, with a view to mainstreaming
the principles of the youth, peace and security agenda
throughout the world.

Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I am
grateful for the briefings this morning on cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union on
issues of peace and security in Africa.

We are also convinced that our efforts to enhance
cooperation between the African Union Peace and
Security Council and the Security Council can be
inspired by the unity regularly demonstrated by three
African members of the Security Council and their
cohesive political commitments, as underlined by
Mozambique this morning.

As we have said before, Ecuador considers
that cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations goes beyond what is stated in
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations on
regional arrangements and is indispensable to uphold
the three fundamental pillars of this Organization:
the maintenance of international peace and security,

The invitations to senior officials of the African
Union to brief the Security Council are key opportunities
to gain first-hand regional and subregional perspectives
on issues affecting the continent and should be
more frequent. There is also a need to revitalize and
continually improve the Ad Hoc Working Group on
Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa as a

16/20

23-30138

12/10/2023

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

mechanism for regular exchanges between the Security
Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council.
The African Union and the United Nations are
natural partners, united by shared values, principles
and objectives. Therefore, the United Nations and
its Member States have much to gain from greater
cooperation, coordination and consultations with the
African Union. The stronger our relationship, the more
effective we can be in our efforts on the ground, now
and in the future.
Mr. Kelley (United States of America): I would
like to thank our briefers Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Parfait Onanga-Anyanga,
Ambassador Fatima Kyari Mohammed and Mr. Solomon
Ayele Dersso for their insightful views on how to
enhance and improve coordination and collaboration
between the United Nations and the African Union
(AU).
The United States shares the Secretary-General’s
assessment that strong partnerships between our
bodies are important to address global and regional
challenges arising from climate change, food and
energy insecurity, conflict, violence and terrorism.
That includes the Secretary-General’s recommendation
that international financial institutions must evolve to
advance their core mission of ending extreme poverty
and boosting shared prosperity, while also refocusing
efforts on transnational challenges.
The Biden-Harris Administration has taken great
steps to scale up World Bank financing and expand
resources for low- and middle-income countries.
That will help to boost progress towards meeting the
Sustainable Development Goals and better address
interconnected challenges such as climate change
and fragility.
We applaud collaboration among the United
Nations, the AU, regional economic communities and
regional mechanisms, as well as other partners, in
support of conflict prevention and meditation. We also
welcome efforts to include women, young people, civil
society and other stakeholders in conflict resolution and
peacebuilding processes, as outlined in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2023/629).
The United States is deeply concerned about the
recent trend to democratic backsliding in West Africa
and in other parts of the continent. We reaffirm

S/PV.9435

our commitment to working with African partners,
including local leaders and civil society, regional bodies
and Governments to support democratic institutions.
We recognize and support the Economic Community of
West African States in leading efforts to bring about a
solution that preserves constitutional order in the Niger.
In Mali, we are deeply concerned about the rise
in violence that has accompanied the drawdown of
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali. Mali has a responsibility
to support the Mission’s safe and orderly withdrawal
by fully cooperating with the United Nations and
prioritizing the safety and security of peacekeepers.
We also strongly urge the United Nations to prioritize
the removal and disposal of lethal equipment and
ammunition, which if seized by bad actors would only
further destabilize the country and the region.
Turning to the Sudan, the United States joins the
AU, the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) and partners in calling for the Sudanese Armed
Forces and the Rapid Support Forces to immediately
end the fighting, adhere to their obligations under
international humanitarian law, respect human rights
and allow unhindered humanitarian access. This is
the time for the international community to stand with
the AU, IGAD and the United Nations to consolidate
pressure on the warring parties. The Security Council
and all Member States must be more active in
supporting the AU and IGAD’s demands for a ceasefire,
humanitarian access and a return to a democratic
transition. We hope to see further cooperation on the
issue of the Sudan between the AU and the United
Nations in the Security Council.
Regional peace operations remain one of the most
important tools that the international community has to
address new and emerging crises, and the African Union
Transition Mission in Somalia has continued to make
a significant contribution to a more stable and secure
Somalia. At the same time, the lack of predictable and
sustainable financing has hindered their fulfilment of
their mandates, constraining these missions’ potential
for delivering on their promise. That is why the United
States is committed to finding a way within appropriate
parameters for United Nations assessed contributions
to partially fund AU-led peace-support operations
authorized by the Security Council. The arrangement
should define the respective roles of the AU, the Security
Council, the General Assembly and the Secretariat in
supporting an AU financing arrangement. It would

23-3013817/20

S/PV.9435

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

enshrine commitments and responsibilities on human
rights and define specific financial burden-sharing
components. We welcome opportunities such as this to
further discuss our cooperation and paths forward. The
United States will continue to support close cooperation
to advance peace and security in Africa between the
United Nations, regional organizations such as the AU
and subregional organizations.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I thank the briefers for their
insightful remarks.
Malta firmly believes that robust partnerships
between the United Nations and regional organizations
are indispensable to effective multilateralism. We
commend the ongoing United Nations-African Union
(AU) partnership in working synergistically on
mediation, conflict prevention, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. Those endeavours give substance to the
concept of networked multilateralism that we all aspire
to achieve. We must acknowledge that conventional
responses, even when coordinated, have often proved
inadequate. We remain steadfast in our belief that
adherence to constitutional principles is central, even
in challenging situations where fledgling democracies
grapple with issues such as poverty, terrorism and weak
institutions. In the Sahel in particular, we have deepened
our collaboration to call for a swift and punctual return
to constitutional governance in line with the timelines
established by the Economic Community of West
African States.
Together with the AU, we are committed to
empowering women, and we continue to call for their
full, equal, meaningful and safe participation. Including
and empowering young people are equally important.
We welcome the AU’s activities on implementing the
women and peace and security agenda in Africa. The
solidarity missions of African women leaders from
the Great Lakes Region in the context of the Sudan,
as well as the establishment of a women’s situation
room to monitor women’s political participation in
Kenya’s elections, are important examples of crossregional solidarity.
Malta supports the Africa Platform on Children
Affected by Armed Conflicts. We welcome the
development of a child protection programme within
the AU Peace and Security Department, as supported
by the United Nations. Building on the three-year
strategic plan for integrating child protection, we look
forward to the implementation of two pivotal policies,
18/20

12/10/2023

on child protection in AU-led peace support operations
and on mainstreaming child protection into the African
peace and security architecture. As Africa remains one
of the continent’s most heavily affected by the effects of
climate change, we are also encouraged by the growing
recognition of the clear need to develop a robust and
coordinated policy response. We welcome the AU’s
10-year Climate Change and Resilient Development
Strategy and Action Plan, which lays a foundation for
continent-wide climate action.
The annual consultative meetings between the
United Nations Security Council and the AU Peace
and Security Council have substantially fortified our
cooperation over the years. Our joint endeavours in
Addis Ababa last week further enhanced coordination
between the two bodies, including on aspects relating
to working methods. As it stands, Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations provides us with an
adequate framework for moving forward in the realm
of peace and security. We advocate for a continued
United Nations-AU partnership that will empower the
AU to assume ownership in peacekeeping efforts on
the African continent. With that in mind, the Security
Council will soon be tasked with taking on a decision
towards predictable, sustainable and flexible financing
of AU-led peace support operations. As was discussed
in Addis Ababa, we have a unique opportunity to make
progress and forge consensus on the issue.
In conclusion, the United Nations and the AU
share multiple common interests and concerns. We
should leverage the most pressing ones to invigorate
our shared efforts. Collectively, we can infuse new
content and momentum into the interactions between
the two bodies, in the interests of our credibility and the
prosperity of future generations.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates): I
would like to begin by thanking Brazil for convening
today’s meeting and also for leading, together with
Mozambique, the Council’s recent mission to Addis
Ababa for the Annual Joint Consultative Meeting
between the Security Council and the African Union
(AU) Peace and Security Council. I welcomed the
adoption of the joint Security Council-AU Peace and
Security Council communiqué on that occasion. I also
want to thank Special Representative Parfait OnangaAnyanga and Ambassador Fatima Kyari Mohammed
for their insightful remarks, as well as Mr. Solomon
Ayele Dersso for his contributions.
23-30138

12/10/2023

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

In recent years we have seen significant
developments in the relationship between the United
Nations and the African Union, as well as in the
respective strength of both organizations. They include
the 2017 Joint Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security, and the African Union-United
Nations Framework for the Implementation of
Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. Growing convergence, unity of purpose
and a relationship based on common understanding
promise to bring even greater rewards. Today I
would like to make three points on how the enduring
partnership between the AU and the United Nations
could be further strengthened.
First, we should continue to draw lessons from
the successes that have emerged from regional
organizations. Over the past two decades, the African
Union has increasingly demonstrated the political
will and commitment needed to tackle security
challenges, including through preventive diplomacy
and the deployment of peace support operations in
Africa. The AU’s efforts to take on a more prominent
role at the regional level are commendable and should
be encouraged. Incorporating regional voices and
perspectives is crucial to maintaining international
peace and security. And without regional buy-in, it is
difficult, if not impossible, for United Nations efforts
alone to succeed.
Somalia is a prominent example of the intrinsic
value of partnerships in which the United Nations,
the AU and bilateral partners continue to engage
constructively with the Federal Government of Somalia
towards the implementation of its State-building
priorities. As the African Union continues to deepen
its scope of engagement and broaden its partnerships,
it is in the interest of the Security Council to support
the AU’s commitments to international peace and
security and as a cause that aligns with the purposes
and principles of the United Nations.
Secondly, the cooperation between the Security
Council and the AU Peace and Security Council should
be strengthened. It should not be a box to tick every year.
Rather, it must be an ongoing dialogue that addresses
not only issues pertaining to Africa, but also global
agenda items, both thematic and country-specific, in
which African perspectives can enrich our discussions.
It should also encompass more regular engagements
with high-level officials from the AU Commission.
As subregional organizations take on more prominent

S/PV.9435

peacekeeping roles on the African continent, such
organizations must become true partners. Sharing
relevant information and operational assessments
can also contribute to devising effective responses by
both Councils. In the context of AU-led peace support
operations authorized by the Security Council, we
recognize that the absence of predictable, sustainable
and flexible resources prevents the AU from fulfilling
its peace and security mandate.
This year’s joint communiqué of the annual joint
consultative meeting also acknowledges the persistent
financial challenges facing AU-led peace support
operations. In line with the communiqué, we believe
that it is important for the Security Council to consider
how to enhance the predictability, sustainability and
flexibility of financing for AU-led peace operations
authorized by and under the authority of the Security
Council, consistent with Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations. We look forward to engaging
constructively in the upcoming negotiations on that
issue and hope to reach an agreement that meets the
needs of this moment.
Thirdly, both Councils must work together
to promote the values of tolerance and peaceful
coexistence. Hate speech and extremism can lead to the
escalation and spread of conflict. In June, the Security
Council acknowledged that when it unanimously
adopted a resolution on tolerance and international
peace and security (resolution 2686 (2023)). That is also
echoed in the AU’s Agenda 2063, as that organization
continues its historic struggle against all forms of
racism, discrimination and intolerance. To make
meaningful advances on that common agenda, both
organizations will need to work in unison and ensure
that those frameworks enable our organizations to
safeguard peace and security.
Supporting the efforts of the African Union is
at the heart of Chapter VIII of the Charter. It is an
acknowledgement of the valuable contribution that the
AU makes to international peace and security and to the
growing role that it is called to play in an increasingly
polarized world. For its part, the United Arab Emirates
will strive to enhance cooperation between both
organizations in support of our common values,
purposes and principles towards the maintenance of
international peace and security for all.
Mrs. Shino (Japan): I would like to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Onanga-

23-3013819/20

S/PV.9435

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Anyanga; Ms. Mohammed, Permanent Observer of
the African Union (AU) to the United Nations; and
Mr. Dersso, Managing Director of Amani Africa, for
their briefings.
Let me start by joining others in expressing our
deep gratitude to the AU Peace and Security Council
for its warm hospitality during our trip to Addis Ababa
last week. African files carry substantial weight in
the work of the Security Council. The annual joint
consultative meeting gave us an opportunity to
explore how we should jointly address pressing issues
of common concern. The swift adoption of the joint
communiqué is an illustration of our solidarity and
common understanding under a shared set of goals.
As all of us highlighted in that meeting, and today the
demand for a strong United Nations-AU partnership
continues to grow in order to tackle Africa’s challenges
more effectively. Close consultation is required between
the two organs across the full spectrum of conflicts.
For that, an increased emphasis on prevention efforts
is important to ensure that, as proposed in the New
Agenda for Peace. We welcome regular technical-level
contact between the two Secretariats on country and
thematic files, including a horizon-scanning exercise
for conflict prevention.
The Ad Hoc Working Group of the Security Council
on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa is a
window into our close coordination efforts with the AU
Peace and Security Council. It should be a platform to
follow up on our common understanding articulated
in the joint communiqué, including on working
methods. More structured monthly coordination
between the President of the Security Council and the

20/20

12/10/2023

Chair of the AU Peace and Security Council should
greatly contribute to facilitating further dialogue and
cooperation between the two Councils. Japan is willing
to contribute to crystallizing that point by updating the
related documents.
We appreciate regional peace initiatives with a
strong sense of ownership to prevent, mediate and
settle conflicts on the African continent. A strong
understanding of the unique circumstances of each
situation in Africa and an approach that is crafted
accordingly should be a comparative advantage for the
AU and its peace support operations.
Last week, we again underscored the importance
of predictable, sustainable and flexible financing for
AU peace support operations through AU and United
Nations contributions. As we stated at the Security
Council meeting on this topic in May, Japan, in
principle, supports the establishment of a mechanism
through which AU peace support operations authorized
by the Security Council under Chapter Ⅷ of the
Charter could be partly financed through United
Nations assessed contributions, on a case-by-case basis
(see S/PV.9329). Japan remains committed to further
consultations with all stakeholders in that regard.
Africa continues to suffer from human security
crises caused by multiple factors. Close partnerships
between the United Nations and regional entities are
essential. Japan continues to play its part in supporting
international and regional efforts for peace and security
in Africa.
The meeting rose at noon.

23-30138
