TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

MEETING: 2 JULY 1969
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
......,..,....................

Page
1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 26 June 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/9284) . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 484)

SlPV.1484

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . ,) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN

HUNDRED

Held in New York
IWident:

AND EIGHTY-FOURTH

MEETING

on Wednesday, 2 July 1969, at 3 p.m.

Mr. Ibrahima BOYE (Senegal).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1484)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 26 June 1969 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/9284).
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 26 June 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/9284)
1. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): In accordance with the previous decisions of the Council, I invite the
representatives of Jordan, Israel, the United Arab Republic,
Saudi Arabia, the Syrian Arab Republic, Morocco, Iraq,
Indonesia and Lebanon to participate in our debate,
without the right to vote.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. Hashim
(Malaysia) took the place reserved for him at the side of the
Council chamber.
3. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): The Security Council will now continue its consideration of the item
before it. The first speaker on my list is the representative
of the United Arab Republic, on whom I now call.
4. Mr. EL-ERIAN (United Arab Republic): I have asked
for the floor to make a few brief comments in exercise of
my delegation’s right of reply. The representative of Israel
in his statement yesterday, regrettably, reached the height
of his melodramatic, arrogant and abusive performances,
which, notwithstanding the fact that the Council has by
now become accustomed to them, continue to be wearying
and tedious. In that statement the representative of Israel
poured out the venom of his hate and the wrath of his
bitterness at a number of countries, including the United
Arab Republic. Apparently he was disturbed by the
statements made in the Council in which the illegal nature
and lawless character of the offences committed by the
Israeli authorities in Arab Jerusalem were exposed.
5. It comes as no surprise to us that Mr. Tekoah finds our
statement disturbing, just as the authorities he represents
find our stand and our policies equally disturbing, inasmuch
as such statements and policies oppose Israeli aggression,
denounce Israel’s violations of the basic norms of contemporary international order and express our determination to defend our rights.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. H. El-Farra
(Jordan) and Mr, Y. Tekoah (Israel) took places at the
Council table, and Mr. A. El-Erian (United Arab Republic),
Mr. J. M. Baroody (Saudi Arabia), Mr. G. J. Tomeh (Syria),
Mr. A. T Benhima (Morocco), Mr. A. Raouf (Iraq), Mr. H.
R. Abdulgani (Indonesia) and Mr. E. Ghorra (Lebanon)
took the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

6. I shall not take up much of the time of the Council in
replying to the slanderous lies spoken by the representative
of Israel against the United Arab Republic, since they are
self-refuting. Therefore I shall confine myself to taking up a
few of the points contained in the speech of the representative of Israel, since they reveal the real character of Israeli
policies and practices. The representative of Israel alleged in
his statement yesterday that: “Egypt has made half a
million of its citizens homeless and has driven them out of
the towns and villages along the west bank of the Suez
Canal” [1483rd meeting, para. 1111.

2. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): Furthermore, I have just received a request from the representative
of Malaysia [S/9302/
asking that he be allowed to
participate in the debate of the Security Council. If there
are no objections, I shall invite him to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, and to take a seat at
the side of the Council chamber, on the understanding that
he will be invited to take a place at the Council table when
the time comes for him to speak.

7. It is the height of callousness and sinister behaviour for
a representative of the Israeli authorities, which have
committed aggression against the Arab peoples and have
continued thereafter to bombard and shell the civilians of
our cities along the Suez Canal, to come to the Council and
not shrink from manifesting a hypocritical and deceitful
concern for the Egyptian citizens of the towns and villages
along the west bank of the Suez Canal. How can the Israeli

bank of the Canalwith offensive.,weapons,to enablethe
Israeli fire to reach the city of Port Said. This latest
aggressive
action by the Israeli armed forceshasseriously
aggravatedthe situation in the Suez Canal areato the
point of a threat of explosion.

representative, of all people, arrogate to himself the right to
speak about homeless citizens and their being driven out of
their towns and villages? Did he ponder for a moment the
fate of more than one and a half million Arabs that have
been driven from their homeland by the Israelis, who have
refused to comply with the numerous resolutions of the
General Assembly which reaffirm the inalienable right of
these Arabs to return?

“It will not escapethe attention of the Council that
theseIsraeli attacks againstthe city of Port Saidare an
Integral part of the same aggressivepolicy againstthe
cities and towns of the westernbank of the Canal,whose
main objective is to sowhavoc by the destructionof civil
and economicinstallationsand’to inflict heavy casualties
on the civilian population.” [S/9210./

8. It appears necessary to refresh the memory of the
representative of Israel by recalling the circumstances in
which the United Arab Republic Government took the
necessary measures to protect the civilian inhabitants along
the Suez Canal.

10. Thesemeasureswhich the Government of the United
Arab Republic hasfound it necessaryto take to protect its
citizensfrom Israeliaggression
seemto disturb the represen.
tative of Israel. His concept of the responsibility of a
Government towards its citizens seemsto suggestthat it
shouldkeep them at the mercy of Israeli shellingandwithin
the rangeof Israeliartillery fire. The representativeof Israel
finds it equally disturbing that thesemeasures
frustrate the
Israeli plan to underminethe will of our people to resist
Israeli aggressionand force them to yield to the Israeli
Dilctat. According to Mr. Tekoah, measureswhich frustrate
the Israeli plans of aggressionconstitute a failure on the
part of a Government to discharge its responsibilities
towardsits citizens.

9. As early as ;i October 1967, in a letter to the President
of the Security Council, the representative of the United
Arab Republic Informed the Council that:
“ . * . Israel has consistently attacked, bombarded and
shelled the populated cities in the Suez Canal sector and
the Canal’s installations. These aggressive acts and violations of the cease-fire have resulted in heavy losses of
civilian life and destruction of buildings and property, a
fact which has lately prompted the United Arab Republic
Government to evacuate over 300,000 of the inhabitants
of the Canal sector.” [S/820.5.]
Moreover, the representative of the United Arab Republic
stated in the Council on 4 September 1968 that the Israelis:

11. May I turn now to another point containedin the
statementmade yesterday by the representative of Israel,
wherehe spokeof countries which by their behaviourhave
placedthemselvesoutsidethe fold and deprived themselves
of the right to be heard on questions of international
obligations,civilized conduct or human rights.

“ . . . have wantonly

shelled the Egyptian cities along
the west bank of the Canal, Without provocation they
aimed their guns and flew their planes over the innocent
civilian population of these cities, inflicting untold
damage . . . in order to apply pressure on my Government. For there were no military targets within these
cities. Is it conceivable that the lives of men, women and
children should be the price to be paid for the folly of the
Israeli leaders? Is it tolerable that the indiscriminate
destruction of buildings, whether homes, mosques,
churches or hospitals, should be the toll collected for the
insatiable desire of Israel to achieve its expansionist
designs?

12. One would like here also to refresh Mr. Tekoah’s
memory about Israel’sconcept of international obligations,
whether emanatingfrom the Charter or from commitments
under international agreements.Israel declaredits renuncia.
tion of the General Armistice Agreements between the
Arab Statesand Israell, to which it had affixed its signature
in 1949, when it realized that those Agreementsstoodin
the way of its ambition to acquire territory beyond the
1949 armistice demarcation lines. Today, the Israeli
officials declarethat all the Armistice Agreementsno longer
exist. Israel proceedson the basis that it is entitled to
conclude international agreements<andthen to renounce
them, by its unilateral will, as soon as it finds in them a
limitation on its freedom concerning what it considersits
right of territorial expansion,

“I should like, with your permission, Mr. President, to
cite a tragic result of this vicious policy of Israel. Its
indiscriminate shelling of densely populated cities of the
Canal area has resulted in the following: 134 killed and
329 injured in Suez and Ismailia on 14 and 15 July 1967;
50 killed and 70 injured in Suez on 4 September 1967; 2
killed and 1.5 injured in Kantara on 12 September 1967;
X6 killed and 216 injured in Suez, Ismailia and Kantara
on 27 September 1967; 3 killed and 50 injured in Suez on
24 Ortober 1967; 50 killed and 67 injured in Suez on
3 July 1968-a total of 325 killed and 747 Injured, all
innocent civilians.” [1446th meeting, paras. 39 and 40.1

13. Israel’srenunciation of the Armistice Agreementsthat
it had signedis in line with its renunciation of the Lausanne
Protocol, which it signedwith the Arab States, also in
1949.2 That Protocol was aimed at the solution of the
refugeeproblem. Israel renouncedit as soon asit achieved
the purposefor which it had affixed its signature,namely,

Furthermore, in a letter dated 15 May 1969 to the
President of the Security Council the representativeof the
United Arab Republicstatedthat:

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Fourth Year,
Special Supplements Nos. 1 to 4.
2 Official Records of the General Assembly, Fourth Session, Ad
Hoc Political Committee, Annex, vol. II, document A/921, annexA

“In early March 1969, Israel intensified the fortifications of its positionsin the northern sector of the east

andB.

2

admission to membership in the United Nations. As to
Israel’s violations of its obligations under the resolutions of
the United Nations, a rather long inventory would be
needed if one were to attempt to list them. The subject
matter of the item before the Council is Israel’s refusal to
carry out the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly
and Security Council regarding Jerusalem. Its defiance of
these resolutions has gone as far as informing the Secretary-General that its annexation of Jerusalem is irreversible
and not negotiable.

invite to take a place at the Council table. I now call on
him.
17. Mr. BENHIMA (Morocco) (translated from French):
Mr. President, on behalf of the Government of the Kingdom of Morocco and its delegation, I should like to express
to you personally, and to the members of the Council, our
gratitude for agreeing to permit me to express the views of
my Government during this debate. I know that the
provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council
entitle all Members of the United Nations to speak in the
Council when the problem before it is of great interest to
their respective governments. We have spoken in the
Council on other occasions because we have felt that, for
various reasons, our participation in the debate was
justified. But we have never felt more closely and directly
concerned by a problem than we do, for a number of
reasons, by the one before you today.

14. This policy of defiance is manifested in the following:
Israel’s refusal to implement Security Council resolution
242 (1967) of 22 November 1967; Israel’s refusal to
withdraw from the Arab territories occupied as a result of
its aggression on 5 June 1967; Israel’s insistence on following an expansionist policy; Israel’s refusal to recognize the
rights of the refugees as stated by the United Nations in its
numerous resolutions; Israel’s continued expulsion of Arab
citizens from their territories and villages, with the aim of
establishing Israeli settlements therein; and Israel’s resistance to the mission of the Secretary-General’s special
representative, charged with the task of examining the
conditions of the Arab population in the occupied territories. Such is the record of Israel’s disregard for its
obligations. One may question the audacity, but certainly
not the authority, of the Israeli representative when he
speaks of countries which by their behaviour have placed
themselves outside the fold and deprived themselves of the
right to be heard on the question of international obligations, civilized conduct or human rights.

18. First of all, as Members of the United Nations, we
assume collective responsibility for maintaining peace and
for providing evidence of what we consider to be the truth
on certain problems. There have been decisions by the
United Nations, and resolutions adopted by the Security
Council on the question of Jerusalem. They have been
violated, and this makes it our duty to come here to express
our point of view on this violation.
19. We also do so for another reason. The area concerned
is an Arab territory which has been plundered. We are
Arabs, and this concerns us.
20. Finally, we do so for a third reason, and it is not the
least. It is the Holy Places of Islam which have been ,
plundered. ! belong to a Moslem civilization, to a Moslem
State, and that is another reason for my Government’s
participation.

IS. Lastly, may I say a few words on the Israeli
representative’s remark in his statement yesterday that the
Arab countries were openly pursuing warfare and on his
reference to a peaceful and just settlement. I should like to
quote, in reply, from a statement my Foreign Minister
made in the general debate of the General Assembly at its
twenty-third session:

21. May I be allowed to add a final personal comment?
As I express the views of the Moroccan Government in this
Council, I should like at the same time to express the
convictions of an Arab and the faith of a Moslem
concerning the danger threatening Jerusalem. I am sure
there will be no objections to this last point. I remember
that in the course of the debate of the Security Council in
June and July 1967, a representative of Israel began his
statement here by saying: “I am Jewish, and proud of it; I
am a Zionist, and proud of it”. My identity as an Arab and
my faith as a Moslem also make me proud to participate in
this debate at the gravest time in the destiny of Jerusalem.

“While Israel continues its policy of occupying more of
the Arab territories and transforming more of the Arab
citizens into refugees, it has been undertaking a campaign
of international deception in which it claims a desire for
peace. Israel occupies Arab territories and claims peace. It
resists the return of the refugees and displaced peoples,
and claims peace, It carries on a campaign of terror and
oppression against Arab citizens in the occupied territories and claims peace. It annexes Jerusalem and claims
peace. It plunders Arab property and claims peace. It
refuses to implement the peaceful settlement approved by
the Security Council, and claims peace. It lays down one
obstacle after another to the peace mission of Ambassador Jarring, and it claims peace.

16. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Morocco, whom I

22. But it is not only Morocco which is concerned in this
matter. You have received a great many requests to
participate in this debate from delegations of various
continents and faiths. I think that is enough to show the
importance which is attached throughout the whole world
in the present circumstances to a problem which a certain
sector of the press is presenting to us as merely the
demolition of some old buildings, but which, in fact,
concerns walls with a sacred history; it concerns the
obliteration of an age-old identity and civilization in a place
which has in fact been occupied only a few years.

3 Ibid.,
Twenty-third
paras. 110 and 111.

23. The representatives of Israel have used different styles
on different occasions in speaking before the Council. At

“Peace, in Israel’s view, is the surrender of the Arab
peoples to its will and their acquiescence in its territorial
ambitions.“3

Session,

Plenary

Meetings,

1689th

meeting,

3

one time, when Israel still had some modesty and was
m&hg an effort to disguise its intentions, we used to hear
speakers whose talent, skill, and even a certain adroitness
led them to take the trouble to addressthe Council with
some degreeof subtlety. Since the events of June 1967,
however, Israel has entered a phasein which its policy
concerning the United Nations consistsof defiance; its
attitude in the dialoguebeing conducted here is one of
arrogance;and, mobilizing all the cosmopolitantalentsat
its disposal,it hasat lastfound a representativewith all the
qualitiesnecessaryto addressthe Councilwith indifference
and arrogance.Weshallnot follow him in this course,but
we cannotfail to point it out.
24. Every time we have been invited here to speakon a
specific problem, we have either been asked by the
representativeof Israelto go back in history all the way to
Moses,Solomonor David, in an effort to justify the claims
of the people of Israel to certain lands, or we have been
remindedof the crimesof nazisrnasthough that injusticewhich Israel trots out so frequently-could justify another
injustice. And every time, thesedigressions
were intended
to divert the Council from specific facts which are the
subject of specific documents,or of complaints by the
Statesconcerned,expressed
equally clearly.
25. We have before us today the complaint by Jordan
regardingspecific facts, and this is what the Council must
consider.In the courseof the debatestheselast few days,
Mr. Tekoah has displayed a subtlety which is wholly
transparent.I shallmakethis clearshortly, andgive a fitting
reply. But what exactly is the problem we are considering
here? Sincethe eventsof 1948, a seriesof texts havebeen
adopted unanimously or by a majority vote of the
Assembly, unanimouslyor by a majority of the Council.
There are even bilateral Armistice Agreements.There have
been sometripartite declarationswhich have guaranteeda
certain statusquo in the Middle East. This is the legaland
political context of the debateshere. From 1948 onwards,
Jerusalemwas a city whosestatushad beeninternationally
defined by decisionsof the United Nations.Israel started
out by holding paradesthere contrary to the statute of the
city. It transferredthe bulk of its governmentmachinery
there, contrary to the relevant provisionsof the Assembly
and the Council. I know that somecountrieshave yielded
with much benevolenceto Israel’sinvitation to transfer
their embassies
to Jerusalem,In doing so, they have
deliberatelycontravenedcertaininternationaldecisions,
26. Since the eventsof June 1967, the Security Council
has consideredthe questionof Jerusalemand the General
Assembly has held special sessionsto deal with this
problem. A seriesof resolutionshave beenadopted which
have the merit of beingperfectly clearand without any of
the euphemismswhich are sometimesfound in other
decisionsof the Council,

not to let the parade take place. It did take place, with a
demonstrationof force such aswe saw in Austria, Czechoslovakia and elsewherein those times which provide Israel
with justification for contemporary theories concerningits
rights.
28. Israel expropriated 500 hectares of Arab land in
Jerusalem. The Council condemned [resolution 252
(1968)] this decision. In its resolution 242 (1967) of 22
November 1967, the Council took care to announce,in the
secondpreambularparagraph,that no acquisition of territory by force could be accepted as a fait accompli. We
understoodat the time that the paragraphin question had
beenintroduced in this particular place in the resolutionin
orderto give particular emphasisto the unanimouscondemnation of all territorial conquestswhich had been voicedin
the Assembly and the Council by the most eminent
representativesof all the States concerned.Perhapscertain
countrieswhich were so anxiousto acceptthis formula saw
it only as a statementof a principle which preservestheir
own acquired rights, or makes it possible to restate a
principle anew in order to maintain the status quo and
positionsin areaswhere they have direct interests. But we
wishto assume
that this paragraphrelatesto the casebefore
us. It is contained in a resolution which concernsthe
Middle East, it shouldbe applied to the Middle East; andit
should not be applied there with connotations for other
territories in Europe, Asia or elsewhere.
29. If Jordan hassubmitted this complaint today, it has
done so to denouncethis series of violations which are
contrary to perfectly clear-cut decisionsof the Security
Council and the General Assembly. At no time have our
warnings,recommendations,or diplomatic appealsthrough
the most discreetmeansand channelsbeenheededor taken
into considerationby Israel; that is what I mean by saying
that its policy has now entered this phase of constant
defianceandarrogance.
30. This time, the question before us is the demolition of
buildingsin Jerusalem.Israeli aviation isattacking the canal
zone or Jordan regularly, and has destroyed a numberof
villages.You havehad to dealwith the problem of Karameh
here in the Council, and you have expressedyour condemnation. You have repeatedly and constantly called upon
Israelto respectthe cease-fire.If this time it were merelya
matter of the destruction of somevillage, we would write it
off, acceptingthe fact aspart of the general picture of the
tragic situation in the Middle East. But this time a mosque,
a school, a court of justice are involved: these are all
symbols both of sacred places and buildings where the
children of a divided country still cling with all their might
to their culture, their civilization and their faith; a court
where the laws governing a peaceful society are respected
andremainin force.
31. Mr. Abba Eban told us at a certain moment that the
measuresadopted concerning Jerusalemwere merely one
aspectof an administrative and municipal integration made
necessaryby the requirementsof local administration.He
hasstated on a number of occasions-andat the time many
representativesaskedhim to back this assuranceby certain
statements which he avoided-that the city’s placesof
worship would be fully respected.We are confronted by a

27. Israelannouncedthat it would hold a miljtary parade
on 2 May 1968; the Secretary-General, aware of his
responsibilities,wrote to the Israeli Government [see
S/8567]. We receivedno official reply, andMr. Abba Bban
felt he shouldwait to address
the GeneralAssemblybefore
replying in an evasiveway to the Secretary-General.The
Council issueda warning(resohtion 250 (19G8)] to Israel
4

flagrant violation of those declarations and assurances given
by the spokesman of the Israeli Government, who at the
time insisted on giving them in a tone of solemnity,
possibly even of a sincerity which they may llave possessed
then but which they no longer have. The elections are
approaching, and even doves are becoming vultures.
32. I think this is the problem on which the Council must
express itself. Within its responsibilities for legal questions
and respect for international law, it has before it texts
which it has itself adopted; and it is at the same time
confronted by violations which it must prevent, so that
they do not afflict the victims who are suffering from them
today.
33. Yesterday, we heard with great satisfaction certain
statements, particularly by the major Powers, expressed in
terms which had the merit of clarity or, in any case, the
merit of having been made at the right time and place, as
they should have been, even though at other times there
was some ambiguity. If these declarations are meaningful
they must lead to logical conclusions-I
do not wish to
judge in advance any subsequent statements by members of
the Council-in a very clearly defined resolution firmly
forbidding Israel to touch buildings which have the weight
of historical prestige, and the sacred character of a spiritual
heritage. If we close our eyes to such an attitude this time,
we shall open the way in the coming weeks and months to
total obliteration of the international character of the city,
total obliteration of its Arab and Moslem personality and,
for all we know, to some extent even of the Christian
personality of the world’s religious capital. So much for the
strictly formal and legal aspect of the Council’s work.
34. But the Council, as the organ responsible for peace, is
not only a court of first instance which applies provisions in
certain cases of breaches of the law. In accordance with the
spirit of the Charter and the philosophy of the United
Nations, international law is intermingled with its political
justifications and moral aims; and these two aspects of the
problem are also involved in what is happening in Jerusalem. What is happening in Jerusalem is changing the status
quo in the Middle East, changing it legally and politically.
The cease-fire, the Armistice Agreements, the resolutions
which have been voted in the organs of the United Nations
in these last few years, establish a specific framework which
does not in any way affect these three aspects of the
situation in the Middle East, and especially in Jerusalem,
and gives Israel absolutely no right on any pretext to
change them.
35. I said a while ago that certain statements by Mr. Tekoah were perfectly transparent. If a representative of
Israel, the first time he speaks before the Security Council,
considers that he should announce to us the purport of a
certain meeting in Jerusalem to decide on that city’s future
and town planning regulationc, it means he must have
wished to try both to divert the Council from its main
objective and to create some confusion or, by announcing
such a meeting in the Security Council, to legalize it or lend
it the authority of being placed on international record. But
the move is too clumsy to pass unnoticed.
36. Of course, in the list of personalities meeting in
Jerusalem at present, we recognize some of individual

importance, we recognize the eminence of certain personages, from Mr. Ignazio Silone to others who, on whatever grounds, have a right to accept an invitation by Israel.
But even though the statement made here wilfully insinuated that there are among them personalities who are
eminent as sympathizers of Islam, the authority of those
sympathizers of Islam does not give them any rights, as
scholars, to speak or make decisions on behalf of Moslems.
TO be a specialist on a civilization gives no one any right
whatever to become its guide and mentor, and we most
emphatically denounce this new aspect of the presence of
those persons in Jerusalem.
3’7. Israel’s guests have a right to take whatever decisions
they wish. The courtesy which guests must observe will lead
them to be very indulgent in making certain decisions. But
these are not guests of Moslems, of the Arabs of the Arab
part of Jerusalem, and what they decide will be valid only
before their own conscience. I consider that those who have
won world-wide prestige and a reputation of moral integrity
and high intellectual and spiritual development have, by
their mere presence at this meeting, destroyed that moral
authority for ever.
38. Mr. Tekoah has also told us that certain Moslem
personalities of Jerusalem have recently made statements
expressing their endorsement of the Israeli authorities and
declaring that they are happy to live under the Israeli
occupation. I do not know whether Mr. Tekoah knew then,
when he was in Shanghai, what was happening in Europe
after 1940. At that time, countries with a glorious history
and political figures whose careers had led them to the
highest posts, at the centre of the stage in their countries,
made statements under the occupier’s authority which, at
the time, were brandished and played up by the occupation
authorities to salve their consciences. Those statements led
some of their originators to the gallows, and, in any case,
were never binding on the occupied peoples who were living
under the yoke of the occupier.
39. We consider that only the legal authority which still
enjoys freedom outside of any occupation, and only those
who have strengthened their legitimate rights by having the
courage to take up arms to reply to the Israeli occupation,
are the authentic spokesmen of Jerusalem or of any inch of
Arab territory occupied at present.
40. The above-mentioned personalities are free to say,
under pressure or through weakness of conscience, whatever they please. But they do not possess the authority
required to present themselves as the spokesmen of an
occupied population, since they are at present completely
controlled by the Israeli police.
41. Lastly, Mr. Tekoah also mentioned statements of
Christian authorities, particularly those of a high-ranking
prelate of Brazil. May I mention that high-ranking prelates
of Brazil are today making statements against their Government because they are dissatisfied with their rkgime? Can
those prelates, who today try to speak on behalf of
Christianity, at one and the same time accept an occupation
in the Arab world and denounce restrictions of liberty in
their own country? I would certainly like to have heard the

45. So much for some remarks made in the Security
Council by Mr. Tekoah in order to divert the Council from
the real problems it has to consider. And so much for some
remarks made with that quality of arrogance I mentioned at
the beginning of my statement.

prelate who defends Israeli legitimacy in Jerusalem also
defend legitimacy and freedom elsewhere. In any case,
Christians know what are their historical responsibilities in
Jerusalem. They are aware of the way they must defend
their,heritage in that area. I shall return to this point in a
few minutes.

46. But I am obliged to deal with yet another problem,
and I ask the Council to eliminate any aspect of impassioned or religious polemics from that problem and to
consider it as the reflection of a simple historical fact which
none of us should forget. We are told: “Jerusalem is not
Arab”. But who remained in Jerusalem while you were in
the Diaspora? The Arab people, the Moslem people. Who
built the Mosque of Omar, the Masjid Al-Aqsa? Who built
all the other Moslem Holy Places? Are they the creation of
Moses’ rod? Who made them? Who has preserved and
cared for them? Do you mean to wipe out the entire Arab
heritage by a couple of words in the Council, by saying that
the Arabs have no right to Jerusalem? Was it Zionist
cosmopolitanism which, over 1.500 years, created that right,
guarded its legitimacy, preserved the Holy Places in the
Arab part of Jerusalem against all the storms of history? I
have not heard you tell the Council that, on the basis of the
same principle, you also questioned the legitimacy of the
Christians-which
should logically follow from your statement. Your silence on this score is certainly not an
oversight. I can readily believe that it is calculated. I know
that in recent years Israeli diplomacy has made enormous
efforts in approaching the Church and the Christian world,
and I must say, to your credit, that sometimes you have
done so with some degree of success. But, on the same
principle, why do you not say today that Christianity has
no right to Jerusalem either? Are you trying to preserve an
objective ally in this circumstantial division? Are you
trying to assure that ally that he will have more guarantees
than the Moslems? We are engaged in an open dialogue
with the Church, in a spirit of tolerance and monotheistic
fraternity, and I am sure that when the Church speaks of
Christian ecumenism, it does not forget world ecumenism;
and the current effort being made for coexistence at the
ideological level, and at the level of national churches for
understanding, is also being made at a world-wide level for
mutual understanding among all creeds. You will not
separate us from the historic fraternity we have had with
Christianity. You have a habit, in more ways than one, of
confusing Zionism with Judaism, with the former triumphing over the latter.

42. The substance of what I wish to point out about these
declarations is that they cannot mislead the Council,
because they come from personages who are in no way
qualified to speak on behalf of those who cannot speak for
themselves. We attach to them personally, and to their
priesthood, all the respect and reverence which one believer
is capable of feeling about another. But in politics there are
other considerations, and certain statements simply cannot
be accepted because they come from persons who were not
qualified to make them.
43. Finally, Mr. Tekoah spoke of the illegality of the Arab
claim to Arab Jerusalem. Has Mr. Tekoah, who was born in
Shanghai, or Mrs. Golda Meir, who was born in Russia, or
Mr. Abba Eban, who was born in South Africa, more right
to speak of Jerusalem than Mr. Rouhi El-Khatib, the
elected Mayor of the city, whose family have lived there for
1500 years as eternal protectors of the Temple, in the
shadow of the Holy Places of Jerusalem? Whom is
Mr. Tekoah trying to deceive here? Although in his cultural
education his knowledge of Judaism dates from the time of
his arrival in Palestine in 1946, the history of Palestine
began long before that. And by what right can Israelites of
the Baltic countries, Prague or the Sudetenland, or elsewhere, even though they have been badly treated there,
claim to have more right to a country they have never
known, where they have not lived, where they cannot
establish their genealogy’? By what right can they reject the
legitimacy of those who, because they are reverently
attached to each stone and every inch of their sacred Holy
Land, have for 1500 years suffered all the vicissitudes of
history, all the occupations, all the misfortunes and
tragedies of that land? Those who have lived happily as
bankers in Zurich, Amsterdam, Rotterdam or elsewhere
should not come forward now to claim that they are the
protectors of the Holy Land, and that they have more right
to it than those who were born there and whose faces today
reflect the very character of its soil.
44. We have been told about the unity of Jerusalem. But
Israel’s concept of unity is equivalent to Hitler’s “New
Order”. If Mr. Tekoah knows the etymology of the words
he uses, he must realize that there is an intrinsic, constituent factor of unity, whether national or popular: the
consent of those who mean to unite. Mr. Tekoah, do you
have the consent of the population of Jerusalem to occupy
that city, and to claim that you have brought it a beneficial
unity? YOU tell us with great emotion-and one would
think we were hearing a trade union leader addressing the
Council-“We have increased the wages of the Jordanian
workers”. DO YOU think anyone would agree to give up his
dignity, to accept the occupation of his territory, in
exchange for an extra 15 pence or so on his daily wage? We
know that your philosophy, your Zionist ideology is based
on hatred of the Arabs, and we do not question your right
to hate us; but we do question your right to regard us with
such contempt.

47. May 1 remind you that what you
are doing in
Jerusalem today has been done before in history, and that
the consequences are still visible. Certainly, the conquest of
the Christian world by Rome brought it a great deal of
might and power in the early centuries of Christianity, but
also brought it so many disturbances, so many divisions
that the Church still bears some of the scars to this day.
The capture of the Moslem world by the Ottoman Empire
may also have given the latter some temporal brilliance and
political power for a certain period. But every time the
conqueror takes and espouses another’s world and faith, he
brings the latter misfortune. I am convinced that Zionism,
when it takes over Judaism and becomes its compulsory
and world-wide guide and mentor, is preparing some very
woeful times for Judaism in the future. It is not for
Zionism to wipe out what the history of Islam has left to
6

Jerusalem, what Christianity has done in Jerusalem. I have
mentioned what the Moslems have done for 1500 years to
remain in Jerusalem. But I must say that, although the
crusades are a sad page in the history of mankind,
nevertheless, at the cost of the blood shed in Jerusalem,
they legitimized an eternal right-a right which must be
preserved for ever-for Moslems and Christians alike over
the high places of their creeds, and the high places of their
faith. If Latin Christendom sent all that was greatest and
most valiant to the crusades, if all its ruling dynasties and
princely houses sent their knights to fight in Jerusalem, it
was certainly not in order to be told today that Israel is
there, that Zionism is there and that nobody has the right
to claim that Jerusalem belongs to anyone but the Israeli
world. So, although you are silent today on the subject of
the Christian Holy Places, we are sure that as your policy
develops you will some day find arguments to challenge the
Christians too on that point.

justification of their role as permanent members. Do you
expect US to relieve them of that responsibility today
because the attitude they are taking does not suit your
ulterior motives and your objectives?
50. There are rules in this Council; it has its statute. It has
adopted resolutions, and its first concern, if not duty,
should be respect for their validity. And I remember many
debates in the Council where, whatever the differences of
political attitudes to the problems being discussed in the
Council, the members of this organ were unanimous in their
will to see to it that the previous decisions of the Council
were complied with. Here I wish to recall certain factswithout this in any way being regarded as a statement of a
political position-which
simply appear on the Council
record.
51. On the question of Kashmir, the Council constantly
upheld respect for and the validity of the decisions of the
United Nations. On the question of Cyprus, the Council
constantly invoked international agreements which had
received an international guarantee. On the question of the
situation created in Berlin, we were on the verge of
international crises and war at certain times, because
nobody wished the arrangement made at a particular
moment to be changed unilaterally. There has been war in
Korea and Viet-Nam because the statutes which had been
established following the war in Asia and in Indo-China had
not been respected by either party concerned. If in those
cases the Council insisted-wholly to its honour-on enforcing respect for the validity of its decisions, does it now
regard Jerusalem as a corner of the world of any less
significance, of less importance? And should we be asked
not to engage in a debate because it might be harmful to
certain talks? But the Council can only be strengthened
ultimately-as would the talks now going on, to which we
are the first to wish a successful outcome-if it takes a
decision here reaffirming that what it has decided in the
past must remain valid until such time as the Council
decides otherwise.

48. This is an infinitely broad and painful subject. It
would be hazardous to try to deal with all its aspects at the
same time. However, in referring to a few historic facts I
also mean to bring the debate back to its present context.
Yesterday, when Mr. Tekoah saw in the Council a certain
trend towards the desire for compliance with the decisions
adopted-a trend which exists and must continue-he
brandished a statement by Mrs. Golda Meir telling us that
the great Powers have nothing to do with this matter. I do
not think that has always been Israel’s policy. This kind of
rejection of intervention by the great Powers is new in its
policy. After all, Israel was created and recognized by the
great Powers. The great Powers guaranteed the status qllo
by the Tripartite Declaration. The great Powers supplied it
with all the weapons it wished. For example, and to
mention names-I know that the Soviet delegation is
capable of answering the points made yesterday concerning
it, although every time we meet here you challenge its right
to speak because its ideas are closely in line with the
legality and legitimacy of Arab rights-I do not think that
President Weizmann threw Stalin’s cable of recognition in
the wastebasket when he received it. I do not think you
scorned the intervention of the Government of Mr. Guy
Mollet or of Mr. Anthony Eden when they were your
accomplices in the attack of 1956. I do not think you
displayed such haughtiness towards the United States when
you mobilized all the electoral power of that country in
order to get the Phantom jets. 1 do not think you disdain
contact with Great Britain when you are about to negotiate
to buy the world’s best tanks from the United Kingdom.
You want to have them beside you constantly to confirm
your rights and strengthen your war machinery. But when
these great Powers manifest their responsibility by espousing the rights of this very Organization, you seem to say
that you do not recognize them, We have been subject to
their decisions when it is we who were the victims. If a
moral awakening and a change in the world situation are
today leading people back to a more genuine respect for
law, on what grounds do you expect us now to disdain the
great Powers along with you?

52. That is the legal, moral and political context of the
debate we are engagedin today. The delegation of Morocco
wished to express its point of view concerning all aspects of
this problem. We hope that today States Members of the
United Nations-whatever
the religion to which they
belong, or whether they be inspired by a humanism deriving
from other than transcendental values, so long as they have
shown that they respect the beliefs of others-will not view
what has happened in Jerusalem this week only as the
passing of a few bulldozers over some old buildings, but as
the fiist stage in a systematic process of destruction, of
elimination of the international identity and status of the
city, and the obliteration of all that is most sacred in it.
And I say to you, with no claims to prophecy, that if
tomorrow all that which is Christian and Moslem disappears
from Jerusalem, then it will mean that atheist Zionism will
have taken over Judaism and will have established its own
headquarters in the place of the Wailing Wall and the other
Holy Places which the world of Judaism still reveres.

49. I know that we are opposed to directorates in the
world, but the Charter of the United Nations and the
statute of the Security Council give the great Powers a
special moral responsibility, and this is the sole legitimate

53. Mr. MWAANGA (Zambia): Allow me to express the
appreciation of the Zambian delegation to Mr. Solano
Ldpez of Paraguay, who last month presided over the
7

the United Nations it must recognize and accept its
responsibilities flowing from the Charter. Its non-co-operation with the Security Council will, in our view, tarnish this
body’s reputation, and we should not allow this to happen.

deliberations of the Council. We were highly impressed by
his correctness and his grasp of Security Council procedures. We had added pleasure in having as President a
shining representative of the Latin American continent with
whom we have always enjoyed the best of relations.

58. With due respect, we do not believe that this is the
right kind of approach for settling major international
disputes. We sincerely believe that it must be a matter of
great concern that, at a time when everyone who is
interested in peace is genuinely searching for an effective
formula that will bring peace to the troubled area, the
parties to the conflict should proceed deliberately to
aggravate the situation. It is my humble submission that,
taking into account resolution 252 (1968), the recent laws
promulgated by Israel are acts intended to confuse even
more an already confused situation. There is no doubt that
they undermine the efforts being made by the Security
Council, efforts which in my delegation’s view are designed
towards peace and justice, not only for the Palestinian
refugees or the Arab countries, but for Israel itself.

54. Mr. President, I am happy to welcome YOU as
President of the Security Council for the month of July and
to offer the unreserved co-operation of my delegation in
the discharge of your difficult but noble task. Knowing YOU
as we do and knowing also your enormous diplomatic,
professional and human qualities, to mention only a few,
we have no doubt that you will discharge your responsibilities in such a manner as to meet our often high
expectations. Your country and mine have always had
fraternal relations, based on deep foundations. Our two
countries are headed by leaders who have defined man in
general terms and who are convinced that this gregarious
animal called man is one and indivisible the world over.
55. My delegation and, indeed, my Government are
extremely perturbed by the worsening situation in the
Middle East. We are especially worried that the response to
repeated appeals for peace by the Council and the whole
world community have not led to the easing of tension.
Instead the parties to the conflict have resorted to measures
that are clearly designed to worsen the situation.

59. At this juncture I should like to restate my Government’s stand on the whole Middje East question. As is well
known, we have made it clear that political reality must
persuade everyone to accept the independence and sovereignty of the State of Israel; but while we so believe, we
have equally made it clear that we cannot recognize
territorial aggrandizement. It is within the context of these
two principles that we understand the meaning of the
words the “right to live in peace within secure and
recognized boundaries” [resolution 242 (1967)J. It is
within that understanding that we supported resolution
252 (1968) adopted on 21 May 1968 in relation to the
status of the Holy City.

56. Once again the Council has been called, at the request
of Jordan, to consider the alleged infringements by Israel of
Security Council resolution 252 (1968) of 21 May 1968 on
the status of the sacred city of Jerusalem. It is not
necessary for me to remind the Council of the purpose of
this resolution. Representatives have before them, thanks to
the excellent efforts of the Secretary-General, his report
dated 30 June 1969 [S/9149JAdd.l],
drawing the attention of the Council to certain measures which have been
taken by the Israeli Government since the adoption of
resolution 252 (1968). A sober analysis of that report will
no doubt confirm that there has been deliberate infringement of resolution 252 (1968). It is regrettable that, even
while we sit here to discuss this matter, according to an
article in today’s edition of l?ze New York Times, yet
another measure is being undertaken by Israel in pursuit of
its policy of formal annexation of the Arab sector of
Jerusalem. The Israeli Government, according to this
report, has decided to move the national police headquarters from Tel Aviv to East Jerusalem, which, as we all
know, was part of Jordan until 1967. It may be true that
Israel had intended to make this move some time back, but
the move cannot be justified, particularly in the light of
resolution 252 (1968). It is rumoured that other agencies of
the Israeli Government may follow the police move, among
these the Ministry of Justice and the Supreme Court.

60. However, we accept the fact that the status and
administration of Jerusalem is only a part of the wider
complex of the Middle East question. In our view, it is the
solution of that whole question that will guarantee the
re-establishment of justice, equality, peace and security for
all the people in the area. We are opposed to annexation
measures by Israel, not only because they violate the
Council’s resolution, but also because they are discriminatory ind inhuman in character. Furthermore, they will
harden the attitude of the other parties to the conflict at a
time when conciliatory efforts would be expected from
both sides.
61. HOW can we hope for a lasting and just peace when we
are adding many more names to the inexhaustible list of
refugees? How can we talk of a lasting and just peace when
we are sequestrating property from people whose only
offence is that they do not recognize the military occupation of their land of birth? Is there any intention on the
part of Israel to abandon territories acquired during the
1967 hostilities if it is proceeding with such measures as the
transfer of its Administration to the occupied areas?

57. We have carefully listened to the Jordanian comp!aint.
Similarly, we have followed with great interest the reply by
the representative of Israel. In the same spirit, we have paid
attention to the many reasoned interventions made by
other delegations on the matter. We have been grieved to
find that, rather than trying to find a solution to the
problem, indeed rather than making a gesture pertinent to
resolution 252 (1968), Israel continues deliberately to defy
with impunity the decisions of the Council. As a Member of

62. The Council has already called for the withdrawal of
Israeli armed forces from territories occupied during the
1967 conflict; it has also called for the termination of all
claims or states of belligerency and respect for recognized
boundaries. Surely, this systematic expropriation of Arab
property, demolition of Arab houses and expulsion of Arab
8

nationals are likely to make our goals even more distant.
.Prima facie, the Legal and Administrative Matters (Regulation) Law of 1968 (see S/9149 of II April 1969J is
intended to consolidate Israel’s stay in the conquered Arab
area and no doubt is meant to complete the process of
annexation of East Jerusalem and the neighbouring areas.
The laws are discriminatory, as I have said, and operate
against the financial interests of the Arab people. They are
against the accepted norms of international law. And all the
explanations by the representative of Israel, rather than
answering the charges made by Jordan, have, in fact,
confirmed the gravity of the crisis.

68. Mr. KHATRI (Nepal): Mr. President, I wish to congratulate you on your assumption of the Presidency of the
Security Council, and to assure you of the whole-hearted
co-operation of my delegation in the discharge of your
functions. I would also like to pay a tribute to your
predecessor, the Ambassador of Paraguay, for the exemplary manner in which he presided over the Council during
the eventful month of June.
69. My delegation voted in favour of General Assembly
resolutions 2253 (ES-V) and 2254 (ES-V) of 4 and 14 July
1967, respectively. Provisions of those resolutions were
later reiterated by the Security Council in its resolution
252 (1968) of 21 May 1968. The passage of time has not
caused any modification in our full support for those
resolutions. My delegation continues to hold the view that
all actions taken by Israel which tend to change the status
of the city of Jerusalem are invalid. This position of policy
is motivated, in part, by our regard for Jerusalem as the
holy place for three great religions, but mainly by our
recognition of the principle which forbids acquisition of
territory by military conquest.

63. My Government would like to see all the religious
interests in Jerusalem live side by side in peace, and no
irreversible measures taken by the Israeli authorities. I
would like to reiterate the desire of the Council to find a
lasting solution for the Middle East crisis; and unless
measures such as those taken by Israel are stopped, the
restoration of peace in the area will, for a long time, appear
illusory.
64. It is time both sides listened and paid attention to
world appeals for peace. Enough innocent lives have been
lost. Israeli action in East Jerusalem is likely to lead to
more loss of life, and the Council has a duty to call on
Israel not to proceed with these measures. In our view, it is
imperative that resolution 252 (1968) be implemented, and
implemented now,

70. We appreciate and share the concern shown by
delegations over the various measures taken by the occupying authorities aimed at changing the fundamental personality of the city, in contravention of the decisions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council. My delegation
deplores the continued disregard for the resolutions of the
Council and the Assembly and is prepared to join in a
further call to Israel to rescind those measures and to desist
from taking similar actions which might tend to alter the
status of Jerusalem.

65. We are not impervious to the plight of the Jewish
State. The problem between Israel and the Arab countries is
a political one, with no military solution. In fact, the
Middle East has had more opportunities than most other
areas of the world to discover once and for all that disputes
cannot be solved simply by the clash of arms. Yet the cycle
of forgetfulness of that compelling lesson is regrettably a
short one-much shorter than in Europe, for instance,
where the irrelevance of war is fortunately a lesson taking
slightly longer to unlearn.

71. The Security Council may recall that on 8 February
1969 Jordan had requested a meeting of the Council
[S/8998/ to consider the legislative provisions enacted by
the Government of Israel concerning the city of Jerusalem.
However, since Israel decided to postpone the putting into
effect of those legislative provisions, it was agreed that the
meeting should not be convened. We concurred in this
agreement and were happy at the development. Preparations for the Big Four meetings on the situation in the
Middle East were being made at the time, and although the
preparations were at a preliminary stage we welcomed the
fact that the Council did not need to meet.

66. If the Arab-Israeli dispute is more than a contest
between opposing armies-or even, for that matter, between
opposing societies with a strong military orientation-what
is it? It is important to get away from the belief that it is
another symptom of anti-Semitism of the kind one might
find in British or American golf clubs. It is not specifically a
product of racial incompatibility between Arab and Jew.
The history of Jewish communities in the Arab world is not
half SO terrible as the history of Jewish tribulation at the
hand of Christian societies. It is fair to say that Jewish
communities have probably flourished culturally and commercially with considerably more security in the Arab
world over the last twenty centuries than they have in
Europe. We look forward to the day when the phrases
“‘SaZaam” and “Shalom” become a meaningful reality. Let
there be peace on earth.

72. Regarding the situation in the Middle East then and
now, as far as my delegation is concerned, the primary
concern is the withdrawal of forces from all occupied
territories, including, of course, Jerusalem, as well as the
termination of belligerency on all fronts. The need which
appears to my delegation as supreme and paramount is the
faithful implementation of Security Council resolution
242 (1967) of 22 November 1967 in all its provisions. The
question of Jerusalem is no doubt important. The 22
November 1967 resolution applies to this question, as it
applies to the rest of the broader Middle East question.

67. The PRESIDENT (tianslated from French): I wish to
thank the representative of Zambia for his kind words
about me. As you know, the relations between your Prime
Minister,
Mr. Kenneth Kaunda, and our President,
Mr. Senghor, are based on personal understanding, which
should be the beginning and the end of policy.

73. May I state again that, unlike many other problems
that face the Security Council, the question of the Middle
East is one for which we already know the answer
concerning a final settlement. The Council’s answer to this
problem is the resolution of 22 November 1967 in its
entirety.
9

lesson of contemporary events. The lesson is that we cannot
solve this essentially political question either by unilateral
decisions or by the use of force. We must have recourse to
peaceful political means; and since all attempts have proved
futile, and in the absence of dialogue among the parties
themselves, it is vital now that we all put our faith in the
four-Power talks as the only means likely to lead to the
solution of the question, within the framework
of the 22
November resolution.

74. The delegation of Nepal feels strongly about the
unhappy situation which prevails in the Middle East. The
whole region has been passing through a state of warfare
and turmoil for a long time. Experience has shown the utter
futility of all attempts to solve the question by military
means. Continued occupation of foreign territories, consolidation of military conquest, hostile expeditions across the
frontiers-all these actions and attitudes lead US nowhere
near the final settlement. On the contrary, they make any
settlement more difficult.

79. The PRESIDENT (translated j?om French): I thank
the representative of Nepal for the kind words he has
addressed to me.

75. The occupying authorities have taken further measures
in a clear bid to change the status of Jerusalem, in defiance
of the decisions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council. Jerusalem is a question of acute international
concern. Those measures already taken and contemplated
are of such magnitude that their effect would amount to
the annexation of the city, Private lands have been
requisitioned, private homes bulldozed and hundreds of
families evicted. All this shows not only the defiance but
the contempt with which the decisions,of our Organization
reflecting general world opinion are treated by the occupying Power.

80. Mr. CSATORDAY (Hungary): Mr. President, ma:y I
associate myself with those who have preceded me in
expressing warm appreciation for the outstanding performance of your predecessor, Ambassador Solano Lopez, who
presided over our debates last month so successfully, and
with competence, tact and effectiveness.
81. Mr. President, it is very difficult
to give proper
expression to our deep satisfaction in seeing you in the
Chair. Your high personal qualities of great wisdom,
statesmanlike perspicacity, rich experience and sound
judgement are all solid guarantees that in the month of July
the gavel of the Secur,ty Council is being held by a very
able diplomat.

76. Even while the Security Council is meeting to consider
the question of Jerusalem, we hear further disturbing news
from Jerusalem. This is, to say the least, deplorable. We
expect all parties, particularly those directly interested in
the question, to show restraint, moderation and respect for
the decisions of the United Nations. Our appeal for
restraint and moderation, and for increasing recourse to
peaceful means in this regard, is not an equation between
those who pursue a policy of annexation and those who
suffer from it. It is motivated by our recognition of the
fundamental objective which, in this case, is the implementation of the 22 November resolution, taking into account
the special status of the city of Jerusalem.

82. The present series of meetings of the Security Council
have been convened at the request of the representative of
Jordan to discuss “the continued Israeli defiance of its
resolution 252 (1968) on Jerusalem” (S/9284/.
We all
know that the situation in the Middle East continues to be
tense and fraught with grave dangers. Why then, one could
ask, should there be a meeting of the Council on Jerusalem
only? The answer to this question lies in the peculiar
nature of the problems concerning Jerusalem. These pr’oblems undoubtedly constitute an integral part of the Middle
East issues facing the Council. But they are a very special
aspect of it. This aspect is governed by resolution 242
(1967) of the Security Council but has also been the
subject of several resolutions of the General Assembly and
Security Council, notably resolution 252 (1968), which
relates exclusively to it. This is a special problem since,
within the bounds of Israel’s conquest and beyond mat
fact, Israel is creating an additional and more difficult
problem by fundamentally and juridically
changing the
status of a part of that territory, the city of Jerusalem.
Thus a special and separate question emerges; it is sornething which clearly requires the special attention of the
Council.

77. It is in that light that we have welcomed the current
talks among the four permanent members as providing the
best and the only hope for peace in the Middle East.
Political solution is the only solution of the intricate Middle
East question, and those Powers are eminently qualified
collectively to assist in the peace efforts undertaken by the
United Nations under the Council’s resolution of 22
November 1967. Although we are naturally concerned at
the slow pace of progress in the four-Power talks, we
understand the need for very careful examination of all
aspects of the problem, which has defied solution for so
long. It is the duty of all Member States, and in particular
of those which are directly concerned, to help the four
Powers to find ways and means for the faithful implementation of the 22 November resolution. Any action on our part
which was directly or indirectly aimed at wrecking the
peace efforts undertaken by those Powers would be a great
disservice to the cause of peace.

83. Security Council resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967 provides that the Israeli armed forces must
withdraw from territories it occupied during the war of
1967. Nowhere does that resolution exclude Jerusalem
from this obligation. Israel is thus bound to withdraw from
Jerusalem as much as it is bound to withdraw
from all other
territories occupied as a result of its aggression of June
1967. But to make this obligation even more specific,
General Assembly resolutions 2253 (ES-V) and 2254
(ES-V) of 4 and 14 July 1967 and Security Council
resolution 252 (1968) of 21 May 1968 provide that the

78. The recent developments in the Middle East are hardly
calculated to further the above-mentioned objective, Violence has taken place almost daily. Acts of force aimed at
the piecemeal destruction of one another, and directed
indiscriminately against military and civilian targets alike,
have occured. We condemn such acts of violence. The need,
as we see it, is for all of us to recognize the inescapable
10

United Nations can accept no change in the status of
Jerudem. The Council, in its resolution 252 (1968),
referring to the violations of those resolutions by Israel,
urgently called up011Israel “to rescind all such measures
already taken and to desist forthwith from taking any
further action which tends to change the status of
Jerusalem”.

other to tell us that measures aimed at bringing about this
so-called unity, more correctly this annexation, are mere
technicalities and that to have the Council deal with them is
“the height of frivoiity and irresponsible malice”.
86. Locating the national police headquarters of Israel, as
is reported today in the press, in the occupied city, in a
building built by Jordan as a hospital, not only shows the
marked difference in intentions of the two Governments as
to how to care for the well-being of the civilian population
of Jerusalem, but, at the moment of the present Security
Council discussion, constitutes as well an act of grave
provocation and not a mere technicality.

84. What has been Israel’s reaction to those decisions of
the United Nations adopted by overwhelming majorities’?
To put it in a nutshell, Israel has done nothing to rescind all
these measures and has done everything to change the
status of Jerusalem. I do not propose to go into the details
of these measures; other speakers have already done so and
no effort has been made by the representative of Israel
during this discussion to deny the thrust of the Israeli
measures of annexation. Suffice it to say that no steps have
been neglected in proceeding with the annexation of East
Jerusalem, in open defiance of the United Nations. Thk
land and property of the Arab inhabitants and institutions
of Arab Jerusalem have been systematically expropriated. A
large number of houses belonging to Arabs have been
demolished on short notice and the rightful owners have
been required to move elsewhere. Others, including some of
the most prominent Arab leaders of the city, have been
forcibly deported to the east bank of the Jordan. New plans
have been announced to create Israeli settlements in East
Jerusalem with a view to drastically altering the composition of the population, thus making East Jerusalem a city
inhabited by newly settled Israeli citizens, All these brutal
and arbitrary measures have been aimed at bringing about a
de facto change in the status of the city. This, however,
does not mean that no steps have been and are being taken
to legalize the situation thus created and to make East
Jerusalem formally a part of Israel.

87. In brief, the measures serving as the basis for Jordan’s
complaint are violations of the Charter and of the resolutions of the United Nations by Israel, and the Government
of Israel knows this full well.
88. The policy of armed conquest practised by Israel in
Jerusalem cannot be substantiated by the provisions of the
Charter. Indeed, no attempt has been made by the
representative of Israel to do this. Instead, he once again
shifted the discussion into the realm of mythology. Are we,
from now on, to proceed on the basis of mythical theses
that take us back to ancient times? Shall we agree that
frontiers of modern States should be drawn on this basis?
If so, what will remain of all the frontiers now existing in
the world? It is sufficient to ask these questions to see the
absurdity of the Israeli position.
89. It is no better when the unification of Jerusalem is put
forward as justifying the annexation of East Jerusalem. The
unity of Jerusalem is not before the Council. Israel knows
this full well, and the choice of this code-word, “unification”, is solely motivated by a desire to offer a more
popular term than “annexation”; but, in fact, the real
meaning is annexation. What we are concerned with here is
the principle enshrined in the Charter that acquisition of
territory by military conquest is inadmissible and the
weight of conquest should not determine frontiers. This
alone is the issue before the Council with regard to
Jerusalem.

85. The latest of these measures are contained in the
so-called Legal and Administrative. Matters (Regulation)
Law, 5728-1968, which provides for the compulsory Israeli
registration of Arab companies. This law, as reproduced in
the report of the Secretary-General [S/9149 and Add.11
submitted in pursuance of Security Council resolution
252 (1968) of 21 May 1968, states that: “the Minister of
Justice may instruct by an order its [a company’s]
registration in Israel in accordanoe with the Companies
Ordinance . . .” [see SJ9194/Add.l, appendix A/. In this
connexion the representative of Israel, speaking at the
1482nd meeting, stated that: “The pretext”-as he put
it-“for
Jordan’s call for an emergency meeting is a year-old
law which provides for the issuance of licences and permits
for the exercbe of commerce and professions”. He went on
to criticize Jordan for laying before the Security Council
“technicalities of registration of commercial enterprises.” It
is surprising, to say the least, that emergency regulations
requiring companies in the occupied city of Jerusalem to
register with the occupying authorities as Israeli companies,
with everything that such a move entails, should be
characterized by the Israeli representative as technicalities.
It is even more unfortunate that he expects the Council to
take his assertions at face value. It is certainly indicative of
the Israeli treatment of the Council that so transparent an
attempt is deemed sufficient to mislead the Council. It is
certainly not to the credit of Israel on the one hand to
boast that “Jerusalem will for ever be united” and on the

90. The policy of open annexation pursued by Israel in
Jerusalem is disturbing not only for what it means for the
city, but for what it shows of the true intentions of Israel in
the Middle East. We have often been told by Israeli
representatives that Israel has accepted resolution 242
(1967) of the Security Council. Does that assertion apply
to Jerusalem too, or are we to understand that resolution
242 (1967) allows the Government of Israel to annex
Jerusalem? Are the provisions of that resolution accepted
in the same way by Israel with respect to other issues in the
Middle East? Surely no one can claim that the Council has
issued a licence for annexation in resolution 242 (1967).
91. Another point stressed by Israel is the idea of direct
negotiations with its Arab neighbours. This proposition is
put forward time and again as the only possible way to end
the crisis in the Middle East. Yet, when we approach the
individual issues such as Jerusalem or the Golan Heights or
others contained in the declarations made recently by the
Prime Minister and the Defence- Minister of Israel, we find
11

any further violation of its decisions. It must guarantee that
Israel, just as any other Member State, lives by the laws of
the United Nations. All such decisions as outlined by
various speakers preceding me will find my delegation
among their firm supporters.

that all those issues are labelled as non-negotiable. It thus
appears that the only purpose of such negotiations would
be acceptance by the Arab countries, from the hand of
Israel: of surrender terms embodying the annexation of
Jerusalem, the Golan Heights, a large part of the Sinai
Peninsula including Sharm eshSheikh, large parts of the
west bank area, etc. Curious negotiations indeed. But it is
even more curious that Israel professes not to understand
the refusal of the Arab countries to enter into such
negotiations.

94. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I thank
the representative of Hungary for the kind words he has
addressed to me. I shall certainly need the experience and
ever friendly indulgence of a diplomat like himself in order
to discharge my task successfully this month.

92. The question of Jerusalem is not only of a legal and
political nature, but of a psychological nature also. Jerusalem’s place in the feelings of hundreds of millions of
people, people sometimes far removed geographically and
politically from the Middle East, is well known to everyoqe.
It is for this reason that the insensitivity of Israel to the
feelings of those people is most disturbing. It is really
difficult to understand how a Government which bases its
claims to Jerusalem on religious and historic grounds can
fail so completely to take into account the sentiments of
others motivated by the same considerations. All this is
even further compounded by the denial of self-determination to the Arab inhabitants of East Jerusalem. Everything
testifies to the fact that the Arab inhabitants of the
conquered city, whether they be Moslems or Christians, do
not wish to become Israeli citizens, do not wish to see their
city become part of Israel. Is this so difficult to appreciate
for those who claim their rights by pointing back two
thousand years? Do they really feel that a military
conquest which took place two years ago confers a right
upon them for ever, when the Roman conquest twenty
centuries ago was but a single historical interval? I am
obliged to raise these questions because I do feel that the
thoroughly unrealistic approach of the Israeli representative
in our discussion as much does a disservice to the genuine
interests of the people of Israel as it seriously harms the
persecuted Arab population of Jerusalem. The lyrical tone
of Mr. Tekoah’s intervention is drowned out by the noise of
the bulldozers, by the explosion of the bombs of the Arab
resistance. No objective observer, not even such a normally
pro-Israel voice as The New York Times, would subscribe to
the complacent picture of Jerusalem drawn by the representative of Israel. There is no real coexistence in Jerusalem,
those observers tell us, between conquerors and conquered,
Israeli sources quoted by other speakers concur in this view.
And yet we hear the Israeli representative, speaking in his
growing isolation, putting forward the simplistic ideas of
the conquerors of all times and expecting us to take them
at face value.

95. Mr. PASTINEN (Finland): May I, in the name of the
Finnish delegation, extend our congratulations and best
wishes to you, Sir, as President of the Council for the
month of July. We all know the high qualities you bring to
the Chair. It is a privilege for my delegation to pledge its
co-operation to you.
96. I should also like to pay a warm tribute to the retiring
President, Ambassador Solano L6pez of Paraguay, for the
outstanding service he rendered to the Council during its
meetings in June.
97. The Security Council has convened once again to
consider a complaint under the general heading of “The
situation in the Middle East”. The representative of Jordan
has requested this urgent meeting of the Council to
consider the question of Jerusalem. Jordan’s complaint
refers to measures taken by the Government of Israel aimed
at changing the character and status of Jerusalem in
contravention of resolution 252 (1968) of the Security
Council, and earlier resolutions of the General Assembly.
The Council also has before it a report by the SecretaryGeneral [S/9149 and Add. 11, which reproduces the text of
the Israeli law on which, among other things, Jordan’s
complaint is based.
98. The representative of Israel has confirmed that his
Government has undertaken legislative and administrative
measures, to which the Jordanian complaint and the
Secretary-General’s report refer. He says, however, that
whatever measures the Israeli Government may have taken
with regard to Jerusalem, they are aimed at assuring the
welfare of the city and its inhabitants.
99. The resolutions on Jerusalem approved by the General
Assembly during its fifth emergency special session in 1967
and by the Security Council in 1968 are based on legal and
political considerations. They proceed from the basis that
the Government of Israel can claim no sovereignty over
Jerusalem and that, therefore, measures and actions by
Israel cannot be accepted nor recognized as altering or
prejudging the status of the city. Consequently, the General
Assembly and the Security Council have declared these
measures invalid, and have requested the Government of
Israel to rescind measures already taken and to desist from
any further measures tending to change the status of
Jerusalem. My Government has concurred in this view in
voting for General Assembly resolutions 2253 (ES-V) and
2254 (ES-V).

93. The Middle East situation ‘continues to remain explosive because the Government of Israel has been demonstrating an astonishing lack of understanding of the genuine
interests of its own people. It endangers the peace and
security of the whole region and, even, is not loath to draw
the great Powers into this conflict. Having lost its sense of
proportion in the wake of its temporary military superiority, it is dangerously out of touch with our times and
with the aspirations of peoples. It is high time that it
understood the dangers of its present suicidal course. But
until it does, we have no alternative except to apply the
provisions of our Charter and of our resolutions. The
Security Council must serve notice that it will not tolerate

100. In the political context, the situation in Jerusalem is
intensifying tensions in the Middle East, This gives rise to
12

deep anxiety, particularly at a time when the over-all
situation in the area is deteriorating. The Secretary-General,
on 2 May 1969, in the form of a special report [S/9188/,
called to the urgent attention of the members of the
Security Council the critical situation in the Suez Canal
sector and the danger of a breakdown in the cease-fire
arrangements there; tension and violence continue unabated
along the cease-fire lines and beyond them in other areas as
well. All these acts in defiance of the pertinent resolutions
of the Security Council make more difficult the already
difficult task of promoting a peaceful settlement on the
basis of the principles set forth in the Security Council
resolution of 22 November 1967. The Finriish Government
strongly believes that the talks between the major Powers,
permanent members of the Security Council, still offer thk
best hope for progress towards a peaceful and accepted
settlement. In our view, the Security Council, which bears
the responsibility for maintaining peace and security in the
area, should do everything possible to promote the achievement of a just and lasting peace in the Middle East.

tion of an agreed pIan for peace, any action that tends to
predetermine the terms of settlement or otherwise change
the status of the disputed city must meet with the
unequivocal disapproval of the Council. This has been, and
still is, the position of my delegation. In line with this
position, my delegation gave its support to resolutions
2253 (ES-V) and 2254 (ES-V) at the fifth emergency
special session of the General Assembly in July 1967. It was
also in line with this position that we voted for Security
Council resolution 252 (1968) of 21 May 1968, in which,it
may be remembered, the Council called upon Israel to
rescind all legislative and administrative measures and to
desist from any action tending to change the legal status of
Jerusalem. That resolution remains binding on the Council
as well as on the parties directly concerned.
‘105. In the present case, Jordan complains that Israel, in
defiance of Security Council resolution 252 (1968), has
proceeded to complete the process of unilateral annexation
of Jerusalem, namely, the creation of a greater Jerusalem
which includes many neighbouring villages and areas inhabited and owned by Christian and Moslem Jordanians,
the .confiscation and demolition of property owned by
Arabs, the subordination of Arab life to Israeli laws and the
gradual liquidation of the whole Arab character of the Holy
City. The representative of Israel, in his statement at the
1482nd meeting of the Council, has not denied the
Jordanian charges. He has, however, described the actions
taken by his Government as attempts to build, to construct,
to improve and to modernize rather than to tear down and
destroy. The needs of a modern society must be met.‘The
issuance of licences and permits, he argues, is not so much
to subordinate Arab life to Israeli laws as to “facilitate the
continued and lawful conduct of Arab business and
professions in the city”. The demolition of certain buildings
and structures adjacent to the Wailing Wall is “aimed at
ensuring the beauty, the safety and the dignity of that Holy
Place”.

101. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I thank
the representative of Finland for the kind words he has
addressed to me and the pledge he has given me of his
co-operation.
102. Mr. LIU Chieh (China): Permit me, Sir, first of all to
offer you the congratulations and best wishes of my
delegation on your assumption of the Presidency. We are
confident that in your skilled hands the Council will be
guided through a month which has begun on a note of
urgency. I should like to add a word of tribute to the
outgoing President, Ambassador Solano L6pez of Paraguay,
who presided over the Council with such wisdom and
distinction as to make our common labour a pleasant
experience.
103. The Council has been called once again to consider
the question of Jerusalem, a question which has been a
matter of international concern since 1947 and the subject
of a number of important resolutions both of the General
Assembly and of the Security Council. There seems to be a
consensus that this Holy City, the cradle of three great
religions, should, as far as possible, be kept free from
international rivalry and strife. This, unfortunately, has not
been the case. Instead of being a symbol of hope and peace,
Jerusalem has become the battleground of national ambitions.
104. The question of Jerusalem cannot, however, be
viewed in isolation. It is one aspect-a vital aspect, to be
sure-of the Middle East problem, It is thus inscribed on
our agenda under the general heading, “The situation in the
Middle East”. I believe that members of the Council are
agreed that the solution of the Middle East question must
be based on the principles laid down in Security Council
resolution 242 (1967), and no one, particularly those
directly concerned, should do anything that might prejudice the efforts to achieve a just and lasting peace in that
sensitive area of the world. Needless to say, my delegation,
in common with other delegations, is greatly disappointed
at the lack of progress in the mediatory mission of
Mr. Jarring and in the efforts of the interested Powers in
seeking an acceptable settlement. But, pending the formula-

106. However that may be, it cannot be denied that what
Israel has done in Jerusalem since 1967 has not been
acceptable to the Arab population and is inconsistent with
the terms of Security Council resolution 252 (1968). The
transfer of governmental establishments from Tel Aviv to
East Jerusalem, as reported in today’s press is hardly
calculated to lessen the apprehensions about Israel’s intentions.
107. In the present circumstances any unilateral action
that tends to change the character of the city and affect its
future status must be viewed as prejudicial to the rights of
the Arab inhabitants in the occupied area and contrary to
world public opinion as reflected in the resolutions of the
Security Council and the General Assembly. Certainly it
cannot be to the longterm interest of Israel to persist in a
course of action which will make the achievement of
durable peace in the Middle East even more difficult.
,’

13

lb8. It seems to my delegation that at the present
juncture the Council should reaffirm the principles laid
down in resolution 252 (1968) and urgently call upon Israel
to comply with the requirements of that resolution and to
desist from taking any further action that has the effect of
ultimately altering the status of Jerusalem. It is difficult to

co-operation among Muslim nations. That Conference gave
delegates from many Moslem countries the opportunity to
discuss issues affecting the progress and happiness of many
millions of Moslems throughout the world. Delegations
from Moslem countries from all over Asia and Africa
converged on Kuala Lumpur to exchange views on Islamic
theology and to discuss religious issues. It was by no means
a political conference, yet one of the main resolutions
passed concerned Jerusalem, which shows beyond any
doubt the importance that is attached by all Moslems to the
status of the Holy City. With your permission, I shall quote
that resolution, entitled “Beit-al-Maqdis from the Islamic
Point of View”:

imagine that tranquillity may be restored to the Holy
City unless the rights of the Arab populace are recognized
and protected.
109. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I thank
the representative of China for the kind words he has
addressed to me. The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Malaysia. I now invite him to take a seat
at the Council table, and I call on him to make his
statement.
110. Mr. HASHIM (Malaysia): Mr. President, I should like
to take this opportunity to express to you, and through
you to the members of the Security Council, the gratitude
of my delegation for giving us this privilege of participating
in the deliberations of the Council, without the right to
vote. I appear before you today as a representative of a
State on the other side of the horizon, far from the actual
areas of conflict, yet not unconcerned with the events
which are now taking place in Jerusalem. Perhaps it is not
too late to remind Israel that the status of this Holy City is
not purely a matter between Israel and Jordan; nor does it
concern only Israel and the Arab States; but, because of its
very nature, any changes to the status of Jerusalem will
have profound repercussions also among Christians everywhere, as well as among Muslims all over the world. It is
because of the deep concern felt by the Government and
people of Malaysia at the persistent and intensified Israeli
violations of Security Council resolution 252 (1968) concerning Jerusalem that we seek your indulgence for our
participation in this Council.

“Having carefully studied the issue of the Holy City of
Beit-al-Maqdis where the Moslems have for centuries.been
responsible for preserving the sacred places of the Moslem
and the Christian alike,
“And noting the strong sentiments expressed by delegates to this Conference,
“1. This Conference condemns Israel for having
usurped the Arab territories and in particular the Holy
City of Beit-al-Maqdis, which includes the first Qiblah and
the third sacred mosque of the Moslems and piace of
ascension of the Holy Prophet;
“2. Calls upon all Moslem States and peoples to
support the Palestinian people and the Moslem countries,
which have been the victims of Israeli aggression, in their
efforts to recover Beit-al-Maqdis and their usurped territories and for restoration of the legal rights of the
Palestinian people;

111. In the aforesaid resolution, the Council considered
that “all legislative and administrative measures and actions
taken by Israel, including expropriation of land and
properties thereon, which tend to change the legal status of
Jerusalem are invalid and cannot change that status” and
urgently called upon Israel “to rescind all such measures
already taken and to desist forthwith from taking any
further action which tends to change the status of
Jerusalem”.

“3. Appeals to all Moslem nations to hold as soon as
possible a Conference at high political level to discuss the
issue of Beit-al-Maqdis in all its aspects;
“4. Appeals to all nations of the world to uphold the
Charter of the United Nations which clearly condemns
the acquisition of territories by force and denies the fruits
of aggression to the aggressor”.

112. The intentions and objectives of the resolution are
very clear. Yet, in utter disregard of the will of the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, and instead of complying with the
aforementioned directives, Israel proceeded to enact legislation amounting to the virtual annexation of the Old City.
We also learned from the representative of Jordan the other
day of Israel’s continued violation of basic human rights in
the Holy City by the taking of measures contrary to the
provisions of resolution 252 (1968) and the United Nations
Charter. He also referred to the arbitrary arrests, detentions, torture, demolition of houses and deportations
committed by the Israeli authorities. The recent eviction by
force of several Arab families from ‘the Old City of
Jerusalem, including the desecration of the building belong
ing to the Waqf, a, Moslem reIigious institution, is to be
condemned by all, and not by Moslems alone.

The above-mentioned resolution is also in conformity with
General Assembly resolution 2254 (ES-V) of 14 July 1967,
and Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) of 22 Novernber 1967 and 252 (1968) of 21 May 1968.
114. From what I have said it will be clear that if Israel
continues to defy the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council and the General Assembly affecting Jerusalem, it
will have to contend not only with its Arab neighbours and
the Moslem world, but also with the political and moral
force of the United Nations itself.
115. Since June 1967, the Israeli Government and its
military occupation authorities, by assuming a wide variety
of responsibilities on the territories newly annexed, have
indicated beyond doubt that the occupation of the Arab
lands will not be short. In the Old City of Jerusalem itself,
the Jordanian educational, judicial and administrative systems have been uprooted and replaced. The Israelis have
always pointed out that their object has been to “integrate”

113. In April this year, Malaysia played host to the
International Islamic Conference, That Conference was yet
another milestpne in Malaysia’s efforts to bring about peace
and co-operation among nations. It was also a great and
important step forward in bringing about fraternity and
14

East Jerusalem; they carefully avoid the term “annexation”. The people of the territory who refuse to accept
“integration” are told to leave, and ,later forcibly evicted;
those who resist are warned and then apprehended. Israel
has all along claimed the entire city as part of the new
Jewish State and its status as non-negotiable. This is done in
utter defiance of the General Assembly resolution 12254
(Es-V)/ of 14 July 1967-sponsored by Malaysia, Pakistan
and six other Member States-which
called on Israel to
rescind all measures it had taken to alter the status of
Jerusalem; in spite of two further resolutions by the
Security Council, Israel remains adamant and continues to
strut in arrogance.

120. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Lebanon. I now
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and I call on
him to speak.
121. Mr. GHORRA (Lebanon): Mr. President, allow me
first to join in the tributes paid to the past President of the
Council, Ambassador Solano L6pez of Paraguay, and to
voice my delegation’s satisfaction that you are now
presiding over the deliberations of the Council. Our
satisfaction stems from the fact that a deep friendship has
developed between Senegal and Lebanon through many
years of human and cultural association.

116. The other day Mr. Tekoah emphasized that the
so-called legislative acts were necessary for the smooth
running of Jerusalem as a whole as a modern city. These, he
claims, were essential for the purpose of issuance of licences
and permits, payment of rents and rates, and so on. But as
correctly pointed out by the representative of the United
Kingdom, the question of Jerusalem cannot be solved by
administrative acts alone; there are also political, social and
economic issues to be considered, all of which are of
considerable importance in maintaining peace and security
in the area.

122. I am grateful to you, Mr.President, and to the
members of the Council for giving me the opportunity to
present the views of the Lebanese Government on the
question of Jerusalem, which is before the Council.
123. Jerusalem is of particular importance and interest to
Lebanon. The Christian and Moslem communities which
compose the population of Lebanon have had, from time
immemorial, deeply rooted spiritual, traditional and affectionate ties with the Holy City, Until the Israeli occupation
in June 1967, their access to the religious shrines had never
been interrupted and this constant association has been to
them a source of pride and inspiration. The calculated and
sustained Israeli plans for the de-Arabization and the
Israelization of the Old City, containing the Moslem and
Christian holy places, has aroused the gravest concern of
the Government and people of Lebanon.

117. Mr. Tekoah has also painted a glowing picture of
Jerusalem under Israeli occupation. He talks of the prevailing good .weather, the warm sunshine, the bustling trade
and industry of Jerusalem today. Yet in this context his
argument is extremely unconvincing. The fact that Israel is
now administering the whole of Jerusalem does not confer
on it the badge of legality. In so far as Malaysia is
concerned, in line with various resolutions already passed, it
condemns Israeli annexation of the Old City of Jerusalem.
It was and still is Arab territory, and because of that,
Malaysia cannot condone this act of blatant aggression.

124. The Council has been convened to deal with the
continuous illegal process of Israelization which is being
carried out by Israel in defiance of the United Nations. My
distinguished colleague, Mr. El-Farra of Jordan, has eloquently presented you with all the facts and justifiably
requested the Council to take prompt and effective
measures to redress a situation in Jerusalem bound to have
serious consequences in the future.

118. I reiterate what my delegation stated during the fifth
emergency special session in June 1967: that it is the hope
of Malaysia that, in matters concerning war and peace, the
United Nations could still provide the means to tilt the
balance in favour of a lasting peace with justice and equity.
When the territorial integrity of a State is being violated,
the United Nations cannot remain passive and thereby
condone such acts of aggression. At the moment the
problem affecting the status of Jerusalem presents indeed a
challenge to the prestige and dignity of the Security
Council. Is the Coun’cil going to remain passive and merely
watch Israel continue persistently to violate, in open
defiance of the Council, the various resolutions adopted on
Jerusalem?
119. Malaysia is dedicated to the fundamental principles
of non-aggression, respect for the independence and territorial integrity of States, and support for United Nations
actions. The Government and people of Malaysia abhor
violence in any form and from any source; violence should
not be used as an instrumtnt to settle disputes. My
delegation can only pray to God Almighty that the days of
war and violence, death and misery, will come to an end
soon, and that peace and sanity will return to the Middle
East, the cradle of civilization, and love and hope for all
mankind.

12.5. Only today news dispatches in The New York Times
bring to the attention of the Council and the world at large
the news that Israel moved its national police headquarters
yesterday from Tel Aviv to East Jerusalem in a bold move
to solidify its annexation of the Jordanian sector of the
Holy City. The police headquarters are to be housed in a
handsome stone structure which, before the Israeli occupa.
tion, was being erected by Jordan as a hospital. The NW
York Times further reports that arrangements are being
made to transfer the Ministry of Justice from downtown
western Jerusalem to East Jerusalem. That is the kind of
justice that Israel is applying in the occupied Arab city of
Jerusalem. That is how Israel is complying with international law and United Nations resolutions.
~126. Both the General Assembly and the Security Council,
in 1967 and 1968, adopted, without dissent, resolutions
requesting Israel to rescind all the decisions and measures it
had taken with the aim of altering the status and character
of the Old City of Jerusalem. But faithful to its heavy
record of defiance of the United Nations, Israel has shown
its disrespect for and contempt of the decision of this
important body contained in resolution 252 (1968) of 21
15

be a sore spot, an area for friction and disturbance,
Jerusalem, of all the cities of the world, should be spared
this ordeal.

May 1968. That is the central issuefor the consideration of
the Council. Mr. Tekoah has been attempting, in his
interventions, to confuse that issue, to drown the fish. He
has spoken of many things, including the innocent testimony of two gentlemen from Sierra Leone and Madagascar
about what they sawin Old Jerusalem. His attempt reminds
me of a few versesby an EngIish poet of the last century,
William Thackeray, who said:

129. It follows that the Security Council has a special
responsibility to prevent the development of such a
perpetual conflict. It can do so by taking measures in
accordance with the Charter to bolster Council resolution
252 (1968), by making it effective and by deterring Israel
from committing further violations of United Nations
resolutions. The Governments and peoples of the Arab
world are growing sceptical of resolutions adopted by the
United Nations and never implemented. The United
Nations can no longer afford to have its resolutions and
decisions flouted by Israel. The United Nations and the
Security Council, in particular, have the responsibility of
restoring the confidence of the Arab peoples in the
effectiveness and prevalence of international law. This
Organization has been created to maintain legality and
order in the world, to promote peace and security amongst
nations, to protect the human rights of individuals. What is
now being undertaken in Jerusalem by Israel is not only in
direct violation of international law but is also a flagrant
violation of the human rights of the Christian and Moslem
Arabs of Jerusalem.

“He scarcehad said his catechism
When up he jumps: There is land I see,
There’s Jerusalem and Madagascar
And North and South Amerikey
There’s the British fleet a-riding at anchor,
With Admiral Napier, K.C.B.”
Such a vision of the world can be claimed nowadays only
by the astronauts. The Israeli representative will do better
and be better advised if he tells the Council, clearly and
squarely, whether his Government intends to heed the
resolutions of the United Nations.
127. We have been gratified, yesterday and today, to hear
the statements of representatives in the Security Councilespecially the representativesof the Big Four Powers-statements in which they have reaffirmed the positions of their
respective Governments with regard to the illegal and
invalid decision taken by Israel to annex the Old Arab City
of Jerusalem and all the measures that have flowed from
that decision. They have unequivocally stated that the
Israeli actions prejudge and prejudice the final settlement of
the Arab-Israeli conflict according to Security Council
resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967. Those statements may have the effect of partially allaying the fearsand
suspicions of the Arabs about the fate of East Jerusalem.
But more is needed. Action should be taken to implement,
promptly and effectively, Security Council resolution
252 (1968). The Council is duty bound to prevent all
actions by Israel which constitute at the present stage, and
will undoubtedly constitute in the future, added grave
obstacles on the already too difficult road to peace.

130. My friend and colleague, Mr. El Kony, representative
of the United Arab Republic, vividly expounded yesterday,
as others have done today, the violations by Israel of some
provisions and principles of international law, I do not wish
to be repetitious. But to us in Lebanon, a country which
since the inception of the United Nations has continued to
make positive contributions to the promotion of the
principles of human rights, the violation of the human
rights of the Arab peoples in the Israeli-occupied territories
is of deep and saddening concern.
131. In violation of the fourth Geneva Convention,4
article 54, and of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, article 17, Israel has confiscated Arab properties
and land.

Ti 128. If Israel sincerely wishespeace,it must desist from all
acts that will hamper and undermine peaceful developments. It should come to its sensesand understand that in
the age of the United Nations and of the better-defined
principles of international law and morality, the road to
peace no longer can be travelled by way of force, military
conquest and Diktat. Israel entered the Holy City by force
of arms, and by force of arms it wants to stay there. By the
weight of conquest Israel claims that the integration of the
Old City of Jerusalem into the western part is final,
irrevocable, irreversible and not negotiable. This harsh,
stubborn and defiant Israeli attitude does not augur well for
the future of peace in the Middle East. This attitude
motivated the views expressed in an editorial in Z’ke A&v
York Times on 1 July, from which I quote the following:

132. In violation of the fourth Geneva Convention,
articles 53 and 33, Israel has destroyed Arab property and
belongings, amongst which are a mosque and a religious
tribunal.
133. In violation of the fourth Geneva Convention, article
49, and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
article 9, Israel has forcibly deported, evicted and transferred Arab inhabitants from their homes.
134. The evidence about these systematic violations by
Israel of the human rights of the indigenous population of
the Arab city of Jerusalem has been substantial and the
records of this Organization are replete with it. The
International Conference on Human Rights which washeld
at Teheran in May 1968 strongly condemned these and
other Israeli violations. However, the Israeli representative
has the audacity to pretend before the Council that
peaceful, normal and co-operative relations prevail between
the Israeli occupiers and the Arab people of the Old City of

“But in ignoring the rights of long-time Arab residents
of the city and in refusing to recognize that others have
an attachment for Jerusalem that is equal to their own,
the Israelis are sowing the seedsof perpetual conflict,”
The continued presence of Israel in the Old City of
Jerusalem will never be conducive to peace; it will always

4 United Nations, 7keat;vSeries,

16

vol. 75 (1950),No.

973.

Jerusalem. He goes so far as to pretend that the Arabs have
never had it SO good. If the Israeli Government can really
boast of such achievements as it claims, if it has nothing to
hide and has a clear conscience, then Israel can readily
declare its willingness to co-operate with the United
Nations and implement its resolutions. It can then receive
the special representative of the Secretary-General, in
accordance with Security Council resolution 237 (1967). It
can receive members of two committees, the one formed
recently by the Economic and Social Councils and the
other to be formed in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 2443 (XXIII) of 19 December 1968, to visit the
occupied territories and the Old City of Jerusalem, in order
to investigate the practices of Israel with regard to the
human rights of the Arab populations. The special representative of the Secretary-General and the two committees can
then establish their reports and tell us here at the United
Nations whether or not Israel has violated the human rights
of the Arab peoples of the occupied territories and the Old
City of Jerusalem. The Arab Governments have welcomed
the creation of the two committees and are willing to
extend all co-operation to them. They are confident that
what they have been saying about the violation of human
rights by Israel in the occupied territories represents the
truth. Israel should not be afraid of letting the complete
truth become known.

fraught with so many explosive dangers-while
all this is
happening, Israel is forging ahead in consolidating its
annexation of the Old City of Jerusalem. Some Israeli
leaders are declaring their desire to transform the new facts
of occupation in other parts of the occupied territories into
established facts, and to follow the example of integration
of the Old City of Jerusalem by integrating such areas as
the Golan Heights, Nablus, Jericho, Sharm esh9heikh and
other places. It follows that what is happening in Jerusalem
is symptomatic of well-hidden and well-conceived Israeli
plans for expansion and annexation; it follows therefore, as
I have said before, that the Security Council, and particularly the Big Four, have the responsibility of preventing the
perpetual conflict regarding Jerusalem from developing
further. Governments have been in full agreement that the
Holy City shouldbe sparedthe horrors and ordealsof wars
and hatred. The Security Council can and should act
promptly to prevent the deterioration of the situation in
the Old City of Jerusalemand consequentlyin the area.
138. To us in Lebanon, as well as to men everywhere,
Jerusalemembodiesall that is divine, sublimeand spiritual;
it is a city of love, harmony and understanding;it abhors
hatred, animosity and strife. The destiny of Jerusalemwas
to be the holiest city for Judaismand Christianity and the
secondholiest city for Islam. Jews,Christiansand Moslems
have lived there in harmony, peaceand understandingfor
centuries,and cando so againfor a long time to come.

135. Mr. Tekoah tried to demonstrate to the Council the
other day the interest of his Government in the development of the Old City of Jerusalem. He stated that a
conference is being held at present in Jerusalem for that
purpose and that it is being attended by various personalities who have distinguished themselves in various fields of
art, science and architecture. We have great respect for
these personalities, but their presence in Jerusalem should
not be represented or construed as an act of approbation of
the annexation of the Old City of Jerusalem by Israel or of
its violation of the human rights of the Arab people. These
personalities should not be drawn, and I believe they do not
want to be drawn, into any political disputes. We do not
believe that their intention in being in Jerusalem is to
sanction or consecrate the claims of Israel to the Old City
of Jerusalem.

139. We in Lebanon have a deep attachment to our
Christian and Moslem Holy Places in the Old City of
Jerusalem.We sharethis attachment with that of all the
Christiansand Moslem peoplesin the Arab World. We do
not want to be estranged and detached from our Holy
Places,from the Old City of Jerusalem.We want the Old
City restored to the full splendour of its spirituality. We
want to seethat the Arab peoples,ChristiansandMoslems
alike, sharewith the Christians, Moslemsand Jews of the
world over, the joy and exhilaration of visiting the sacred
shrinesof Jerusalemunhamperedby strife brought about
by an occupying Power. Barriers of hatred, suspicionand
bitternessshouldnot be erected or maintained. Israelmust
understand that it cannot arrogate to itself the soleright
and power of dealingwith the destiny of the old Holy City
without at the sametime preserving and reinforcing those
barriers.Arab rights have to be fully restoredand respected.

136. Mr. Tekoah speaks of acts of violence to distract the
attention of the Council from the main issue. Lebanon has
complete justification to recall the wanfon, treacherous and
criminal Israeli attack on the International Airport of
Beirut in December 1968, an attack for which Israel was
strongly and unanimously condemned by the Council.
Other aggressive attacks against -the Arab countries and
people continue unabated, thus endangering the precarious
peace in the Middle East.

140. In conclusion, permit me to say that the Lebanese
Government and people feel that peopleseverywhereshare
their feelingsand concern over the fate of Palestineand the
old Holy City of Jerusalem.Becauseof Jerusalem,because
of Palestine,PresidentCharlesHelou of Lebanon said, not
very long ago:
“Witness andvictim of violence and inequity, our Arab
Orient knows that it is not alonesubject to jeopardy, and
that in defendingitself it is defending a morality and a
justice that are indivisible. In this respect, it is not
sufficient to say that every country could fear becoming
one day the Palestineof someoneelse. It is necessaryto
say more and to recognizethat, already and in the present
conditions, every man, becauseof the Palestinedrama,
carries in himself a profaned sanctuary and a Holy Land
in mourning.”

137. While the four-Power talks go on here at the United
Nations and the bilateral talks are pursued in Washington,
while the Security Council convenes every now and then to
deal with various aggressive acts by Israel against the Arab
States, while the occupation of the territories of three Arab
countries continues, while the international community is
dealing with the situation in the Middle East which is
5 See Economic
6 June 1969.

and Social

Council

resolution 1423 (XLVI) of
17

and the Mayor of the city was banished, together .with
other religious, civic and political leaders. Full accounts of
these and other iIlega1 activities by Israeli occupation
authorities were given by the Mayor of Beit-al-Maqdis when
he addressed the Council on 3 May 1968, and can be found
in the record of the 1421st meeting. What has taken place
since then was partly reported by the Secretary-General in
his report of 11 April 1969 [S/9149], and its significance
was adequately highlighted by the representative of Jordan
in his statement to the Council on 30 June 1969 [148&d
meeting].

141. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Iraq. I now invite
him to take a seat at the Council table, and I call on him to
make a statement.
142, , Mr. RAOUF (Iraq): Permit me, Mr. President, first to
express to you and to the distinguished members of the
Security Council the sincere thanks of my Government for
your favourable response to my request to take part in the
current discussions of the Council regarding the question of
Jerusalem. The fate of Beit-al-Maqdis is so vital and crucial
to the Iraqi people, as part of the Arab nation and the
Moslem world, as to make it essential to acquaint the,
.Council with the views of my Government and to convey to
it the feelings of my people.

,147. Fully aware of the implications of all the illegal
activities of the Israeli occupation authorities, and con.
scious of its duties, the General Assembly moved swiftly to
deal with the situation. On 4 July 1967 it adopted
resolution 2253 (ES-V), considering the measures taken by
Israel to change the status of the city invalid and calling
upon Israel to rescind all measures already taken and to
desist forthwith from taking any action which would alter
the status of Jerusalem. When that resolution fell on deaf
ears, the General Assembly, at its fifth emergency special
session, adopted its second resolution on the city of
Jerusalem [2254 (ES-V) . The cynical arrogance with
which Israel dismissed those resolutions ought to make the
whole membership of this Organization ponder.

143. For, whereas other aspects of the Israeli aggression
affect the sovereignty of three Arab countries and the
condition of the inhabitants in the occupied territories, the
Israeli aggression in Beit-al-Maqdis affects the future of a
city unlike any other city in the whole world: a city held in
sacred reverence by three major religions, but one that is
about to fall prey irretrievably to the political designs of
Israel. Thus the profound sentiments of more than half of
human kind are in danger of being utterly disregarded SO
that the stranglehold of the Israelis on that suffering city
and its inhabitants may be perpetuated. The fate of
Beit-al-Maqdis and of its people is symbolic of the future of
a whole country and of a whole nation. Only when justice’,
is done to that city can there be a glimmer of hope that
justice will finally emerge victorious in Palestine.

14g. The Security Council, in its resolution 252 (1968),
was no more successful in its attempt to make Israel heed
world public opinion and respect the universal will of the
international community. In that resolution the Council,
reaffirming that acquisition of territory by military conquest is inadmissible, deplored the failure of Israel to
comply with the General Assembly resolutions, considered
all legislative and administrative measures and actions taken
by Israel which tend to change the legal status of Jerusalem
invalid and incapable of changing that status, and finally
called upon Israel urgently to rescind all such measures
already taken and to desist forthwith from taking any
further action tendingto changethe statusof Jerusalem.

144. What is before the Council now is not a complaint by
Jordan, nor is it a complaint by the Arab countries or the
Moslems or the Christians. It is an appeal by all humanity;
. .. and the Council, which is entrusted by the collective will of
the Members of this Organization with the maintenance of
international peace and security, is called upon to deliver
Beit-al-Maqdis from the aggressor, to restore its dignity and
sanctity and to protect its people.
145. The issue is very clear, On 5 June 1967, Israel
embarked on a further step in the implementation of its
expansionist plan, this time to absorb all of Palestine and
occupy sizable areas of territory of the United Arab
Republic and Syria. The next day the Security Council
cajled for a cease-fire, but Israel went on waging its war of
aggression for five more days until it fulfilled all of its
immediate objectives. Less than three weeks later, on 27
June 1967, Israel took the first steps to perpetuate that
situation brought about by conquest. On that day, Israel
enacted legislation designed to annex the Old City of
Jerusalem and all of its environs, with more land to be
added at a later stage. Actually, Israel did not wait for the
legislative formality to give effect to its plan of annexation.
It had already dynamited and bulldozed 135 houses
belonging to the Moslem Waqf in the Maghrabi Quarter
adjacent to AI-Haram Ash-Sharif.

149. The merefact that the Council is seizedonceagainof
the matter after more than 13 months attestseloquentlyto
Israel’s arrogant obduracy and its intransigence.As for
Israel’scynicism, the statementof the Israelirepresentative
in the Council on 30 June 1969 provided more than
sufficient evidence.
150. Imperviousto the resolutions of the Councilandthe
GeneralAssembly, Israelwent headlonginto implementing
its programmeof total and final annexation of the City of
Jerusalem and harassingits people into either forced
submissionor departure, The occupation authoritiespur.
suedtheir designswith a vengeance.The eviction of people
and the demolition of houses and dwellingswent on
unabatedly. The most modern and up-to-date hospitalin
the Old City was converted into a police headquartets,
undoubtedly to force the people to attend the hospitalsin
the Israeli sector and to picture that as“intermingling” of
Arabs and Jews to the unsuspectingtourists, to who%
testimony Israel attaches greater importance than to the
testimony and reports of official representatives.The
expropriation of land and property, especiallythat belong
ing to the Moslem religious endowments(Al-Waqf), have

146. Systematic actions then ensued, all designed to
finalize the annexation and absorption of the Old City into
Israel. Where acts of intimidation and terror failed to
remove the Arab inhabitants of the city, eviction by force
was resorted to. The Arab Municipal Council was dissolved
18

continued relentlessly, resulting in the incorporation of 827
acres of East Jerusalem and its northern suburbs within the
city’s municipal boundaries.

eviction of tenants, the expropriation of land, the perpetup
tion of another fait accompli-now that the Arabs can sing
and dance?

151. In a futile attempt to justify all these and other
actions manifestly designed to alter drastically the legal,
civic and administrative structures of the Old City, the
Israeli authorities forwarded the curt and inane explanation
that they were meant to provide better municipal services.
Undoubtedly encouraged by the inaction of the international community, and particalarly the competent brgans
of the world Organization, Israel grew bolder in its coercive
measures in the occupied territories, and in Beit-al-Maqdis
in particular. Simultaneously, and emboldened by the
protection it received from its imperialistic benefactors,
Israel also became more contemptuous of world public
opinion. The statements of its official spokesmen have
become more derisive of the intelligence of its audience, as
evidenced by the statement made by the Israeli representative to the Council at its 1482nd meeting. In that
statement, he dismissed the recent Israeli legislation and the
administrative actions based on it, and aimed at the radical
transformation of the legal status of the Old City, as merely
“licensing regulations”. He demonstrated a surprising jealousy of the Council’s time and efforts in an attempt to
admonish it for involving itself with matters relating to the
“issuance of licences and permits”. He went on to extol the
merits of the new regulation to the extent of boasting that
it guaranteed “the rights of Arab absentee owners of
property in Jerusalem”. He conveniently failed to mention
which part of Jerusalem he meant. The question is
therefore put to him to answer here and now whether in
this context the word “Jerusalem” includes the western
sector and whether Arabs can now claim their properties in
the Israeli sector of which they have been deprived by
brutal force since 1948. Do the guarantees mean that Arab
landowners can now claim their properties in western
Jerusalem together with their accrued benefits and interests, or can they only, in their “intermingling” with the
Israelis, see their properties from outside and bestow their
blessings on the Jewish occupants?

1.53. Last week, X$e New York Times published a report
on Southern Rhodesia in the wake of the referendum on
the so-called “constitution”. The caption of one picture
published with the report quoted a white man as saying:
“Of course we let them”-meaning the African nationals“attend the horse races; they love it”. The condescension
and patronizing air apparent from the white man’s comment and the Israeli’s song-and-dance report need no
further elaboration. At a time when the whole world is
striving to put an end to the “white man’s burden” in
Africa, we encounter the self-proclaimed “Zionist’s bup
den” in Palestine.

152. The threadbare attempt by the Israeli representative
to defend his Government’s actions should never make us
oblivious to the ridicule in which he holds the decisions of
this Organization. In his defence of these actions he
reduced them to simple acts of merely removing public
latrines. And while he considered public conveniences
important enough to mention them twice within the span
of one minute, he did not deem it fit to refer even once to
the resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council regarding Jerusalem. While completely ignoring the
legal aspect of the debate, and conveniently forgetting the
relevant principles of international law and the Charter, he
untiringly, though tediously, kept on extolling the material
benefits which he claims the Israeli occupation has brought
about. Now, according to him, we ought to observe that the
people of Arab Jerusalem, though deprived of their modern
hospital, schools and mosques, can share the joys of
“Arab-Jewish
song-and-dance ensembles”. What does it
really matter to be deprived of your sovereignty and your
basic rights if you can join the mixed song-and-dance
groups? And what business is it of yours, you guardians of
world peace and security-the
demolition of houses, the

154. One important fact, however, should be highlighted
at this stage of our debate. This concerns the insinuations
the representative of Israel injects into his statements, thus
attempting in a roundabout way to present his alIegations
as facts. Take, for example, his frequent use of the words
“Arab minority in Jerusalem”. He often repeats them,
conveniently ignoring that the increase in the number of
the Jewish population in the city was not a result of the
natural process of propagation, but rather a product of the
systematic colonization policy of the whole country and
the importation of foreign settlers. Be that as it may, he
persists in using that expression, which is insidiously meant
to convey that Arabs are no longer the inhabitants of East
Jerusalem, but have become, by the simple decree of the
occupation authorities, a minority in a “united” city.‘If
indulging in such a practice makes him any happier, he is
welcome to it; but let us hope that he does not believe we
take his words at their face value. The practice of ,,
over-simplification is no novelty resorted to only recently
by the Israeli representative. It has indeed become standard
in the pronouncements of the Israelis, In the interview
published by the %nday Times of London on 15 June
1969, to which the representative of Syria referred yesterday, the Israeli Prime Minister, Golda Meir, attempted even
to deny the existence of the Palestinians and Palestine
altogether, just because there was no State named Palestine.
In the same interview she was asked:
‘“Rightly or wrongly, the Arabs look upon Israel and
the Israelis as Westernized intruders, bent upon aggrandizement in a Moslem Middle East, What can you say or
do to show them that they are wrong? ”
The over-simplified reply was:
“If this means that we have brought in a modern phase
of thinking, we have. I came to Israel in’ 1921”-mind
you, Israel and not Palestine, as if Israel and not Palestine
were in existence in 1921-“One of the first sights that
shocked me was an Arab ploughing with a very primitive
plough, which was really a piece of wood with some nails
below, . , . Now, if it means that we have destroyed this
romantic picture by bringing in tractors and combines
and threshing machines, this is true: we have.”
15.5. With a little dabbling in the art of over-simplification,
the whole question of the occupation by force of arms of

’

160, Mr. ABDULGANI (Indonesia): I wish to thank you,
Mr, President, and members of the COUnCil for giving me
this opportunity
to participate in this debate, becauseit
enablesmeto expressthe view of my Government on this
topic of grave consequence
to all Members of the United
Nations. Moreover, Indonesia has a strong and abiding
interest in the problemof Jerusalem.I should like alsoto
extend to you my best wisheson your assumptionof the
office of Presidentfor the current month.

the entire territory of Palestine and the displacement of
most of the Palestinians becomes a matter of replacing a
wooden plough with a tractor. Unfortunately, she omitted
to mention bulldozers, Similarly, the representative of
Israel alleged before the Council yesterday
“that compensation was paid not only to tenants actually
residing in a particular house, but also to the title-holders
of empty structures” [1483rd meeting, para. 1191.

161, Before beginningmy remarks on Jerusalem,I should
like to recall that this’ is the second time recently that
Indonesia,as a non-memberof the Council, hasrequested
the right to participate in a Security Council debate.When
we last participated, asalso a member of the Councilfor
Namibia,on 21 February 1968[1393rd meeting], wewere
concernedat the continued defiance of South Africa for
resolutionsof the General Assembly and decisionsof the
Security Council. The subject of that debate affectedthe
whole of southern Africa. My Government attachesthe
greatestimportanceto its commitmentsin the strugglefor
freedom from colonialism, racism and apartheid in that
whole area, where tensions make it one of the most
potentially explosiveon the international scene.

Thus, by stressing an entirely irrelevant offshoot of the
Israeli actions in the City, he attempted to distort the
whole issue and confuse the entire question. He has to be
reminded here and now that the question is not whether
compensation was paid to this landowner or that tenant.
The question is simply that of illegal legislative and
administrative measures and actions taken by Israel which
tended to change the legal status of Jerusalem, to use the
words of resolution 252 (1968).

‘,

156.’ Although I now caution against the art of over-simplification as practised by the Israelis, the course the
Security Council should now take in dealing with the
question of Jerusalem is very simple and obvious. The
Security Council has its resolution 252 (1968), which Israel
has consistently flouted in flagrant defiance of the Council
and the General Assembly. This is deplored by the totality
of the membership of the United Nations. Indeed, the four
permanent members of the Security Council have pronounced themselves and they have all agreed that the Israeli
legislation and actions regarding the status of Jerusalem
have blatantly violated the provisions of the resolution.
What is required now is that the Council exert its authority
and take effective measures to put an end once and for all
to Israel’s defiance.

162. Indonesia, in seeking again to participate in the .,
deliberationsof the Security Council, is motivated by, the ‘:
fact that here againis at stake the continued defianceof
GeneralAssemblyresolutionsand decisionsof the Security
Council by Israel. The Middle East is also an areawhere
tensionshave risen that arc threatening to upset a precariousbalanceof power in that crucial areaof the world.
163. My country is located in yet another areawherethe
world is witnessinga battle between forces wherebysome
of the nuclearPowersare facing each other andwhereone
of the technically, most highly developed nations-if not
the foremost-and one of the least developedare involved. :
In that areaof South-EastAsia, the balanceof poweris still
precariousin spite of commendableefforts at the conference table and the best intentions indicated by troop
withdrawalsand de-escalations.It is not Indonesia’sintention to arrogateto itself the pretension of trying to tell the
membersof the Council how to solve this problem,but we
feel obliged to share our concern about its seriousness,
because there is an obvious interrelation and interconnexion between increasingtension in the Middle East
andthe stabilizationefforts in my country.

157. The representative of Jordan, in the eight points he
enumerated at the conclusion of his statement before the
Council on 30 June [1482nd meeting, para. 441, charted
the suggested route for the immediate action. He was
generous enough to reprieve Israel for two weeks. My
delegation is prepared to go along with that. However, if at
the end of that period Israel has failed to meet the
requirements of the resolution, Article 41 of the Charter
would provide the necessary measures that could be taken,
158. Although the legal status of Jerusalem is very well
and although we all agree that no change in that
status should take place arbitrarily and through the use of
force as a result of illegal occupation, the city spiritually
belongs to all of Us. Let us not now forsake our city in its
hour of sorrow and need. If, by our inaction, we allow the
occupation to be consolidated and the annexation to be
perpetuated, each of us will have his own cross to carry on
his back; and, unlike the original cross, which was that of
martyrdom and redemption, ours will be heavy with guilt
and remorse. Then it kill be too late for any of us to cry in
anguish: “0, Jerusalem! What have I done unto thee? ”
known

164. Allow me to limit my statement to the problemof
Jerusalem,although we realize that it is part of the whole
complex situation prevailingin the area. Let me explainin
brief why Indonesiacontinuesto have a vital interestin the
status of Jerusalem.During the fifth emergencyspecial
sessionof the GeneralAssemblyin 1967, we participatedin
the debateon the renewedcrisisin the Middle East.At that
time we supported resolution 2253 (ES-V), which called
upon Israel to rescind all measuresalready taken and to
desistfrom taking further action to changethe statusof
Jerusalem. We also supported resolution 2254(ES-V),
which deplored the failure of Israel to implement the
former resolution. Both resolutions were adopted overwheh-ninglyby the General Assembly, thereby reflecting
the acute international concern over Jerusalem.Our par-

159. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): 1 tha&
the representative of Iraq. I now invite the representative of
Indonesia to take a seat at the Council table and I call on
him to make his statement.
20

titular concern is related to the fact that, although
Jerusalem might seem geographically remote from Indonesia, it is not remote from our hearts and spiritual life.
Jersualem is as dear to the 100 million Indonesian Moslems
as the holy cities of Mecca and Medina. For us, Jerusalem is
the Holy City of the Mosque, Beit-al-Maqdis, which
includes the first Qiblah and the third most sacred mosque.
of the Moslems. Similarly, it is sacred to us as the site of the
ascension of the Holy Prophet Muhammad, may he rest in
peace. Each year during our Mi’radj festivals, we commemorate this sacred event, as it represents a spiritual
source for our national strength in time of difficulties and
hardships. In mosques, prayer houses and public buildings
throughout Indonesia, in villages as well as in cities, the
name of Jerusalem with the Holy Mosque, Beit-al-Maqdis, is
chiselled and engraved in the minds and hearts of the
millions of Indonesian Moslems during the Mi’radj cornmemorations. My Government has sent material contributions for the Holy Mosque. Our spiritual attachments to
these holy cities has always been one of the sources of
strength in our task of nation-building in our whole
archipelago, in our fight against all the injustices of the
colonial past, and in our struggle to survive as a nation
against the pressures from extreme reactionary, conservative forces, as well as from adventurous forces of the
extreme left,
‘_‘.
.
165. It is, of course, self-evident that the relevant Secre.
.tary-General’s report and other reports from Jerusalem,
such as appeared in The New York Times of 1 July,
regarding the annexation by requisition of Arab lands, the
bulldozing of Arab homes and the evicting of scores of
Arab families, are a source of great concern to us. Our
people have demonstrated this concern in resolutions
adopted by our Parliament and in cables to the SecretaryGeneral. Also outside the Parliament our Moslem student
movements and many other social and political organizations of all layers of our society share this concern.

Beit-al-Maqdis; this has already been mentioned by the
representative of Malaysia.
168. Let me now turn to the constitutional obligations of
all of US in the United Nations community. It is now more
than two years since the General Assembly in its special
session expressed itself on this matter and over a year since
the Security Council adopted resolution 252 (1968) on 21
May 1968. Those decisions still have not been implemented
and, as representatives from many countries have pointed
out on numerous occasions, this repeated disregard by
Israel for a resolution of the highest authority of the United
Nations poses a serious threat to the very existence of our
Organization. There has probably been no more persistent
and difficult problem facing the United Nations in its
nearly 25 years of existence than the failure by a few
countries to carry out their pledged obligations to the
Charter of the United Nations. I am referring specifically to
Article 25, in which all Members agree to accept and carry
out the decisions of the Security Council in accordance
with the Charter. Continued defiance poses a great threat to
both the word and the spirit of the Charter, The crisis of
confidence in the United Nations will deepen.
169. Summarizing our point of view, I would state that
our deep concern for the question of Jerusalem is twofold:
first, the religious and spiritual attachment to Jerusalem by
the people of Indonesia as the largest Moslem country in
South-East Asia, based on the teaching of Islam-and Islam
not only as a religion but also as a way of life and as a
civilization; and second, the future of the United Nations.
It is the earnest conviction of the Government of the
Republic of Indonesia that only by a firm stand by the
Council can further aggravation of the situation be halted,
and further deepening of the crisis of confidence in the
United Nations be averted.
170. Mr. CAGADAS (Spain) (translated from Spanish):
Mr. President, permit me, first of all, to address your
predecessor in the Presidency, the representative of Paraguay, to thank him for his conduct during the past month
of June. There is no need to praise him now, since the
representative of France already did so yesterday in
masterly terms and with greater authority than I myself can
claim. Therefore, I only wish to express whole-heartedly
the gratitude of my delegation for the efforts, the gentlemanly behaviour, the constant friendship and the spirit of
co-operation which Ambassador Solano LBpez, the representative of a sister nation, has always shown. We wish YOU,
in your difficult post, Mr. President, a tenure full of success
and satisfaction such as may be expected from so distinguished a diplomat who has acquired the highest prestige in
this Organization.

166. These actions on the part of Israel are a clear
violation of the established provisions of international law
regarding the rights of an occupying Power, as was stated
by the United States representative, Mr. Yost, yesterday.
Furthermore, it constitutes total disregard for the principle
of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by war
and military conquest, as set forth in previous resolutions.
This principle is in our view so vital for maintaining peace
that in yesterday’s joint communiqu6 issued in Djakarta by
the Indian Prime Minister, Indira Gandhi, and our President, Suharto, this principle was specifically reaffirmed and
emphasized. Both leaders expressed their hope for the early
return of peace and stability in the Middle East on the basis
of the full implementation of the Security Council resolutions. Fruits of aggression should not accrue to any State. It
is self-evident that in the case of places of great religious
significance this principle should apply with even greater
strength.

171. Turning to the item on our agenda, I wish to say that
I shall try to be very brief, since it is very late. Compared
with the complex nature of the Middle East problem as a
whole, the specific case before us today is comparatively
simple, at least from a purely formal standpoint.

167. In stating these things we would also like to clarify
why the Moslem community in our,part of the world came
together recently in Kuala Lumpur, along with our Moslem
brothers from other parts of Asia and Africa. The conference made a decision to condemn Israel for usurping the
Arab territories and in particular the Holy Mosque of

172. The city of Jerusalem, which was subject to a prior
legal status, is the victim of military occupation by a State
Member of this Organization; and that occupation is in no
way justified. Furthermore, it is contrary to a number of
21

178. My delegation considers that, first of all, it is urgent
that the Council pronounce itself as categorically as
possible regarding the respect due the resolutions adopted
by the United Nations.

resolutions adopted by this Organization. Nevertheless, on
the basis of the fact of that occupation itself, the occupying
State is enacting a series of measures whose consequences
would tend to change the legal status of the city and
consolidate a de facto situation which cannot be recognized
in law.

179. Secondly, in order to prevent any future misunderstanding, it seems necessary for the Council to condemn
unequivocally the entire fait accompli policy adopted by
Israel. It is intolerable that this kind of policy
should serve
as a basis for continually consolidating positions and
creating new situations which may be used later as a pretext
for refusing to comply with the resolutions adopted.

173. No explanation or justification
which may be
claimed for these measures can stand up even to the most
cursory analysis. Neither the opinion of an alleged majority
of the inhabitants, nor the need for some town-planning
measures, nor the hypothetical benefits of a unity imposed
by force nor, of course, considerations of good administrative order-which already existed previously-can legitimize
an entire series of measures which gravely affect Jordan,
which affect the inhabitants who are in no way responsible
for what happens in the city, which offend the religious
sentiments of communities comprising many hundreds of
millions of human beings, which affect the spirit and even
the physical appearance of a group of monuments which
has been miraculously preserved until now, and also affect
the rights and interests of third parties, and the very legal
structure of this Organization upon which rests the safeguarding and preservation of peace.

180. Thirdly, it is imperative that we firmly declare that
the use of force cannot justify any annexation of territory,
nor legitimize any expansionist aspirations.
181. Respect for accepted norms and fulfilment of obligations are the only way civilized society has found to
overcome the law of the strongest. In Jerusalem, the cradle
of spiritual values shared by many millions of human
beings, that respect is even more important and urgent.
182. The gravity of the situation, the tensions arising from
it, and the unforeseen complications which may arise at any
moment make it urgent for us to know once and for all
whether Israel is or is not willing to fulfil its obligations so
that, in the light of that knowledge, the Council may act
accordingly. My delegation considers that the time has
come to adopt effective decisions on this question, since it
it impossible to go on waiting indefinitely, without any
fixed time-limit, for some hypothetical courses of action
which might lead to a general solution. There can also be a
limit to the patience we display in the face of noncompliance with the resolutions adopted here, and the lack
of regard which this implies toward a large majority of
Member States of this Organization.

174. As my delegation has stated on previous occasions:
“What Spain ardently desires is that a situation maintained
exclusively by armed force should be terminated, that
peace should be restored and that certain countries should
receive justice”.
175. However, I realize that this general view of the
problem is not easy, nor is it the one which specifically
concerns us at this moment. But it may be well to keep this
general situation in mind, as a background to our discussions, SO as not to forget that we are dealing with an
atmosphere in which, in addition to the original injustice of
dispossessing an indigenous people of its lands and property
and replacing it with immigrant settlers, there is now also
the continued military occupation of certain territories, and
the plans for annexation which are clear from the measures
adopted by Israel.

183. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I thank
the representative of Spain for the kind words he has
addressed to me.
184. Mr. MORALES-SUAREZ
(Colombia) (translated
from Spanish): Mr. President, it is a source of the greatest
satisfaction to my delegation that a person of your
outstanding qualities is presiding over the work of the
Council. You succeed Ambassador Solano L6pez, to whom
I wish to express my warmest congratulations on the
exemplary skill with which he has carried out his delicate
mission.

176. The authority of this Organization is at stake in
Jerusalem and, consequently, so is the future of peace. My
delegation cannot fail to mention the growing concern with
which it observes the non-compliance with the resolutions
adopted by the General Assembly and the Council. The
course matters have taken is certainly a dangerous one, and
therefore my delegation considers that the time has now
come to make a determined effort to change this trend.

185. The general position of my delegation regarding the
problems of the Middle East was set forth by Mr. Turbay
Ayala on 27 June 1967 during the fifth emergency special
session of the General Assembly (1538th meeting/. The
views expressed at that time retain all their validity so far as
we are concerned and therefore remain unchanged. More.
over, they constitute a single whole from which it is
impossible, in our opinion, to omit any element if we wish
to achieve a lasting and just solution, But in connexion with
the case now before the Council, the Council itself has set
the limits to which its action must be confined. In adopting
the agenda 1 July, the Security Council specifically and
unanimously cited the letter from the representative of

177. Regarding the specific request summarized in eight
points by the representative of Jordan [1482nd meeting,
para. 441, my delegation does not conceal the sympathy
with which it views certain requests which-since
they
proceed directly from resolution 252 (1968) adopted by
the Council, as well as others adopted by the General
Assembly-seem on the whole appropriate and reasonable.
However, because of their profound importance in our
opinion, I wish to stress in particular the following ideas
which are directly connected with the subject we are
examining, but which are also of much broader general
significance.
22

Jordan addressed to the President of the Security Council;
this letter referred to the violation of resolutipn 252 (1968)
adopted by the Security Council on 21 May 1968.

193. I shall now quote the following parts of resolution
303 (IV):
“The General Assembly,

186. in accordance with the legal principles which traditionally govern its conduct, my delegation fully endorses
the above-mentioned resolution, regards any act or procedure contrary to it as inadmissible, and considers the
measures taken in violation of its provisions to be illegal
and arbitrary. Therefore, the change in the legal status of
Jerusalem by a unilateral initiative, whatever its origin,
cannot be countenanced in any form whatever by the
delegation of Colombia.

“...
“I. Decides
“In relation to Jerusalem,
“Believing that the principles underlying its previous
resolutions concerning this matter, and in particular its
resolution of 29 November 1947, represent a just and
equitable settlement of the question,

187. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I thank
the representative of Colombia for the kind words he has
addressed to me.

“1. To restate, therefore, its intention that Jerusalem
should be placed under a permanent international rkgime,
which should envisage appropriate guarantees for the
protection of the Holy Places, both within and outside
Jerusalem. , , .”

188. Mr. SOLANO LOPEZ (Paraguay) (translated from
Spanish): Before expressing the views of my delegation
regarding the matter before us, permit me, Mr. President, to
express my sincerest gratitude to those representatives who,
in the course of the afternoon, have been kind enough to
refer to me with the cordiality typical of friends.

This resolution also specifically confirmed, inter alia, the
following provisions:the establishmentof Jerusalemasa
corpusseparutumunder a specialinternationalrdgime;the
form of its administration;the organ designatedto dischargethe responsibilities
of the AdministeringAuthority,
and the territorial jurisdictionof Jerusalem,
ParagraphII of
this sameresolutioncalledupon the Statesconcernedto
makeformal undertakings,at an early date andin the light
of their obligationsasMembersof the United Nations,that
they would approachthesematterswith goodwill and be
guidedby the termsof the aforesaidresolution.

189. Once again, the Security Council is examining the
problems concerning Jerusalem. Therefore, once again, my
delegation considers it its duty to reiterate its points of
view since we believe that, although they may be well
known, the present debate requires their repetition.
190. The position of my delegation is based entirely on
questions of principle, and is therefore unchanging, Resolution 181 (II), adopted by the General Assembly on 29
November 1947, established a well-defined special international rkgime for the city of Jerusalem, and inasmuch as
that resolution or relevant parts of it,and the resolutions
following upon it-have not been revoked or changed, they
continue to have fuLl legal validity.

194. In 1968, when the Security Councilconsideredthe
situationin Jerusalem,I saidin the courseof the statement
I made on 21 May 1968 [1426th meeting] that in my
delegation’sview, despite the de facto situation, those
provisionsof the GeneralAssemblystill retained full legal
validity. I saidat that time that we do not recognizeasvalid
any unilateral action tending to changethe legalstatusof
Jerusalem.I repeat now that so far as my delegationis
concerned,any act intendedto preservethe specialinternational regimeof Jerusalemdecidedupon by the General
Assembly involves an obligation, and as Membersof the
international Organizationour conduct will be dictated by
that obligation.

191. In section A, entitled “Special regime”, of Part III of
resolution 181 (II) it is stated that:
“The City of Jerusalem shall be established as a corpus
separutum under a special international rCgime and shall
be administered by the United Nations.“,

195. True to this concept,andconvincedthat the General
Assemblyis the only authority which can reconsideror
changesuch aims,if it so desires,we, together with the
other Statesof Latin America,includeda specialparagraph
in the draft resolutionwe submittedjointly to the fifth
emergency special sessionof the General Assembly in
1967.6 The fact that this draft re,olution failed to win
adoption by the Assemblyin no 1 ay changesthe basic
conceptwhich led usto co-sponsorthe aforesaiddraft and
paragraph.Thesesamereasonsof principle dictated our
affirmative vote for resolutions 2253 (ES-V) and
2254 (ES-V), whichwereadoptedby the GeneralAssembly
at its specialsession
by the overwhelmingmajority of the

Other provisions of the same resolution establish the
boundaries of Jerusalem, the organ which is to be competent to act as thaAdministrative
Authority, the duration of
the special international regime, and the date after which it
may be modified if necessary, and a number of other
general and special conditions of the said international
rigime.
192. These intentions of the United Nations, whose
underlying reasons are known to everybody, have been
reiterated on several occasions, In mentioning this, I refer
particularly to paragraphs 7 and 8 of General Assembly
resolution 194 (III) of 11 December 1948, and to paragraph 1 of resolution 303 (IV) of 9 December 1949 adopted at the fourth regular session of the General Assembly.

6 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifth Emergency
Special Session, Annexes, agenda
item5, document
AIL.523/Rev.1.

23

endeavours that your great country has reached. May I also
associate myself with all those who paid a tribute to the
previous President of the Sekurity Council, Ambassador
Solano L6pez of Paraguay, with whose country mine is also
linked with the strongest ties of friendship.

Member States of the United Nations, as well as our vote
for Security Council resolution 2.52 (1968).

i

‘,

196. Likewise, and for the same reasons, we consider that
all and any unilateral actions whatever tending to change
the international status of Jerusalem are unacceptable. A
contrary view would imply a sort of recognition or
legitimization of the acquisition of territory achieved
through the use of force. And, in view of our own pOlitiCal,
philosophical and legal traditions, this is an unacceptable
view.

201, It might seem unnecessary to speak further on the
issue before us. But the Security Council is faced with a
most explosive situation, the dangers of which can hardly
be over-estimated. Patience and historical insight are therefore an obligation on world statesmen. For four days now
the Security Council has been debating the Jordanian
complaint on the actual annexation of Arab Jerusalem.
Much has been said and much will be said about Israel’s
disregard of two solemn General Assembly, resolutions and
of resolution 252 (1968) of the Security Council. The two
reports of the Secretary-General, namely the one dated 12
September 1967 [S/8146], and the other dated 11 April
1969 [S/9149/, are his torical, records which preserve the
truth about the Israelis and their actions and intentions, for
generations to come.

197. In the light of the new legislative and administrative
measures and other actions taken by the Government of
Israel, which we deplore and which tend to change the legal
status of Jerusalem, and recalling resolution 252 (1968) of
the Security Council and the failure to comply with it, we
believe that such actions are not legally binding either upon
ourselves or upon the United Nations, and therefore have
no legal validity.

!,

198. So far, I have referred to matters of principle.
However, it should not be forgotten that Jerusalem,
although dealt with separately, is an intrinsic part of the
vast and complex problem of peace and security in the
Middle East. What happens in Jerusalem will necessarily
affect other aspects of the general problem of the area, and
there is no doubt that the actions which have given rise to
our debate are affecting these aspects negatively. These
actions are occurring at a time when, in addition to the
persistent efforts of the Secretary-General and his special
representative to obtain full implementation of the Security
Council resolution of 22 November 1967, efforts are also
being exerted by four permanent members of the Council,
who are holding a series of meetings which have already
been going on for over two months, in their desire to
contribute by their efforts and the undeniable power of
their influence to the just, equitable, and consequently
lasting settlement of these problems of peace and security
in the Middle East. We know that these talks have now
entered a period of recess; but even though we are aware of
this circumstance, we feel it is our duty to appeal, first to
the parties concerned and then to those four permanent
members, to exert even greater efforts in the search for a
just peace, and intensify still more earnestly the exploration
of all paths which may eventually lead to the settlement of
the problems I mention. The means are within their power:
if the will exists, the difficulties, although we know they
are immense, can be overcome. This is our fervent hope,
linked as WC are by close ties of friendship with all the
States of the Middle East.

202. Avoiding repetition of what has been said, amplified
and expanded by so many representatives, let us see now,
within the historical perspective looking towards the future
which we are called upon to take into consideration, what
are the patterns with which we are going to be faced, and
the laws of Israeli behaviour. For, undoubtedly, 20 years of
continuous tragic history in our part of the world must
necessarily lead us to draw some conclusions.
203. With regard to Jerusalem, it is crystal-clear that Israel
has thrown all resolutions concerning the Holy City into
the wastebasket and has virtually slapped the United
Nations in the face. Is this a new departure? No. But from
this the first pattern and law of behaviour may be
formulated as follows: that whenever the General Assembly
or the Security Council is seized of the Palestine question
or any of its derivative issues, Israel takes the law into its
own hands. While we are debating the Jordanian complaint-and many speakers have already referred to this at
the current meeting-there have appeared on the front
pages of the newspapers this very day reports about Israel’s
carrying-out of the annexation and occupation, its clearing
out of Arabs from the Holy City, and its complete
domination of Jerusalem. This pattern and practice can be
substantiated in every period of recent Palestinian and Arab
history. The most recent case concerns the morning of
5 June 1967. The Security Council was seized of another
facet of the Palestine question. It was debating some of the
most intricate and complicated problems of international
law, seeking to solve an international dispute by peaceful
means; and once again, in the very midst of that peaceful
process, the search for a peaceful answer, Israel’s military
establishment struck.

199. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table,
and to make his statement.

204. The Security Council was, and is now, employing the
civilized rules of examining the law. It has not been
employing jet bombers striking out of the dawn to bomb
the territories of three neighbouring States in a typical
Blitzkrieg. I would not have dwelt on the developments
that ensued had it not been for the absolute necessity for
mY country, Syria, to set the record straight, This is all the
more necessary since the representative of Jordan, Mr. El-

200. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): Allow me, Mr. President, to
associate myself with all those who have paid high tribute
to YOU and to your country, Senegal, with which my
country, Syria, has the strongest ties of friendship and
culture. It is indeed enough to mention the name of the
illustrious President of your country to be reminded of the
high level of culture and of achievement in intellectual
24

Farra, quoted, at the 1482nd meeting, that interpretation
of the cease-fire as stated in the Council by the representative of Nigeria on 1 l/12 June 1967 [1357th meeting/.

resolutions, and to report to the Security Council not
later than two hoursfrom now.”
That resolutionwasadoptedunanimously;all the members
of the Security Councilvoted for it.

205. In what circumstanceswas that interpretation made?
Allow me to pick up one of the threads where I left off
yesterday-specifically, Mr. Yigal Allon declaringon 2 June
1967: “we are not forgetting the Jordanian and Syrian
fronts either”. Indeed, the Israeli military might did not
forget either the Jordanian front, including Jerusalem,or,
later, the Syrian front, whoseturn in the Israeli masterplan
came on 9 June 1967.
206. NOW I wish to remind this lofty body of somevery
pertinent facts relating to the period between 9 June and
12 June 1967, to showwho put himself outsidethe law of
nations, something about which Mr. Tekoah, in his usual
manner, waslecturing usyesterday.

209. The Councilreconvenedat 7.15 p.m. of the sameday
[1353rd meeting], and the report read by the Secretary
General,cabledto him by GeneralOdd Bull from the scene
of the battle, confirmed that Israel,with all its military
might, was penetrating deep into Syria. The Security
Council wasin almostcontinuoussession
from the morning
of 9 June UP till 12 June, during which time one report
after another from GeneralOdd Bull confirmed that the
invasion of Syria was proceedingin the most outrageous
manner, not sparingthe civilian population, usingnapalm
and fragmentationbombs.

210. On 10 June 1967, a secondcease-fire
wasarranged.I
207. The facts are asfollows: Syria acceptedthe cease-fire quote the words of GeneralOdd Bull himself:“I proposea
resolution of the Security Council at 1 a.m., New York
cease-fire,together with no further movementof troops, to
time, on 9 June 1967, and the telegram addressedby the
be effective at 1306hoursGMT, 10 June”.
Foreign Minister of Syria to the Secretary-Generalcontained that acceptancedated 9 June 1967 [S/7958/.7 At
211. On the night of 1l/12 June 1967, the Security
6 o’clock on the morning of 9 June 1967~and I am sure Council met againand adoptedunanimously,at 2.20 a.m.,
the representative of the United Kingdom, Lord Caradon, a second resolution [236 (1967)] concerningSyria, the
remembersthis very well-1 requesteda very urgent meeting text of which is asfollows:
of the Security Council to report on the Israeliinvasionof
“The Security Council,
Syria. The meeting could not start before 12.30p.m. of
that day. Why could it not start? That is a very interesting
“Taking note of the oral reports of the Secretaryquestion for the student of history to investigatein future.
Generalon the situation betweenIsraeland Syria, made
But those six and one-half hours were crucial, in modern
at the 1354th, 1355th, 1356th and 1357thmeetingsand
warfare, when napalmand fragmentation bombswerebeing
the supplementalinformation supplied in documents
poured over Syrian territory.
S/7930 andAdd.l-3,s
208. The Council met at 12.30 p.m. on 9 June (1352nd
“1. Condemns any and all violationsof the cease-fire;
meeting],
and the President of the Council proposedthe
urgent adoption of a draft resolution demanding that
“2. Requests the Secretary-Generalto continue his
hostilities ceaseforthwith; the following is the text of that
investigationsand to report to the Council as soon as
resolution [235 (1967)J :
possible;
“The

Security

Council,
“3. Affirms that its demand for a cease-fireand
discontinuanceof all military activitiesincludesa prohibition of any forward military movementssubsequentto
the cease-fire;

its resolutions 233 (1967) of 6 June and
234 (1967) of 7 June 1967,
“‘Reculling

“Noting that the Governmentsof Israel and Syria have
announced their mutual acceptance of the Council’s
demand for a cease-fire,
“Noting
the statementsmade by the representativesof
Syria and Israel,

“1. Confirms its previous resolutionsabout immediate
cease-fireand cessationof military action;

“4. Culls for the prompt return to the cease-fire
positions of any troops which may havemoved forward
subsequent
to 1630hoursGMT on 10 June1967;
“5. Callsfor full co-operationwith the Chief of Staff
of the United Nations Truce SupervisionOrganization
and the observersin implementingthe cease-fire,including freedomof movementand adequatecommunications facilities.”

“2. Demands that hostilitesshould ceaseforthwith;

That resolution, asI said,wasadoptedunanimouslyby the
Security
Council; it is clear and needsno comment,except
“3. Requests the Secretary-Generalto make immediemphasisof its paragraph4, which calls for the prompt
ate contacts with the Governments of Israel and Syria to
arrange immediatecompliancewith the above-mentioned return to the cease-firepositionsof any troops which may
8 See Official
Records of the Security
Council,
Year, Supplement for April, May and Juhe 1967.

7 Incorporatedin the record of the 1352ndmeetingof the
Council,para.2.
25

Twenty-second

“I am very glad that I can confinn that, and if
previously I used the word ‘cease-fire line’, I was
mistaken.” [ 1357th meeting,paras.204 and205.1

have moved forward subsequent to 1630 hours GMT on 10
June. The fact is that, even after the adoption of that
resolution, the Israeli army, as can be seen from the
subsequent records of the Security Council, did not abide
by that resolution, and continued its conquest.

213. What do we conclude from the preceding? First, that
Israel attacked Syria after the acceptance by Syria on
9 June 1967 of the cease-fire resolution; and that, in spite
of two cease-fire resolutions adopted unanimously by the
Security Council with reference to Syria and a cease-fire
under the auspices of General Bull, Israel continued its
invasion of Syrian territory and completely disregarded
those two decisions unanimously adopted by the Security
Council. Within the context of the jurisdiction of the
United Nations, those resolutions are the ones to apply to
Syria. They were disregarded by Israel. If anyone has put
himself outside the pale of the law of nations, it is
Mr. Tekoah and his authorities, who were lecturing us
yesterday about respect for international law.

212. Of particular importance are two statements made
prior to the adoption of resolution 236 (1967). I have
already alluded to one of them-that cited at the 1482nd
meeting by Mr. El-Farra-namely, the statement of the
representative of Nigeria, Mr. Iyalla, who said the following:
“Normally, having arranged a cease-fire and the ceasefire having been accepted by the parties concerned, the
‘Council should now proceed to the more important
questions regarding the re-establishment of peace in the
area, beginning principally with the withdrawal of forces
to the positions they occupied before the hostilities broke
out. This is clear. If, however, this is to be prevented by
an endless succession of incidents generating an equally
endless succession of meetings of the Security Council at
all hours of the day and night, then we would never get to
the substantial issues.

214. Secondly, the most important pattern which has
repeated itself throughout the past 20 years is the strategy
to eliminate Arabs and to strike at them in the most
barbaric manner. Thus the fight against the British, in the
words of the Zionist terrorist leaders themselves, was only
one stage in this master plan to isolate the Arabs, part and
parcel of which, let us remember, was the conquest of
Jerusalem. With this goes the unbelievable refusal to
recognize that there are Arabs of Palestine or that Arabs
have ever existed in Palestine-as we heard from the
quotation from Mrs. Meir yesterday.

“A cease-fire, as we understand it, must mean that the
guns must be silenced and that the troop movements
must be halted wherever they are. Any attempt to gain
legal and geographical advantages from the current
situation must therefore be deplored.

215. With reference to the statement I made yesterday
regarding the respective percentages of Arab and Jewish
ownership of land in the sub-district of Jerusalem(l483rd
meeting, para. 1291, I should like to add that, in 1947, the
official statistics of the Mandatory Government of Palestine
which were submitted to the United Nations showed that
the lands in the Jerusalem sub-district alone which belonged
to the Jews amounted to 33,401 dunams, 2 per cent of the
total area of 1,570,785 dunams, whiie the lands owned by
the Arabs amounted to 84 per cent, that is, 1,326,571
dunams.

“I have one last point. In the course of the debate this
evening, a new phrase has gradually come into circulation,
that is the phrase ‘cease-fire line’. Lest it be accepted
merely by default, let me say, for my delegation at least,
that we do not understand that there is a cease-fire line.
There are the armistice lines. There is the cease-fire order
which means that troops should stay where they are and
that any movement, north, south, east or west, except
such movement as to return from the scene of battle to
one’s own home ground, is a violation of the cease fire.”
[1357th meeting,paras.17.5-I77.1

216. Mr. Tekoah, in giving population statistics for Jerusalem at the 1483rd meeting, quoted the President of the
Institute of Holy Land Studies as saying: “It is also
erroneous to say ‘Jerusalem has been overwhelmingly
Arab . . .’ “. He then proceeded to divide his statistics into
three categories-Jews, Moslems and Christians-as though
Christians could not be Arabs, nor Arabs Christians. It so
happens that I am a Christian and I am an Arab. Among the
total population of Arab Palestine that has been evicted,
there are at least 400,000 Arab Christians, constituting the
oldest Christian community in the whole world, that have
been dislodged. There are similar Christian communities in
the Arab countries, including my own, Therefore I completely concur with the brilliant rebuttal that was made
today by the representative of Morocco to the publicity
stunt of Mr. Tekoah in his statement at the 1482nd meeting
in which he referred to meetings of great personalities to
plan for the urbanization of the Holy City.

Needless to say, I supported that interpretation; but even
more important are the words contained in the statement
made at that time by the representative of the United
Kingdom, Lord Caradon, who said the following:
“I have only one point which I wish to make, very
shortly. I wish to expressmy gratitude to the representative of Nigeria for raising an important point. I think that
when I was speaking earlier I referred to the cease-fire
line. If I did so, I did so inadvertently. I$entirely agree
with the important point which he has put to us. It is
well, I think, to refer back to the actual words of the
agreement reached by’ General Bull. 1,refer to the record
of yesterday’s meeting; the actual words of General Bull
were: ‘(1). I proposed a cease-fire together with no
further movement of troops to be effective at 1630 GMT
10 June’ (1356th meeting,paru. 2.51. That is the proposal
which he made ‘to both parties, and it was accepted by
both parties.

217. While the problem is primarily and basically a
political one, a problem of expansion, as we see it, I feel
26

duty bound to express here the veneration, respect and
holiness with which our people, our Arab people, Moslems
and Christians alike, look towards the Holy City of
Jerusalem. The road to the Calvary is always present in our
minds. The real Jerusalem is the new Jerusalem as taught by
Christ and as expounded by Saint Paul in his Epistles to the
Hebrews. However, I can find no more eloquent and tragic
words about this tragic situation than the words of a great
French thinker, Pascal, who, speaking about the sufferings
of Christ remembering humanity, said:

eloquent “peace-maker” of this “peace-loving, law-abiding
State”: “If the General Assembly were to vote I21 to 1 in
favour of Israel returning to the armistice lines tomorrow,
Israel would refuse to comply with that decision.”
221. Well, what party is guilty, out of its own mouth,
standing before this forum? What party spits in the face of
international law and order? What party consigns the
Charter of this Organization to the bottom of its totem
pole of values and loyalty?

iThe speaker continued in French, /

222. I spoke yesterday of the ordeal of the Arabs of
Palestine, particularly in Jerusalem, as reported by Archbishop Raya, a Catholic Archbishop from Jerusalem, in an
address to the Prime Minister, But the story is not new; for
if we go back to the records of the United Nations we will
find that on 31 July 1952 spokesmen for the non-Jewish
inhabitants of the Israeli-occupied sector of Jerusalem
protested to the United Nations against being forced to
become Israeli citizens. Signing the letter were lay leaders
of the Protestant, Greek Orthodox, Catholic, Armenian and
Moslem communities in the Israeli-held area. In their letter
these representatives complained of discrimination and
injustice which they declared had deprived their communities in the Israeli section of Jerusalem and in other parts of
the country of basic human rights.

“In my anguish I thought of thee and I shed tears . .
Must I always pay with blood for my humanity? ”
(The speaker resunzcd in English. /
218. The third pattern concerns the place of Jerusalem,
which we are discussing today in this onslaught in our part
of the world which resulted in the complete conquest of
the Holy City. The massacre of Deir Yassin on 9 April
1948, when 250 persons were butchered in cold blood by
the Irgun Zvai Leumi, under the command of Menachem
Begin, now a member of the Israeli Cabinet, and the Stern
Gang, as it called itself, was actually the first step towards
the conquest of Jerusalem in 1948, prior to the establishment of the State of Israel. The Haganah, being the official
military body of the Jewish Agency, was forced to disown
this massacre as an operation of “no military value”
performed by “dissident groups”. Yet according to Mena&em Begin’s story of the Irgun, entitled The Revolt, the
Irgun commander had received a letter from the Haganah
regional commander stating the following: “I learn that you
plan an attack on Deir Yassin. I wish to point out that the
capture of Deir Yassin and holding it is one stage in our
general plan. . . . Furthermore, if foreign forces enter the
place this will upset the plan for establishing an airfield.”
The airfield, says Begin, was established at Deir Yassin, and
he states categorically, “Deir Yassin was captured with the
knowledge of the Haganah and with the approval of its
Commander.“g

223. But the occupation of Jerusalem goes beyond those
limits. As Professor Al-Khalidi of Iraq pointed out during
the fifth emergency special session of the General Assembly, at its 1553rd meeting on 14 July 1967, the main
purpose of the Israeli strategy of occupying Jerusalem is
twofold. First there is the economic purpose. Jerusalem is a
tourist attraction, to put it baldly. Secondly, the one who
dominates Jerusalem holds the strategic key to the west
bank of the Jordan. It isolates the southern half of the west
bank from the northern half. In short, it dominates the
approaches to Jordan. Of course this cannot be said by the
representative of Israel because we have to bear in mind
always that we are oscillating between Machiavellism and
Messianism, the latter certainly being a disguise for the
former.
224. Fifthly, Israel claims, as it has repeated many times,
that the Arabs are benefiting from Israeli technical knowhow and superior scientific knowledge. But how does that
tally with the systematic destruction of every aspect of
Arab progress and development? I will not repeat either
what was said yesterday or what has been said today, but
surely among the basic causes of the aggressive war of
5 June 1967, planned by Israel, was the economic causenamely, that whereas the Arab countries were making
strides in economic, educational, scientific, agricultural and
financial development, Israel was suffering a great economic
crisis, with at least 100,000 persons unemployed. How can
their claims to peace be tallied with the fact that every day
they were destroying, as they still are destroying, the
bridges and the canals and burning the fields and killing the
labourers, the farmers, the workers, with napalm bombs? Is
not this indeed the mockery of mockeries?

219. \%at we are witnessing today, as has been related so
accurately by the representative of Jordan, is the systematic
implementation of Zionist designs on the Holy City. With it
all goes the undeniable fact that dozens of military
operations by the Zionist terrorists, according to their own
sources, were carried out outside the area given to them
under the partition plan of 1947. The continuation of the
complete Israelization of Jerusalem, as we are sitting here
and discussing ways and means to lessen an inflammatory
international
situation, proves categorically this third
pattern and behavioural law for the conquest of Jerusalem.
220. Fourthly,
before even contemplating a solution,
Israel posits its terms for Dilctat. Let us take the recent
crisis. The Foreign Minister, Mr. Abba Eban, according to
The New York Times of 19 June 1967, suggested that Israel
would act again, as it had in the past, in contempt of the
decisions of this international body. Said Mr. Eban, the
9 New

York,

Henry

225. The point we have to remember is this: the acts
perpetrated in Arab Jerusalem today include the eviction of
Arab civilians from all occupied areas and the tyrannical

Schuman,1951, p. 163.
27

domination over the Arab minority in Palestine, all of
Which, according to the latest legislation of the United
Nations, constitute war crimes and crimes against humanity
that cannot be forgotten <and surely not easily forgiven.
Therefore, within the proceedings of the United Nations
itself, we find that the General Assembly, at its twentythird session, adopted resolution 2391 (XXIII) containing
the Convenfion
on the Non-Applicability
of Statutory
Limitations to War Crimes and Crimes against Humanity,
sub-paragraph(b),
article I, of which rends:

hearsthe wordsof Galili? You deprive him of his right td
national existence and self-determination. When the
British attempted to do the samewith you, didn’t the
Haganah,the Irgun and the Stern Group resort to terror
and violence? Yes, Mr. Minister, I ask you most sincerely: what do you expect my answerto be? And I assure
you most genuinely that I did not fabricate these
questions, nor did I invent them. The duty of the
historian impelshim to seeall aspectsof the problem, and
not to be a liar or a propagandist.”

“Crimes against humanity whether committed in time
of war or in time of peace as they are defined in the
Charter of the International Military Tribunal, Niirnberg,
of 8 August 1945 and confirmed by resolutions 3 (I) of
13 February 1946 and 95 (I) of 11 December 1946 of the
General Assembly of the United Nations, eviction by
armed attack or occupation and inhuman acts resulting
from the policy of apartheid, and the crime of genocide
as defined in the 1948 Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, even if such acts
do not constitute a violation of the domestic law of the
country in which they were committed.”

228. The PRESIDENT (translatedfrom French): I thank
the representative of Syria for the kind words he has
addressedto meand to the Headof State and the peopleof
Sr;negal, a country which for many years hai maintained
close relationsof co-operationwith Syria. The next speaker
on my list is the representativeof Israel, on whom 1 now
call.
229. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): It is now the third meetingof
the Security Council dealingwith the item on our agenda
and, with eachone, Arab intransigence,Arab determination
to persist in hostility and aggressionagainst Israel aFe
revealed in ever greater ferociousnessand malevolence,If
Jordan’s exercisein unbridled hatred and belligerencethat
recognizesno limits wasintended to convince everyone that
the Government of Jordan and other Arab Governments
think and plan and act not for peacewith Israel but for
continued warfare, military and political, it hasindeedthus
convinced the world. This has not been a search for
understanding,not a rational examination of issues,but a
macabre orgy of enmity and abuse.In it facts have lost
meaning; values and principles become aborted and WIbridled fanaticismthe rallying cry.

226. Israel, no matter under what guises it tries to escape
or hide its crimes, cannot deceive all the people all the time.
And it will be brought to the Court of justice one day-1 am
sure of it. The Zionist disguised as a Jew, who is really not a
JCW,
must suffer from a mental block or hnve lost the page
from his copy of the Holy Scripture on which he could read
the explicit words
of the Prophet Isaiah, Chapter V,
Vcrsc 8:
“Woe unto them that join house to hodse, that lay field
to field, till there be no place, that they may be placed
alone in the midst of the earth! ”

230, Yesterday, and againtoday, we witnessedthe Middle
East arch criminal, Egypt, invoke law. We were treated to
the spectacleof Algeria, which has repudiatedthe Security
Council resolutionson cease-fireand peace,taking the floor
asa memberof the Security Council. WeheardSyria, which
has rejected the United Nations peaceefforts; Syria, which
continues to conduct warfare againstIsrael, contrary to its
international obligationsunder the Charter, and hastoday
repudiated even the concept of the cease-fireline under
which it affixed its signature in 1967; Syria, which
oppressesthe Jewsand other minorities without mercy or
shame-we heard Syria give advice on the situation of the
Arab minority in Jerusalem.

227. To translqte these high ideas into the tragic realities
with which the Israelis are faced now, let me quote from an
open letter addressed by a great Israeli educator, Professor
Ya’cov Talmon, to the Minister of Information, Yisrael
Galili. It was published in the journal Ma’arif on 6 May
1969. He said the following to the Minister:
‘&Don’t forget, Your Excellency, that the Jewish national home and the es,tablishment of the State of Israel
were the result of an agreement between the great Powers
imposed upon the Arabs. When, therefore, you state that
you do not recognize the Arabs of Palestine as a moral or
legal entity in Palestine with specific national and popular
characteristics,
you are in fact saying that they are
‘natives’, with no identity of their OWIL In other words,
Your Excellency, they have no rights as a community.
wily should you, therefore, wonder when the Arabs or
others describe you as colonizers and claim that they
annot
reach an agreement with you, because you
simply do not recognize the principle of mutual respect,
but look only toward expansion. Words are more painful
than physical pain, and they are long remembered, even
after the human body has been cured of its pain. And 1
ask you, in your capacity as Minister of Information,
whnt shawl 1 answer the thinkers and educated people of
()thcr rlations,
when they ask me: why should not the
,Q& join the ranks of the freedom fighters, When
he

231. Today, this chorus was joined also by Morocco. 1
would like to say to the representativeof Morocco that I
respect his feelings and his pride as an Arab and as a
Moslem, and the Government and people of Israel hold in
high reverence the values of the Moslem faith and will
honour the interestsof Islamin the Holy Places.This can
and would be better realized in conditions of peace and
mutual respectand understanding.Israel hasbeen waiting
for more than 20 years to detect a similar attitude 011the
part of the Arab Statesfor the interestsof Judaism,of the
Jewish people and of Israel as a nation. However, the
representative of Morocco has also come before the
Security Council to distort history, to deliver himself of
anti-Jewish epithets and personalaspersions,and to tell us
that we Jewshave no right to live in liberty in our own
homeland.
28

232. Where should we then live? In Morocco, where Jews
have lived for centuries in misery and persecution? Is it this
that gives the representative of Morocco the right to appear
here in the garb of mentor and counsellor on law and
human rights?

aimed at facilitating Arab business and protecting Arab
interests, the Arab representatives, as we heard today and
yesterday, suddenly claim that this is not the problem.

233. For the record, the time has come to put an end to
the Arab representatives’ using Jewish suffering as a
plaything in debating contests. True, there have been
periods of enlightened liberalism in the treatment of Jews
by the Arab world, as indeed there have been such periods
in Europe as well, but the general picture is one of dark,
grim discrimination and sorrow. This is, of course, one of
the main reasons why so many Jews fled to Israel from all
the Arab States and why Israel has absorbed as many
Jewish refugees from Arab lands as there are Arab refugees
from Palestine. Nor can we forget that today the Arab
Governments are the only ones in the world which still
print and distribute the old Tsarist fabrication The Protocols
of the Elders of Zion, still publish Mein Kampf still
employ Nazi experts in propaganda, in the production of
arms, in the training of saboteurs to continue Hitler’s
murder of Jews, still educate their children on text books
containing direct anti-Jewish abuse, still discriminate
against Jews by legislation and still keep innocent Jews in
concentration camps and prisons.
234. Iraq too has found it appropriate to appear before
this Council-Iraq
which till now has not accepted the
cease-fire resolutions of the Security Council adopted two
years ago, Iraq which continues to wage war against Israel
daily from Jordanian territory, Iraq which hangs innocent
Jews in public squares of its capital, Iraq which pursues a
war of extermination and genocide against the Kurdish
people. This is the State that has the audacity to speak of
justice, of human rights, of spiritual values.
235. The absurdity of the situation in which such States
lodge complaints before the Seturity Council, make claims
and offer advice to others, is surpassed only by the
absurdity of the arguments that they have put forward. The
Jewish people’s national liberation movement-Zionism,
as
old as Rome’s conquest of Judea, an inspiration to nations
of Africa and Asia in their struggle against foreign imperialism-is blasphemed as colonialism. Jews who for centuries have experienced Europe’s discrimination against
Asians and Orientals are now told that they are foreigners
to Asia and not even Jews at all. Israel’s struggle since 1948
against Arab aggression is blackened, simply because Israel
has been successful in defending its independence and
sovereignty, And now Jerusalem, integral and united for
centuries and divided only for nineteen years by an invasion
contrary to the United Nations Charter, Jerusalem, holy
and venerated by all, is turned in this debate into a mere
weapon of Arab malice and animosity towards Israel. When
Israel proves that its Administration has brought welfare,
prosperity
and higher standdrds of life to the Arab
minority, it is accused by the Arab delegations of colonialist methods. When Israel explains that it has been compelled to take security measures to protect life against Arab
terror warfare, it is told that it injures tie interests of the
Arab inhabitants. When Israel demonstrates that regulations
on licensing permits, regulations which served as the main
pretext of Jordan’s complaint to the Security Council, are

236. Where will this vicious circle of blind passion and
rancour lead us? Has not the time come to stop and ask
ourselves how this frenzy of lust and fanaticism appears in
the eyes of the world and what history will have to say
about it and about its participants? Is it not time to look at
Jerusalem with love, not with hate? Is it not time to see in
it what it is-a bridge to understanding between Jew and
Arab, not an instrument of further conflict and warfare?
237. Today, united Jerusalem is happier, more prosperous,
more true to itself, its character and destiny, than during
centuries of rule by successive conquerors or the years of
amputation and bisection that ended in 1967. For the first
time, all universal religious interests, Islam, Christianity and
Jddaism alike, are accorded recognition and respect. All
holy places are protected by law and administered by the
religious communities themselves. To all holy sites access is
free. Those who are motivated by truly religious considerations, not by lust and hatred, cannot but be aware and
impressed by this situation. Only a few days ago, on 24
June, the well known American evangelist and Editor-inChief of The Trumpet Cull declared to the press after a visit
to Israel: “There has been a tremendous improvement in
the maintenance of Christian holy sites since they came
under Israeli control”. But at today’s meeting we again
heard Arab representatives arrogate to themselves the right
to speak on behalf of Christianity. The one who surpassed
all in this arrogance was the representative of Morocco who
rejected the right of such Christian leaders as the Greek
Orthodox Patriarch of Jerusalem, the Armenian Patriarch
of Jerusalem, the Patriarch of the Church of Ethiopia,
Catholic and Protestant theologians and the Latin Custos of
the Holy Land, whom I quoted at previous meetings to
speak on behalf of Christianity and express satisfaction
with the conditions of their communities and holy places in
Jerusalem, This in fact has been the pattern followed by the
Arab representatives throughout this debate: deny Christian
leaders the right to speak of Christian religious interests;
deny Israel the right to speak on behalf of Jerusalem’s
majority, of Jerusalem’s interests and of Jerusalem’s peace;
trample everyone and everything for the sake of continued
enmity, belligerence and bloodshed.
238. As for the interests of Islam, the following statement
was made, for instance, on 3 June 1969 by the Secretary of
General Services of the Philippines, Mr. Salah Ututalum, the
leader of the 3 million Philippine Moslems, following a
meeting of the Moslem Sharaf Court in Jerusalem. He said:
“I received the impression that Moslems here are well off.
The Israel authorities are fair towards all religions. On the
whole, I was pleased to witness realities which are different
from what I was told back home.” When religion is not
debased and abused as a political weapon then the situation
in Jerusalem, even in the eyes of Moslem leaders, appears
quite different from what the Arab representatives have
tried to paint here.
239. If allegations were voiced again today that restoration or excavation projects in Jerusalem have affected any
mosque, or for that matter any religious court, they are as

29

unfounded as other accusations made only to distort reality
and foster misunderstanding. Professor H. J. Reinink, the
Special Representative of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) entrusted
with reporting on compliance with The Hague Convention
lfor the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of
Armed Conflict’ O was quoted in the Director-General’s
report of May 1969 to the seventy-eighth session of the
Executive Board of UNESCO as follows: “I satisfied myself
on the spot that the excavations being carried out by
Professor Mazar near the South Wall do not threaten the
Mosque Quarter of Jerusalem, which is unique in the
world.” The Mosque Quarter referred to is the Haram
Ash-Sharif, about which we have been hearing in the course
of this debate continuous allegations and accusations.
240. Aref al-Aref, a well-known Arab authority on the
history of Moslem Jerusalem, states in his book The Ijistoly
of Jerusalem,published in 196 1, that 27 mosques existed in
the city in October 1947. According to Mr. Aref, 10 of the
mosques were at the time closed and abandoned-10 out of
27. Not a single one is mentioned as being situated among
the Moghrabi houses or among the other buildings affected
by the various slum-clearing, restoration and excavation
work that has been carried out in Jerusalem since 1967.
Incidentally, according to Aref al-Aref, in 1947, on the eve
of Israel’s independence, in addition to the 27 mosques
there were in Jerusalem 150 Christian churches and about
300 synagogues.

I

I

,,
!’
:;
Ii

there was Jordan’s repudiation of its international obligations and the barring of fi;ee accessto the holy places. If we
are to consider Jerusalem in the light of United Nations
jurisprudence,who is it that will allow the aggressor of 20
years to determine, at his convenience, the legal point of
departure?
243. Jerusalem is one entity today because this is the
natural state of the city. Israel is there because Israel exists
and because Israel is sovereign, and Jerusalem is Israel’s
eternal capital. We fully realize, however, our international
responsibility. We shall ensure the universal religious
interests in Jerusalem with utmost respect and consideration. We shall make certain that all its inhabitants, Jewish
and Arab alike, are protected in their rights, their property,
their lives. We trust that Jerusalem will be 8 source of
happiness, inspiration and light to all. We hope that
eventually the attempts now being made by the Arab
Governments to hamper our work will end, for they will
realize that these designs on Jerusalem’s integrity and life
cannot succeed and they will understand that Israel’s
endeavours are indeed for the good of all.
244. The PRESIDENT (translatedfrom French): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Jordan, on whom
I now call.
245. Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): It seems to me that the
Security Council is now facing not only the question raised
by Jordan, but a more serious case. The case is before you,
and you have here a sample of Zionism and of Hitlerite
statements, a sample of the problems we in the Arab world
are faced with. Mr. Tekoah tells you: “This is nothing but a
chorus: either I have it my way or every thing is wrong and
illegal”. What remains for Mr. Tekoah to do is to dance to
that chorus.
246. This is not the first time Mr. Tekoah has spoken
about this body. At the 1462nd meeting, on 31 December
1968, referring to the resolution the Council adopted
concerning the airport in Beirut, Mr. Tekoah, with all the
audacity on earth, made the following statement: “The
resolution reflects the moral, political and juridical bankruptcy of the Security Council in respect of the Middle East
situation.”

241. Jerusalem, however, is not only a centre of religion;
it is also a living city, with a population of 200,000 Jews,
60,000 Arabs and 5,000 persons of other nationalities
whose political rights to the unity of their metropolis
cannot be sacrificed on the altar of belligerency. Jerusalem
is also a city with a history; and, as I indicated yesterday,
throughout its age-long existence it has been the capital of
one nation only-the Jewish people. Only the history of the
Jewish people is irrevocably bound with Jerusalem. This is
the city where Jewish sovereignty and freedom were
shattered by the cohorts of imperial Rome, and this is the
city in which Jewish statehood and liberty were reborn. It
is with Jerusalem’s name on their lips that our ancestors
were carried off to bondage 2,000 years ago. It was with
the dream of Jerusalem Restored that the Jewish people
trod across centuries of persecution and suffering. It was
for our faith in Jerusalem, for our loyalty to Jerusalem,
that we died in the flames of the Spanish Inquisiton, in the
Tsarist pogroms, in the Nazi gas-chambers. No one will
deny us today the right to live for Jerusalem, to work and
create in Jerusalem.

247. It is not only Mr. Tekoah who has attacked the
Council as well as great religious leaders. If we turn to what
happened after the Council’s decision on the question of
the attack on the Lebanese airport by the Israelis, it will be
seen that the reaction of all Zionist circles, whether in
Europe, the United States, Israel or everywhere else, wasa
wild one. Mrs. Meir said in the Knesset-I am quoting from
the JerusalemPost of 1 June 1969: “I am beginning to feel
very sorry for this family of nations that sits there and
discussesour actions. It would be much more justified if
the Knesset were to debate the United Nations and the
Security Council.” In other words, Mrs. Meir would like to
be the judge of the whole world, including the Security
Council. And she is the Prime Minister of Israel.

242. Jerusalem’s history does not begin with last year’s
Security Council resolution. Jerusalem’s history, Jerusalem’s reality, Jerusalem’s destiny cannot be erased by votes.
However, if one does wish to approach this question from
the legal point of view, why not start at the beginning? At
the beginning there was Jordan’s invasion of 1948, in
defiance of United Nations resolutions; there was Jordan’s
illegal bisection of the city; there was Jordan’s barbaric
destruction of the Jewish Quarter, of Jewish houses of
worship, of ancient Jewish cemeteries. At the beginning

248. Yigal Allon, the Deputy Prime Minister, said: “The
United Nations Security Council has turned into an
‘insecurity council’ encouraging terrorist activity . , .I’. That
appeared in The JerusalemPost of 6 Januav 1969.

10UnitedNations,Treaty Series, vol. 249 (19$6), No. 3511.
30

249. In a debate in the Knesset, the body which Mrs. Meir
wanted to debate the Security Council and the United
Nations, all speakers denounced the reaction of the whole
world as “hypocritical”,
with several of them having the
nerve, the audacity, to attack His Holiness the Pope. I am
referring to an article appearing in the Jewish Monitor of
3 Januaiy 1969. Israel Galilee, another minister without
portfolio, indicated &O that they have no intention of
coming to the Council; they are powerful enough; they
have the might; they have the destructive weapons;
they
have the napalm. He said they would not come to the
Council, according to Galilee, because of the Council’s
“bias and impotence”.

very enlightening. This is the statement of Mr. Chaim
Weizmann:

250. Going further, we see Zionist forums elsewhere also
attacking the Security Council, the United Nations and the
world community; everybody is wrong but the Israelis. I
cite here the Governing Council of the World Jewish
Congress, meeting in Rome, which expressed dismay at
Security Council resolution 262 (1968) condemning Israel
for its aggression against Lebanon. Going even further, we
find that leaders of the three major branches of American
Judaism, Zionist organizations, asserted that His Holiness
and other world figures had applied a double standard.
Everybody
is wrong: religious leaders, secular leaders,
United Nations Members-everybody
is wrong but Israel;
everybody is out of step but Mr. Tekoah. What did those
leaders say? They made an accusation, consisting of a
750-word statement issued by Rabbi Jacob Rudin, President of the Synagogue Council of America. The statement
read in part, as follows:

253. I think what is needed to cure this sickness of
Zionism is a change of heart and mind and behaviour. We
have to look at the good face of life, at the beauty of it, at
the human aspect of people, at the fact that we are living in
a world of togetherness. They should not feel that they are
the chosen ones and that the whole world is made up of
second-class people. This idea of “we, the race”, “we, the
Zionists”, “we, the pure”, should be eliminated. This is
destruction; this is not living and letting others live; this is
dictated by folly and by the ugliness that Weizmann spoke
about.

“We are a small people but a great people, an ugly and
yet a beautiful people; a creative and a destructive people,
a people in whom genius and folly are equally co-mingled.
We are an impetuous people who have time and again
repudiated and wrecked what our ancestors built. For
God’s sake, let us not allow the breach in the wall to
swallow us.”
Those were the words of the first President of Israel on his
death-bed.

254. So much for the Hitlerite statements we have just
heard. I have many points still to discuss. I know the hour
is late. This afternoon I requested that certain pictures,
showing the high buildings, scores of them, built on Arab
lands in the Holy City of Jerusalem, be distributed so that
the members could see whether this was simply a minor
administrative action taken by Israel or completely contemptuous behaviour with the intention of displacing more
Arabs, taking their lands, confiscating their property,
evicting more of them, bulldozing more of their houses. I
hope these pictures will be before the Council tomorrow.

“We resent very deeply the application of a double
standard by world political and religious leaders in their
dealings with Israel and with the Arab countries. We
submit that it is this dishonest duality which raises the
fundamental moral issue in the situation. This onesidedness does not speak of justice or morality but of the
self-serving interests of men and nations.”

2.55. The other point I wish to raise is this. I wonder
whether I could ask for the floor tomorrow to raise the
other points I wish to raise and to answer the main
distortions, falsifications and falsehoods which Mr. Tekoah
had the audacity to present to this important body.

25 1. I have many other statements I could quote on this
specific phase of Zionist behaviour, but I will conclude by
quoting this statement of a member of the Knesset,
Schmuel Tamir, from Tke Jerusalem Post of 6 January
1969: “The enlightened world, in its hysteria over destroyed
aircraft, is more than anti-Israeli; it is anti-Jewish.” When
the Council unanimously condemns Israel, the Council
becomes anti-Jewish. Then they sing the tune of antiSemitism; then they complain as the oppressed, the little,
the innocent, accusing us of being the aggressors, the
invaders, the occupiers. Sometimes people forget to look at
the map and see that this very movement, this very State,
the “little”, the “oppressed”, is the oppressor, the occupier,
the invader, the one who is now occupying all of Sinai, who
is now occupying all of Gaza, all of the west bank, all of
Jerusalem, all of the Golan Heights. Listen to this distortion
that Israel is the lamb and that the whole Council is against
little Israel.

256. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): The
representative of the United States wishes to speak on a
point of order.
257. Mr. YOST (United States of America): In view of the
fact that the representative of Jordan has expressed a
preference for completing his statement tomorrow and in
view of the lateness of the hour, I should like to move
formally, under rule 33, that the Council adjourn until
tomorrow at the hour which, I believe, has been agreed by
informal consultation: 4 p.m.
258. The PRESIDENT (translated from Bench): Rule 33
of the provisional rules of procedure reads as follows:
“The following motions shall have precedence in the
order named over all principal motions and draft resolutions relative to the subject before the meeting:

252. The Council, I said, has before it not only the case of
Jerusalem but this very case right here, and it needs
examination. Maybe the first President of Israel can give us
an enlightened answer. On his death-bed he said something

“1. To suspend the’ meeting;
31

“2.

To adjourn the meeting;

“3.

To adjourn the meeting to a certain day or hour;

“4. To refer any matter to a committee, to the
Secretary-General or to a rapporteur;

“Any motion for the suspension or for the simple
adjournment of the meeting shall be decided without
debate.”
259. I assume that the reference in this case is to
paragraph 3 of rule 33. If there are no objections, the
Council will adjourn until 4 p.m. tomorrow.

“5. To postpone the discussion of the question to a
certain day or indefinitely; or
“6.

To introduce an amendment.

The meeting rose at 8.55 p-m.

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

SE PROCURER

CONSEGUIR

Las publicaciones
en todar
portes
del
Venlos,
Nueva
York

Nations,

be obtained

may
bookstore

COMO

in United

PUBLICATIONS

United
Notions
publications
the world.
Consult
your
.or Geneva.

Ler publications
des
d8positoires
du monde
Notions
Unies,
Section

Litho

NATIONS

New York

las Nacioner
mundo.
Conrulte
o Ginebra.

Price:

$U.S.

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Notions,
Sales
Section,

write

Nations
Unier
sent
entier.
Informez-vow
des venter,
New York

PUELICACIONES
de

or

DES NATIONS
en vente
ouprbs
ou Genlrve.

DE LAS
Unidos

de

et ler ogences
odrersez.vour
b:

UNIDAS

erfdn

en vento

Q IV librero

o dirijare

1.50 (or equivalent

UNIES

dans
les libroirier
vofre librairie
ou

NACtONES

throughout
New York

en librerios
o: Naciones

in other

y caror
Unidar,

currencies)

distribuidoros
Secci6n

de

82105-December

1972-2,050
