A /72/PV.113

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-second session

113th plenary meeting

Monday, 10 September 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lajčák . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Slovakia)

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 13 (continued)
2001-2010: Decade to Roll Back Malaria in
Developing Countries, Particularly in Africa
Draft resolution (A/72/L.68)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Eswatini to introduce draft resolution
A/72/L.68.
Mr. Masuku (Eswatini): It is once again an honour
to introduce, on behalf of the Group of African States,
the draft resolution entitled “Consolidating gains and
accelerating efforts to control and eliminate malaria in
developing countries, particularly in Africa, by 2030”
(A/72/L.68).
In recent times, there has been a lull in the gains
made in the battle against malaria. After many years of
impressive reductions in the global malaria burden, the
World Malaria Report of the World Health Organization
has noted a worrying trend in the data, and progress
has levelled off. Hence the need to redouble our efforts.
That highlights the importance of the draft resolution
that we are introducing here today, as it speaks first
to the need to consolidate the gains made in the fight
against malaria and subsequently to accelerate efforts
leading to the eventual elimination of the disease by
2030. It is therefore critical that we focus on increasing
our efforts in the battle that we are facing.
I am therefore pleased to inform the General
Assembly that there have been some technical updates

in the 2018 draft resolution and some new paragraphs
introduced highlighting current developments. Some
of the most noteworthy include, first, the decision of
the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
African Union at its thirty-first ordinary session, which
endorsed the “Zero Malaria Starts with Me” campaign
in July; secondly, the meeting of the Commonwealth
Heads of Government Meeting, held in London in
April, at which member States committed to halve
malaria in the Commonwealth countries by 2023,
including the pledge by stakeholders to raise $4 billion
in commitments to malaria control and elimination;
and, lastly, the recognition that the Global Fund to
Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria is a primary
multilateral funder for malaria control and elimination,
and that continued progress on malaria elimination will
rely, inter alia, on the successful replenishment of the
Global Fund.
The aforementioned speaks to the call by the Group
of African States, during the introduction of resolution
71/325 on this topic last year, for funding to be
increased so as to enable efforts to continue to progress
unhindered. As representatives of a region acutely
affected, we are grateful for the new commitments
made, as they will address the funding gap that had
been previously identified as a source of concern. We
renew the call for widening the scope of funding that is
available for the fight against malaria and broadening
the base for sourcing funds by the Global Fund to ensure
continued support of our initiatives.
In conclusion, allow me to express our gratitude to
the representatives who participated in consultations on

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-28023 (E)

*1828023*

A/72/PV.113

10/09/2018

the draft resolution for their engagement, constructive
contributions and spirit of compromise. Further
appreciation goes out to the sponsors of the draft
resolution, and we invite other delegations to join in
the sponsorship. We look forward to the adoption of the
draft resolution by consensus as in previous years.
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/72/L.68, entitled
“Consolidating gains and accelerating efforts to
control and eliminate malaria in developing countries,
particularly in Africa, by 2030”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, in addition to those delegations listed in
document A/72/L.68, the following countries have
become sponsors of the draft resolution: Australia,
Austria, Belgium, the Plurinational State of Bolivia,
Brazil, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark,
Ecuador, Estonia, Finland, Georgia, Greece, Hungary,
India, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives,
Malta, Monaco. Myanmar, the Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Romania, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand,
Turkey, Ukraine and the United Kingdom.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/72/L.68?
Draft resolution A/72/L.68
(resolution 72/309).

was

adopted

The President: I now give the floor to those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
position.on the resolution just adopted.
Ms. Eckels-Currie (United States of America):
The Government of the United States remains honoured
to be a part of the massive and concerted global effort
to end malaria and its devastating impact on individuals
and communities. Progress over the past 15 years
has indeed been remarkable. Malaria is no longer the
leading cause of death in children under five years of
age in Africa, and several countries are transitioning
their programmes from focusing on controlling the
disease to eliminating it. Yet that process is fragile
and has not been, and will never be, linear. The United
2/15

States Government recognizes that sustained support
over time is necessary. The United States Government
has committed more than $6.8 billion bilaterally for
malaria control and elimination through the United
States President’s Malaria Initiative (PMI). In addition,
approximately one third of the United States $15.6 billion
total commitments to the Global Fund to Fight AIDS,
Tuberculosis and Malaria benefits malaria-endemic
country programmes. Launched in 2005 in only three
countries, the PMI now supports 24 programmes in
malaria-endemic countries in sub-Saharan Africa and
three programmes in the Greater Mekong subregion
in Asia, where resistance threatens the efficacy of
antimalarial drugs.
In joining the consensus on the adoption of
resolution 73/209, the United States commends the
efforts and commitment of Member States resolved
to eliminate malaria and applauds their progress to
date, urges Member States to sustain their political
commitment and funding, and recognizes the threats
posed by resistance to insecticides and anti-malarial
drugs. We acknowledge progress made in parts of
Africa and Latin America, especially in the following
countries, which have most recently been certified
malaria-free or are poised to receive certification in
the near future: Paraguay, El Salvador and Argentina.
The United States Government also acknowledges
the progress made by the World Health Organization
(WHO) in the South-East Asia region, where eight of
the nine malaria-endemic countries are on target to
achieve at least a 40 per cent reduction in case incidence
by 2020, and India is on track to achieve a reduction in
the range of 20 to 40 per cent.
The United States shares the view expressed in the
resolution recognizing the need to strengthen malaria
surveillance and data quality and urges the global
malaria community to use data to make evidence-based
decisions. Given the influx of data and the advancements
in the development of new malaria-control products,
the United States Government stands ready to work
with the WHO and other institutions to ensure that
global technical recommendations evolve at a pace
with incoming data and advancements in research and
development. Regarding the right-to-health language
contained in paragraph 22 of the resolution and in the
light of article 2, paragraph 1, of of the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the
United States interprets references to the obligations
of States as applicable only to the extent that they
18-28023

10/09/2018

have assumed such obligations. We note that countries
have a wide array of policies and actions that may be
appropriate in promoting the progressive realization
of the right to the enjoyment of the highest attainable
standard of physical and mental health.
Finally, as we have stated for several consecutive
years, it is not appropriate for a United Nations
document to speak to ongoing or future work of the
WTO, or to undermine the independent mandate and
processes of the WTO. The discussion in paragraph 34
of the resolution of the amendment to article 31 of the
World Trade Organization Agreement on Trade-Related
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights is imbalanced
and biased, and it is inappropriate for the United
Nations to call on WTO members to take action on that
issue. Therefore, as was the case last year, the United
States must disassociate itself from paragraph 34, and
we insist that the inclusion of that language in the
resolution not serve as a basis for future negotiations.
We find it unfortunate that so many negotiations
have been stalled by the same issues around intellectual
property, which unnecessarily inflames the discussion
of serious health challenges. This year’s resolution on
malaria highlights the way in which some countries have
chosen to pursue other agendas, even when they have
little or no relevance to the topic at hand. In the case
of malaria, we note that for the anti-malaria medicines
on the WHO Model List of Essential Medicines,
there is not a single patent in a single country that is
still in force. It therefore defies logic to assert that
intellectual property can be a barrier to access to those
anti-malaria medicines.
On the other hand, intellectual property is essential
for the development of new medicines, including the
new medicines we will need in order to treat malaria
when resistance develops to current regimens. The
United States is therefore concerned that the threat or
use of compulsory licensing will choke off the research
and development that will be needed to save lives in the
future. We request that this statement be made part of
the official record of the proceedings of this meeting.
The President: We have heard the only speaker in
explanation of position after the adoption of resolution
72/309.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 13?

A/72/PV.113

It was so decided.
Agenda item 66 (continued)
New partnership for Africa’s Development:
progress in implementation and international
support
(a) New partnership for Africa’s Development:
progress in implementation and international
support
Draft resolution (A/72/L.57/Rev.1)
Draft amendment (A/72/L.71)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt to introduce draft resolution
A/72/L.57/Rev.1.
Ms. Elgarf (Egypt): On behalf of the Group of 77
and China, I have the honour to introduce to the General
Assembly the draft resolution entitled “New Partnership
for Africa’s Development: progress in implementation
and international support”, as contained in document
A/72/L.57/Rev.1.
The value of the draft resolution cannot be
overstated, because it highlights the progress made by
African countries in the implementation of their various
development programmes and projects supported
by development partners. The New Partnership for
Africa’s Development (NEPAD) draft resolution
provides an insight into how far Africa has come since
the previous resolution on the topic was adopted by
the General Assembly (resolution 71/320) and places
the spotlight firmly on those areas that need support
in the implementation of the Sustainable Development
Goals. In many ways it provides a record, year-on-year,
of what Africa has achieved.
The draft resolution also reaffirms the importance
of international support in development. Progress
in development and support for development are two
vital aspects that ensure the implementation of the
ambitious objectives of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. They are linked to the African Union
Agenda 2063 and, we believe, will ultimately empower
our continent and its people to eradicate poverty. May I
take this opportunity to recall that Agenda 2063 sets out
the blueprint for development in Africa until the year
2063, and that it is divided into 10-year implementation
plans. NEPAD and this draft resolution speak directly
to that development nexus.

18-280233/15

A/72/PV.113

This year, in the drafting process of the text, we
saw greater openness aimed at streamlining the text
and at rendering it more focused. However, we believe
that there was too much emphasis on shortening
the text, which could lead to the result that the
substance is not completely addressed. NEPAD is an
important reflection of the responsibility accepted by
African countries for their own economic and social
development. A strengthened and positive balance
between the actions by African Governments and
the response of the international community should
be acknowledged and supported by being reflected
in the draft resolution. Herein lies the much-needed
stability that is fundamental to addressing the special
development needs of the continent.
Instead of support for this important balance, we
have unfortunately seen what can be regarded only as
deliberate attempts to significantly weaken this year’s
draft resolution. The Group believes such an approach is
contrary to the sentiments outlined in the 2030 Agenda,
which perfectly complements the African Union
Agenda 2063. This draft resolution seeks to emphasize
the coherence and coordinated implementation of both
Agendas. They must be seen within a single context.
This year’s draft resolution underlines the
importance of creating a domestic environment that
is conducive to encouraging entrepreneurship and the
formalization of informal sector activities. It also calls
for investment for the express purpose of promoting a
transparent, stable and predictable investment climate.
Those aspects are among those required to strengthen
good governance on the African continent, leading to
what paragraph 4 of the draft resolution refers to as
“proper contract enforcement and respect for
property rights, embedded in sound macroeconomic
policies and institutions”.
The fundamental importance of foreign direct
investment, which is a major source of financing for
development, and the need to broaden and strengthen
the voice and participation of developing countries
in international platforms are also well outlined in
this draft resolution. We note that the draft resolution
speaks of official development assistance, calling
for developed countries to meet their commitment of
0.7 per cent of their gross national income to official
development assistance, with 0.15 to 0.20 per cent of
their gross national income going to least developed
countries. Furthermore, the draft resolution speaks of
4/15

10/09/2018

international trade as an engine for inclusive economic
growth and calls for coherence in trade policies
towards African countries. The draft resolution also
calls for capacity-building and assistance in meeting
the challenges brought on by trade liberalization.
I would like to add, however, that we would have
liked to have seen more on the concerns relating
to official development assistance to Africa, and
particularly Africa’s disproportionately low share of
the volume of international trade. The draft resolution
welcomes the progress made by African countries in
fulfilling their commitments in the implementation
of NEPAD and towards achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs). One area of progress
happily highlighted in this draft is that of agriculture.
The Group regrets, however, that more was not said of
the progress made by African countries in that regard.
Another area that has been highlighted includes
explicit examples of progress, in particular through
collaboration among African countries to promote
innovative public-private partnerships for the financing
of infrastructure projects. We hope that this aspect will
not be watered down in future draft resolutions. The
Group hopes to see a strengthening of examples that
prove that Africa as a whole is on the right path.
As a Group, we are open and willing to work on
a continued process aimed at developing forwardthinking concepts and at polishing the specificities
of such issues, such as supporting the creation of an
inclusive industrial sector; enhancing capacities to
strengthen national health systems; augmenting the
level of resilience against challenges posed by climate
change, drought, land degradation and desertification;
and many other matters that impede the achievement of
our common goals.
In that regard, the Beijing Declaration and the Forum
on China-Africa Cooperation (FOCAC) Beijing Action
Plan (2019-2021), adopted by the African countries
and China at the recently held 2018 Beijing Summit of
FOCAC, covering fields such as industrial promotion,
infrastructure connectivity, trade facilitation, health
care and green development, give strong impetus to the
implementation of Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda.
The Group of 77 and China’s fundamental objective
with this draft resolution and others is to be able to
reach consensus. The Group is gravely concerned
that a draft resolution aimed at enhancing Africa’s
sustainable development and which demonstrates
18-28023

10/09/2018

progress being made in Africa is being subjected to a
vote in the General Assembly. We call on all Member
States to vote in favour of the draft resolution.
Finally, I wish to take this opportunity to express
my thanks to the representatives of Algeria and Angola
for their commendable efforts and roles as coordinators
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China. I would also like
to thank the representative of South Africa for her role
in facilitating the consultations on the draft resolution
and her outstanding outreach aimed at presenting a
well-balanced text to be considered for adoption.
Before I conclude, allow me to make an oral
revision to the twelfth preambular paragraph, namely, to
change the word “recalling” to “welcoming”. This oral
revision has been communicated to all Member States.
I also wish to express my thanks to all delegations for
their efforts aimed at constructive commitment and
participation, as well as to the Office of the Special
Adviser on Africa for its support throughout the entire
consultation process.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United States to introduce the
draft amendment contained in document A/72/L.71.
Ms. Eckels-Currie (United States of America):
I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity to introduce the
draft amendment contained in document A/72/L.71.
Since the development of the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) in 2015, the United States
has noted that a certain Member State has consistently
sought to insert language promoting win-win
cooperation or mutually beneficial cooperation
as a model of development cooperation in many
draft resolutions across a range of issues that affect
development cooperation. In 2015, when the SDGs were
developed, that concept did not have a clear meaning
beyond its generally accepted colloquial use in English.
Over the past three years, however, the United
States has become increasingly concerned about the
consequences of including such language, particularly
as part of an effort to privilege that form of development
cooperation over other models. Our concerns are
that the practical effect of promoting that mode of
development cooperation is to establish a quid pro quo
between developing countries and their development
partners whereby a development actor expects to gain
some tangible benefit from cooperation in exchange for
its assistance to the developing country. That type of

A/72/PV.113

development cooperation is contrary to best practices,
including those set out in the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development’s guidelines
on development cooperation.
Such conditional assistance is also the antithesis
of the kind of effective, sustainable partnerships
that the United States, like-minded donors and our
development partners, including those in Africa, have
worked to build for decades. We are concerned that,
rather than supporting truly sustainable development,
that so-called win-win model leads to unsustainable
debt levels, corruption, poor development outcomes
and, in worst cases, the forfeiture of critical national
assets that should be available to contribute to the longterm economic health and sustainable development of a
developing country.
The draft amendment proposed by the United
States is a straightforward and small change that would
help achieve the goal of restoring balance to the draft
resolution and end the effort to privilege a certain form
of development assistance over all others. To that end,
the United States urges all Member States to vote in
favour of the United States draft amendment changing
the words “win-win” to the word “international”, and
the United States hopes that the amendment will enjoy
the support of all Member States that believe that
sustainable development should be the goal of the draft
resolution (A/72/L.57/Rev.1) on the New Partnership
for Africa’s Development.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/72/L.57/Rev.1, entitled
“New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress
in implementation and international support”, and draft
amendment A/72/L.71 to the draft resolution.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I would like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and
in addition to those delegations listed in document
A/72/L.57/Rev.1, Turkey has also become a sponsor of
draft resolution A/72/L.57/Rev.1.
The President: In accordance with rule 90 of
Assembly’s rules of procedure, the Assembly will
first take a decision on the proposed draft amendment
circulated in document A/72/L.71.
A recorded vote has been requested.

18-280235/15

A/72/PV.113

A recorded vote was taken
In favour:
Albania, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine, United Kingdom,
United States
Against:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda,
Argentina,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo
Verde, Cambodia, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Cote D’Ivoire, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eswatini, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, South Sudan, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Venezuela, Vietnam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Central African Republic, Equatorial Guinea,
Norway, Tuvalu
The draft amendment contained in document
A/72/L.71 was rejected by 46 votes to 106, with
4 abstentions.
6/15

10/09/2018

The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/72/L.57/Rev.1.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia,
Austria,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belgium, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Canada, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Cote D’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Denmark, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Eswatini, Ethiopia,
Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia,
Lebanon,
Lesotho,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa,
South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Dominican Republic, United States
18-28023

10/09/2018

Draft resolution A/72/L.57/Rev.1, as a whole, was
adopted by 159 votes to 2 (resolution 72/310).
The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of vote, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Charwath (Austria): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States. The candidate countries the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Georgia, the Republic
of Moldova and Ukraine, also align themselves with
this statement.
At the outset, we would like to thank the
delegation of South Africa, as the facilitator of the
negotiation process on the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development; Egypt, the holder of the chairmanship of
the Group of 77 and China; and Algeria and Angola,
which represented the Group of 77 and China in the
informal consultations. Allow me to commend the work
of the facilitator and colleagues representing the groups
and members for reducing the length of resolution
72/310. That is a step forward, and the European Union
and its member States engaged constructively on the
resolution on that basis.
While the European Union and its member States
joined the consensus on this resolution today, we also
take note that some concerns were not reflected in the
final text, which remains declaratory and devoid of the
operational dimension that would make a real difference
for the lives of people in Africa and their partners. As
we have said repeatedly, we have three core documents
that we all agreed on in 2015: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development; the Addis Ababa Action
Agenda on financing for development; and the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change. We must now focus
on the implementation of those political commitments.
That means transforming the work we do here in New
York so as to modernize other resolutions, with a sharp
and clear focus on results.
Instead, in this resolution we see new, additional
and vague concepts imposed on the membership. I
refer to paragraph 28. We do not believe that slogans
will move us closer to the implementation of the
2030 Agenda or Agenda 2063 of the African Union.
The concept of win-win cooperation has changed

A/72/PV.113

substantially from the time it was inserted in the 2030
Agenda, becoming a development cooperation tool that
calls for mutual economic gains and takes precedence
over the sustainable development needs of the receiving
countries. We reject that notion and the concept
behind it.
Furthermore, regarding paragraph 55, our quest for
a more coherent and focused agenda on developmentrelated issues in the United Nations is not new. It is
part of the need to revitalize an agenda that is growing
in size, burden and irrelevance. This resolution is,
unfortunately, a clear example of the occasions to make
a difference here in the United Nations that we have
missed. Over 90 per cent of its content could have
easily and more appropriately figured in the preambular
paragraphs. In that sense, this year’s resolution is not
different from last year’s (resolution 71/320), which in
turn was not different from the previous one. While it
has been adequately updated, this resolution does not
need to be and should not be submitted on an annual
basis. That is also why the European Union and its
member States will consider whether or not to engage in
this negotiation again during the seventy-third session
of the General Assembly.
Despite the issues I mentioned, the European
Union and its member States would like to reiterate
their commitment to the full implementation of the
2030 Agenda and Agenda 2063 of the African Union,
and we look forward to further constructive dialogue
and cooperation.
Mr. Xu Zhongsheng (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation aligns itself fully with the
statement delivered by the representative of Egypt on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
In 2015, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development was adopted at the United Nations summit
for the adoption of the post-2015 development agenda.
In that document world leaders jointly committed
to promote the worthy cause of the sustainable
development of humankind. The 2030 Agenda explicitly
stipulates that all parties should uphold win-win
cooperation so that the benefits of development will
be shared by all countries of the world. Upholding
win-win cooperation is a solemn pledge made by the
entire United Nations membership in the 2030 Agenda,
and it is an important building block and basic principle
underlying achievement of the Agenda. It is a principle
that should be safeguarded and adhered to. It should not

18-280237/15

A/72/PV.113

be jeopardized or undermined under any pretext. Some
parties are benefiting from this important principle
while simultaneously jeopardizing or undermining it.
China firmly supports the New Partnership for
Africa’s Development (NEPAD) and the adoption of
resolution 72/310 by consensus. We deeply regret that
some countries requested a recorded vote. China has
always supported NEPAD alongside African countries,
and we follow the principle of sincerity, real results,
amity and good faith, as well as the principle of
pursuing the greater good and shared interests. China
has long stood with African countries. Together, we
have worked in harmony and forged ahead.
Recently China and African countries jointly
convened the 2018 Beijing Summit of the Forum
on China-Africa Cooperation. Chinese and African
leaders deliberated on the theme “China and Africa:
towards an Even Stronger Community with a Shared
Future through Win-win Cooperation”. Through
profound exchanges and consultations, they decided on
eight initiatives for cooperation, covering such areas
as industrial promotion, infrastructure connectivity,
trade facilitation, green development, capacitybuilding, health care, people-to-people exchanges, and
peace and development. The leaders agreed to achieve
strategic and close alignment between the Belt and
Road Initiative, the 2030 Agenda, Agenda 2063 of the
African Union, and the national development strategies
of African countries, so as to inject new vitality into our
common development through win-win cooperation.
At the Beijing Summit, President Xi Jinping
pointed out that China has all along respected, loved
and supported Africa. We follow a five-node approach
in our relations with African countries, namely, no
interference in the pursuit by African countries of
development paths that suit their national conditions; no
interference in the internal affairs of African countries;
no imposition of our will on African countries; no
attachment of political strings to assistance to Africa;
and no search for selfish political gains from investment
and financing cooperation with Africa. We hope
that this five-node approach will be applied by other
countries as they deal with matters regarding Africa.
China supports African countries in their efforts to
achieve their independent and self-reliant development
so that African people can have a happy and better life.
Ms. Eckels-Currie (United States of America):
Throughout the negotiations on resolution 72/310,
8/15

10/09/2018

we made our concerns with the text well known. We
repeatedly offered alternative formulations during
the negotiations, and today we offered a constructive
amendment in the spirit of compromise that would
ensure that the resolution remained consistent with
the principles of the United Nations. We are therefore
disappointed that those and other efforts to address
the presence of inappropriate language in this text
were not successful. As a result, the United States
felt compelled to call for a vote today and to vote
against this year’s resolution on the New Partnership
for Africa’s Development (NEPAD), entitled “New
Partnership for Africa’s Development: implementation
and international support”, owing to the presence of
the national policy rhetoric of a single Member State
in the text.
The United States applauds the efforts of
the African Union (AU) to realize the goals and
aspirations of NEPAD. We strongly support NEPAD’s
overall mission to address the critical challenges of
poverty, development and marginalization facing
Africa internationally. The United States is a staunch
supporter of AU efforts towards our shared goal of
a stable and prosperous Africa. As a clear example
of our commitment, we are proud to have been one
of the non-African countries to establish a separate
diplomatic mission to the AU, a reflection of the robust
and deep historical relationship between Africa and the
United States.
Since 2007, the United States has contributed
over $1 billion in voluntary and in-kind support to
the African Union Mission in Somalia. Since its
inception, in 2004, the President’s Emergency Plan
for AIDS Relief has provided over $67 billion for
Africa, including life-saving treatments to more than
13.3 million men, women and children, and has enabled
more than 2.2 million babies to be born HIV-free on
the continent. With the AU, we hope to establish the
Africa centre for disease control. These are just a few
examples of how the United States and the AU continue
to collaborate to meet the challenges facing Africa.
The United States continues to seek new areas
of cooperation and collaboration with our African
partners. However, we cannot support draft resolutions
on this topic as long as they include references to
win-win cooperation, such as appeared in paragraph 28
of today’s resolution. One State Member of the United
Nations has been promoting such language and other
similar phrases in an effort to promote the domestic
18-28023

10/09/2018

policy agenda of its Head of State through United
Nations policies, programmes and documents. None
of us should support the incorporation of language
targeting a domestic political audience into multilateral
documents, and we should not support language that
undermines the fundamental principles of sustainable
development. Short cuts to economic prosperity and
social development that set aside the rule of law, human
rights, good governance and the participation of civil
society, or that would mortgage countries’ economic
futures and national patrimonies, can only undermine
truly sustainable development, especially for the most
vulnerable among us.
The United States commitment to international
development is enshrined in the President’s National
Security Strategy. We remain the largest provider of
official development assistance and continue to support
countries most in need, while promoting a path to selfreliance and resilience. We are committed to continuing
our support for the efforts of the AU and NEPAD to
address critical challenges on the ground, where it
matters most.
At the same time, I must also reiterate our wellknown concerns with certain aspects of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda and the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change, in particular their climate-change language
and technology-transfer language. In that connection, I
refer the Assembly to our explanation of vote delivered
at the adoption of the High-level Political Forum on
Sustainable Development Ministerial Declaration in
July. In addition, we would have been unable to join a
consensus on the attempt in paragraph 33 to prescribe
the appropriate characteristics of international systems
that are independent of the United Nations. We reject
any texts that suggest that the Organization should give
direction to other independent multilateral institutions
with respect to member countries’ trade policies,
including the reference to improved market access in
paragraph 44.
We are disappointed that we had to call for a vote
today on the resolution just adopted, and to cast a vote
against it. In no way should that vote be construed as
a lessening of our support for our shared goals and
our partnership with Africa, and we strongly urge our
African friends and partners to work with us going
forward to avoid such outcomes in the future.

A/72/PV.113

The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote after the voting.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (a)
of agenda item 66?
It was so decided.
(b) Causes of conflict and the promotion of durable
peace and sustainable development in Africa
Draft resolution (A/72/L.59/Rev.1)
Draft amendments (A/72/L.70 and A/72/L.72)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt to introduce draft resolution
A/72/L.59/Rev.1.
Ms. Elgarf (Egypt): I have the honour to deliver the
following statement on behalf of the Group of 77 (G77) and China, introducing draft resolution A/72/L.59/
Rev.1, on the implementation of the recommendation
contained in the report (A/72/223) of the SecretaryGeneral on the causes of conflict in Africa and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable development
in Africa.
We believe that the draft resolution continues
to serve as an important platform for strengthening
Africa’s responsibility and role in securing peace and
security on the continent, and entails the need for Africa
to strengthen its capacity to address the root causes of
conflict and to resolve conflict in a peaceful manner.
The G-77 and China acknowledges positive trends
and advances in achieving durable peace in Africa. The
draft resolution also emphasizes the need to create the
conditions required for durable peace as a prerequisite
for sustainable development. In that regard, there is
an urgent need to continue developing Africa’s human
and institutional capacities, particularly in countries
emerging from conflict. The Group recalls that African
countries have taken numerous steps to address peace
and security challenges at the national and regional
levels, including in dealing with terrorism and
instability, by establishing the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel and the Multinational Joint Task
Force, and by deploying the African Union Mission
in Somalia.
Those commendable efforts serve, despite their
limited capacity and resources, to manifest Africa’s
determination to find solutions to its own security

18-280239/15

A/72/PV.113

challenges. Furthermore, African countries have
demonstrated growing commitment to the rule of
law and good governance. The African Peer Review
Mechanism has become a unique and innovative
framework for promoting good governance, as well
as durable peace and sustainable development, across
the continent.
In that regard, all efforts should focus on ensuring
the necessary means for implementation, including
financial resources, technology transfer and capacitybuilding. The scale must be ambitious enough to meet
the aspirations of the Sustainable Development Goals.
Developed countries should fulfil their commitments to
the Addis Ababa Action Agenda, including with regard
to official development assistance, as aid remains
an important source for development financing for
developing countries, particularly in Africa.
The G-77 and China is of the view that, in order to
complement and strengthen Africa’s efforts to address
challenges to the continent’s peace and security, it
is critical that partners enhance their support for
African peace and security activities, and help build
the continent’s own capacity to prevent and resolve
conflict through increased assistance. No country or
organization can solve such challenges alone. Moreover,
the G-77 and China underscores the importance of the
long-standing and exemplary partnership between the
United Nations and Africa, notably through the support
for the establishment and operationalization of the
African Union Peace and Security Architecture, which
comprises cooperation between the African Union
Peace and Security Council and the United Nations
Security Council.
This year’s draft resolution brings in new elements to
advance Africa’s efforts in that regard. It underlines the
importance of a comprehensive approach to sustaining
peace and to preventing conflict by addressing its
root causes. Promoting sustained economic growth,
eradicating poverty and promoting reconciliation and
unity at the national level are crucial to addressing the
expansion of conflict in the African continent.
The draft resolution underlines the need to address
the economic, social and environmental impact of
climate change, desertification and land degradation
in Africa. Initiatives enhancing agricultural resilience
in Africa, particularly the Comprehensive Africa
Agriculture Development Programme and other
initiatives, such as the Great Green Wall for the Sahara
10/15

10/09/2018

and the Sahel and the Land Policy Initiative, are not only
important but critical to the agricultural security of the
African continent and, by extension, to the realization
of the Sustainable Development Goals.
The Group calls upon the international community
to enhance support and fulfil its commitments to take
further actions in areas to the economic and social
development of the African continent. That can be
achieved only if a mutually beneficial approach is
employed to create a shared future based on the common
humanity of all States Members of the United Nations.
The Group is therefore gravely concerned that the
draft resolution, which is aimed at drastically reducing
conflict situations and promoting durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa, is being subjected
to a vote in the General Assembly.
Finally, I wish to take this opportunity to express
my thanks to the representative of Nigeria for his
commendable efforts as coordinator of the Group of 77
and China. I would also like to thank the representative
of Morocco for his role in facilitating the consultations
on the draft resolution and his outstanding outreach
enabling us to present a text that is well-balanced to be
considered for adoption. We express our appreciation
to all members for their effort and constructive
engagement in the negotiation process. The Group of
77 and China would also like to express its appreciation
to the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa for its
support during the negotiations on this draft resolution.
We look forward to working with all partners in mutual
trust and in good faith to implement the key deliverables
in this draft resolution.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Austria to introduce the draft
amendment contained in document A/72/L.70.
Mr. Charwath (Austria): I have the honour to take
the floor on behalf of the European Union (EU) and
its member States to introduce the draft amendment to
draft resolution A/72/L.59/Rev.1 contained in document
A/72/L.70.
The EU and its member States would like to call for
the deletion of the word “agriculture” before the word
“resilience” in paragraph 10 of the draft resolution.
Throughout the negotiations, the EU and its member
States have voiced their concern that the draft resolution
should address all root causes of conflicts, including
climate-related threats. The interplay between climate
and security is not an abstract theoretical risk, and
18-28023

10/09/2018

A/72/PV.113

failing to build resilience to climate change will threaten
lives, livelihoods and economies across the world.

explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.

Paragraph 10, as it has been presented in the
draft resolution, focuses too narrowly on agriculture
resilience and excludes other climate change-related
challenges, such as food insecurity or water insecurity.
Despite its relevance, it is also insufficient, and the
consequences of climate change will have a negative
impact on our progress towards achieving the goals set
out in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.

Ms. Eckels-Currie (United States of America):
It is unfortunate that we must take the floor again
to call for a vote on the draft resolution contained in
document A/72/L.59/Rev.1. The United States supports
the majority of the ideas underlying the draft resolution
regarding the causes of conflict in Africa. We join with
others here today in welcoming the progress made by
African countries, the African Union and subregional
organizations in conflict prevention, peacebuilding and
development, and urge continuing close collaboration
among those actors and the United Nations system in
pursuit of those goals.

We must continue our efforts to build resilience to
climate change. By presenting this amendment to strike
out “agriculture”, we therefore call on the General
Assembly to take into account in this paragraph all
risks, including climate-related security risks. I thank
the Assembly for its attention and its support.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United States of America to
introduce the draft amendment contained in document
A/72/L.72.
Ms. Eckels-Currie (United States of America):
The United States cannot support the references to the
“spirit of win-win cooperation” and the creation of “a
shared future, based upon our common humanity”,
which currently appear in paragraph 17. Those phrases
represent an unprecedented and inappropriate effort by
a single Member State to insert the political rhetoric
and domestic political agenda of its Head of State into
United Nations policy documents. We have therefore
proposed the following change.
In paragraph 17, the words “in the spirit of win-win
cooperation and to create a shared future, based upon
on our common humanity” should be deleted. This draft
amendment would in no way weaken or undermine
the text; rather, it would remove this awkward and
unnecessary rhetoric that serves only to privilege the
domestic political agenda of a certain Head of State
over the accepted principles of the United Nations and
the stated purpose of the draft resolution. We therefore
urge all Member States to support the draft amendment
contained in document A/72/L.72.

The United States echoes the concerns expressed
in the draft resolution about the threat of terrorism
and violent extremism in Africa and supports the call
to enhance the role of women in conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. We also commend
the African-led initiatives to strengthen political and
economic governance and strive towards creating
enabling environments for inclusive economic growth.
However, as noted in our draft amendment (A/72/L.72),
the United States objects to language in paragraph 17 that
incorporates certain political catchphrases associated
with a particular Member State into a draft resolution
on the causes of conflict in Africa. This ideologically
driven language is contrary to the very object and
purpose of the draft resolution and, if fully embraced,
is likely to increase conflict, rather than ameliorate
it. The type of development and political cooperation
represented by the so-called win-win model is in sharp
contrast to well-established development best practices,
particularly in fragile and conflict-affected States.

The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/72/L.59/Rev.1 and draft amendments
A/72/L.70 and A/72/L.72.

The United States has consistently supported many
important goals of the African Union Agenda 2063,
most recently at the United States-African Union Highlevel Dialogue held in November 2017 in Washington,
D.C., and notes that the Agenda includes such goals
as improving access to, and the quality of, education,
investing in infrastructure, protecting the environment,
strengthening democracy and the rule of law, and many
other worthy initiatives shared by African countries and
the United States. There should be no question about
our unparalleled commitment to peace and prosperity
in Africa.

Before giving the floor for explanations of vote
before the voting, may I remind delegations that

Given our intense and long-time partnerships in
Africa, we were therefore frustrated that negotiations

18-2802311/15

A/72/PV.113

on areas of concern were unable to get the draft text into
a place we could support it. In particular, in addition
to our previously noted concerns, we are concerned
by language committing to reducing food imports that
could have a negative impact on food security, and
we hope to hold further discussions with the African
Union on this issue. We also have well-known concerns
with certain elements of the language on the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda, the Paris Agreement, climate change,
market access and technology transfer, as stated in
our explanation of vote delivered at the adoption of
the Ministerial Declaration of the High-level Political
Forum on Sustainable Development.
Throughout negotiations, we have made our issues
with this draft text well known. We have offered
constructive amendments in the spirit of compromise,
but we simply cannot join consensus on a draft resolution
that validates the efforts of a single Member State to
incorporate its unrelated, and frankly inappropriate,
domestic political agenda into this draft resolution
on the causes of conflict in Africa. The United States
will therefore call for a vote on the draft resolution and
will vote no on the draft text if it remains unchanged.
We cannot join consensus on the endorsement of a
pernicious effort to promote the domestic political
agenda of a single Member State at the expense of the
basic framework of international human rights, and
we will continue to use our voice and stand up for
the principles of sovereignty, human rights and truly
sustainable development.
The President: We have heard the only speaker in
explanation of vote before the voting.
The General Assembly will now take a decision
on draft resolution A/72/L.59/Rev.1, entitled
“Implementation of the recommendations contained
in the report of the Secretary-General on the causes
of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in document
A/72/L.59/Rev.1, Turkey has also become a sponsor of
the draft resolution.
12/15

10/09/2018

The President: In accordance with rule 90 of the
rules of procedure, before we proceed to take action on
draft resolution A/72/L.59/Rev.1, the Assembly shall
first take decisions on the draft amendments issued as
documents A/72/L.70 and A/72/L.72, one by one.
We will first take action on the draft amendment
contained in document A/72/L.70.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft amendment A/72/L.70?
The draft amendment contained in document
A/72/L.70 was adopted.
The President: We will next take action on the
draft amendment contained in document A/72/L.72.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Malta,
Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America
Against:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eswatini,
Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia
18-28023

10/09/2018

(Federated States of), Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, South Sudan, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Equatorial Guinea, Norway, Tuvalu
The draft amendment contained in document
A/72/L.72 was rejected by 47 votes to 107, with
3 abstentions.
The President: We will now take action on draft
resolution A/72/L.59/Rev.1.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia,
Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belgium, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Canada, Central African Republic,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Eswatini,
Ethiopia, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia,
Lebanon,
Lesotho,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,

A/72/PV.113

Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic
of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa,
South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic
of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
United States of America
Draft resolution A/72/L.59/Rev.1, as amended, was
adopted by 158 votes to 1 (resolution 72/311).
The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of vote after the voting on resolution
72/311, may I remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Charwath (Austria): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States. The candidate countries the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.
At the outset, let me express the group’s gratitude
to Morocco, in its capacity as the facilitator of the
process of negotiations on resolution 72/311, on the
causes of conflicts and the promotion of durable peace
and sustainable development in Africa, and Egypt, in
its capacity as President of the Group of 77, as well as
colleagues representing groups and Member States that
participated informal consultations.
The EU and its member States engaged
constructively throughout the negotiation of this text
in order for the resolution to accurately reflect all root

18-2802313/15

A/72/PV.113

causes of conflict, including climate-related threats.
The interplay between climate and security is not an
abstract theoretical risk. Failing to build resilience
to climate change will threaten lives, livelihoods and
economies across the world. There is a moral imperative
to help those who will lose most from the consequences
of climate change. The EU and its member States have
been clear about their support for the Paris Agreement
on Climate Change and the importance of climate
action for security and prosperity. Without such efforts,
the effects of extreme and shifting weather patterns
will undermine livelihoods, make investments riskier
and disrupt global trade. Progress towards achieving
the Sustainable Development Goals will be severely
compromised. That challenge needs concerted action.
All development must work to build resilience to
climate change.
We are therefore pleased that our amendment
to paragraph 10 of resolution 72/311 was accepted in
order to accurately reflect climate-related challenges
in Africa, including food and water insecurity. Those
are root causes of conflict and must be recognized
by this organ as such. The General Assembly should
take into account all risks, including climate-related
security risks, particularly if we are to build resilience.
We commend the Secretary-General on his efforts to
address climate change and are committed to supporting
him. That includes the convening of his climate summit
in September 2019, where there will be a particular
focus on building resilience.
The EU is disappointed that the resolution contains
outdated language in the twenty-first preambular
paragraph that fails to reflect the important role of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) in conflict
prevention. That was underlined by the sustaining
peace resolutions in 2016, namely, General Assembly
resolution 70/262 and Security Council resolution 2282
(2016); is reflected in the mandate of the PBC; and was
affirmed at the high-level meeting on peacebuilding
and sustaining peace in April (see A/72/PV.83 et
seq.). It is clear that the Peacebuilding Commission,
in its considerations of country-specific and regional
situations, is a body that contributes to sustaining
peace. It is important that it does so, considering that
it is the only body of the United Nations that brings
together the affected countries themselves and States
Members of the United Nations, inter alia Security
Council members, major donors, as well as international
financial institutions and others, in that way. The
14/15

10/09/2018

paragraph as it stands does not contain agreed current
language and does not accurately reflect the mandate of
the PBC, which is inexplicable and regrettable.
The European Union and its member States also
take issue with the mention of win-win cooperation in
the resolution. We do not believe that slogan will move
us closer to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development or the African Union’s
Agenda 2063. The concept of win-win cooperation has
changed substantially from the time it was inserted in
the 2030 Agenda to become a development cooperation
tool that calls for mutual economic gains to take
precedence over the sustainable development needs of
the receiving countries. We reject that notion and the
concept behind it.
Finally, allow me to make a general point. Despite
the reservations we have on the text of the resolution,
the European Union and its member States remain fully
committed to engaging in constructive discussions
with a view to advancing the implementation of peace
and security priorities contained in the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and Agenda 2063 of the
African Union.
Mr. Varga (Hungary): Hungary remains
committed to promoting durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa. In that regard, we believe
that mitigating challenges caused by climate change,
supporting development and placing emphasis on
conflict prevention are highly indispensable in areas
suffering from recurring conflicts in Africa and
elsewhere. We support the comprehensive approach to
the causes of conflict that realizes the linkages between
development, climate change, the rule of law, and peace
and security. Accordingly, Hungary voted in favour of
the resolution 72/311.
Hungary aligns itself with the explanation of vote of
the European Union and its member States, which was
delivered by the representative of Austria, with regard
to the resolution as a whole. With regard to paragraph 9,
we would like to put on record the following statement
in our national capacity.
Events in recent years prove that migration and
its consequences pose serious security challenges and
cause major difficulties for countries of origin, transit
and destination. International efforts should be aimed
at halting migration flows by prioritizing security
considerations and reducing risks that induce that
phenomenon. Every human being has the right to live
18-28023

10/09/2018

in peace and safety in his or her homeland. However,
in our view, migration cannot be considered a basic
human right. The Hungarian Government does not
support any endeavour that could encourage migration.
Therefore, given the decision of the Hungarian
Government of 18 July to withdraw from the global
compact for migration, Hungary interprets paragraph
9 in line with its national position laid down in the 12
points regarding migration.

A/72/PV.113

The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote after the voting.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to conclude its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda
item 66 and agenda item 66 as a whole?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 4.20 p.m.

18-2802315/15
