S/PV.8617

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8617th meeting

Thursday, 12 September 2019, 10.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Nebenzia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Adom
Mr. Trullols Yabra
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Matjila
Ms. Pierce
Mrs. Craft

Agenda
The situation in the Central African Republic

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-27728 (E)
*1927728*

S/PV.8617

The situation in the Central African Republic

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Central African Republic
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Central
African Republic to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2019/729, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by France.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Belgium, China, Côte d’Ivoire, Dominican
Republic, Equatorial Guinea, France, Germany,
Indonesia, Kuwait, Peru, Poland, Russian
Federation, South Africa, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America
The President (spoke in Russian): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2488 (2019).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to welcome the Ambassador of the
United States and assure her of our full support in
her work.
France welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2488 (2019), which authorizes the easing
of the arms embargo on the Central African Republic.
I would like to thank all members of the Security
Council for their constructive engagement during
the negotiations. I would like to mention two points
concerning the resolution.
2/7

12/09/2019

The Security Council is honouring the commitments
it made with resolution 2454 (2019), adopted in
January (see S/PV.8455), and responding to the call
of the Central African authorities regarding the arms
embargo. It is on the basis of the progress made by the
Central African authorities that the Security Council
has decided to embark upon a path towards easing
the arms embargo. This decision is a reflection of the
balance in the positions taken by Council members.
By significantly reducing the exemption procedure
concerning weapons, the Council is responding robustly
to the call made by the Central African authorities once
again only a few days ago. The resolution that we have
just adopted will enable facilitating re-equipping the
Central African defence and security forces so that they
can contribute to the security of their country and that
of all Central African citizens.
Secondly, I stress that the adoption of resolution
2448 (2019) is also an encouragement for the Central
African authorities to pursue the momentum achieved
over the past several months and to continue progress
in the implementation of the five benchmarks identified
by the Council. The resolution includes a number of
elements enabling the Security Council to continue
to monitor the implementation of the easing of the
arms embargo.
Before concluding, I would like to emphasize
that the return of lasting peace in the Central African
Republic is also predicated on combating crossborder trafficking in weapons and ammunition, which
continues to fuel armed groups. In that regard, we call
on the countries of the region to work together with the
Central African Republic to combat such trafficking.
Lastly, I recall that, in the case of the Central
African Republic, sanctions were never intended as an
end in themselves, but always as a means to contribute
to our common goal, namely, stabilizing and restoring
lasting peace in the Central African Republic.
Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): I join
others in welcoming Mrs. Kelly Craft, our colleague
from the United States, and assure her of my delegation’s
full support in ensuring the success of her mandate.
I speak on behalf of the three African countries
that are non-permanent members of the Security
Council, namely, Equatorial Guinea, South Africa and
Côte d’Ivoire.
19-27728

12/09/2019

The situation in the Central African Republic

The three African members welcome the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2488 (2019), which eases the
arms embargo imposed on the Government of the
Central African Republic. We commend the penholder
on ensuring that the commitment of the members of
the Security Council vis-à-vis the Central African
Government is respected with regard to the easing of
the arms embargo in the light of the progress achieved.
Undoubtedly, the easing of the arms embargo
against the Central African Government will be a
powerful driver for multidimensional efforts to speed
up the re-establishment of State authority throughout
the entire country. Such a positive development will
enable the Government of the Central African Republic
to effectively fulfil its responsibility of protecting its
people and defending its territorial integrity, which for
too long have been negatively affected by the spate of
attacks by armed groups.
(spoke in English)
The fact that the Security Council adopted
this resolution is indicative of the Central African
Government’s continued commitment to the
implementation of the sanctions regime despite
the challenges that it is facing in implementing the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic. It should be noted
that, if they are strictly respected, the sanctions will
constitute an effective instrument that can support the
work of the Central African authorities, especially in
the implementation of the Political Agreement, signed
on 6 February, between the Government and the
armed groups.
Our three delegations joined the consensus on the
sanctions mandate renewal because of the realization
that sanctions continue to have a role to play in
supporting the political process in the Central African
Republic. The Central African peace deal is facing a
difficult time, as the Government prepares for the
2020-2021 electoral process.
(spoke in French)
The three African members of the Council
therefore encourage the Government of the Central
African Republic, as well as all regional partners, to
persevere in their efforts to overcome the current crisis.
We assure them of our full support for achieving a
definitive return to peace and stability in that brotherly
country, in line with the aspirations of the continent

S/PV. 8617

and the African Union’s Silencing the Guns by 2020
initiative. We call on the Council to continue to support
the Government and all initiatives aimed at convincing
all parties that the Political Agreement is the best way
forward towards the return to normal life in the country.
Lastly, South Africa, Equatorial Guinea and Côte
d’Ivoire call for taking synergistic action by the Central
African authorities, the States of the region and the
United Nations, with the support of the Panel of Experts,
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
and the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa, so as to ensure the effective implementation of
the relevant United Nations resolutions on fostering a
lasting peace in the Central African Republic.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): First of
all, may I begin by welcoming our colleague Mrs. Kelly
Craft to the Chamber.
Currently, the overall situation in the Central
African Republic is trending in a positive direction.
The Government of the Central African Republic is
committed to implementing the Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic. Positive progress in the implementation
of assessment criteria for the arms embargo has
been achieved.
Resolution 2488 (2019), which was just adopted,
will help strengthen the Central African Republic in
terms of peace, security and capacity-building and help
promote peace and stability in the country, which is
why China voted in its favour.
The resolution provides that the Security Council
will review the suitability of the current sanctions
measures in January 2020. In that regard, the Council
should listen more to the views of the Central African
Republic and respect the aspirations expressed by
its Government.
China’s position on the issue of sanctions remains
consistent. Based on the actual situation on the ground,
China supports the wishes of the Government of the
Central African Republic for the early lifting of
sanctions and the arms embargo against that country.
Mrs. Craft (United States of America): I first want
to note how pleased I am to be here today with all of
the Security Council members in the Chamber today,
assuming my duties at the United States Mission to the

19-277283/7

S/PV.8617

The situation in the Central African Republic

United Nations. I thank my Council colleagues for all
their warm welcomes.
The United States welcome to unanimous adoption
of resolution 2488 (2019) today, which relaxes the arms
embargo on the Government of the Central African
Republic and commits to revisiting the sanctions
regime in four months. My country recognizes that
armed groups continue to violate the arms embargo
with impunity, and we urge the region to end the arms
trafficking that undermines the national security of the
Central African Republic. We recognize that progress
has been made by the Government and will continue
our bilateral support to help the authorities achieve the
United Nations benchmarks.
We look forward to working with other members
of the Council, the Central African Republic, its
Government and the United Nations to support the
implementation of the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic of
6 February and the further extension of State control
over the entire territory of the country. The irresponsible
flooding of arms into a desperately poor and divided
country would only increase the likelihood of a return
to widespread bloodshed and violence. This is not what
anyone wants.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): Let me also add our
voice to everyone else’s in welcoming Ambassador Craft.
We also welcome today’s unanimous adoption of
resolution 2488 (2019), which streamlines the process
through which the Government of the Central African
Republic can acquire arms and equipment. This is
a clear message of support for the that country’s
Government and the progress made in the areas of
weapons management, security sector reform and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration.
It is vital that work continue to ensure that weapons
intended for the security forces do not fall into the
hands of armed groups. Further progress is needed,
including work towards the five benchmarks agreed
by the Council in January. That progress will take
time, and during that time the forces of the Central
African Republic will need to continue to perform their
duties. I therefore urge the Government of the Central
African Republic to make use, where necessary, of the
exemptions process provided for in the arms embargo
so as to ensure that its forces are equipped with the
weapons and material they need.
4/7

12/09/2019

The United Kingdom supports the arms embargo
as a means to help limit the supply of weapons to
armed groups. However, it is clear that arms groups
have continued to acquire weapons from across the
borders of the Central African Republic, with which
they threaten the lives of civilians and break the terms
of the peace agreement. Therefore, we call on the States
of the region, including through their respective mixed
commissions, to fully enforce the terms of the arms
embargo and curb the flow of weapons and ammunition
to armed groups.
More broadly, the United Nations sanctions regime
is designed to promote security in the Central African
Republic and help implement the peace agreement.
We support the use of sanctions, where appropriate,
to respond to breaches of the peace agreement and
welcome the efforts of the Panel of Experts to draw up
new statements of case. We encourage all States to fully
enforce all aspects of the sanctions regime. In addition,
breaches of the peace agreement, which threaten the
lives of civilians, such as the May attacks, must be
dealt with under the core mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) to protect
civilians. MINUSCA needs to be permitted to respond
as appropriate, including, if necessary, with force.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the United
Kingdom’s full support for the Government of the
Central African Republic in their continued efforts
under difficult circumstances.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): First of all, I, too, would like to welcome our
colleague from the United States.
Belgium welcomes today’s adoption of resolution
2488 (2019), through which the Security Council notes
the progress made by the Central African Republic in
reforming its security sector. Its authorities now benefit
from the easing of the arms embargo imposed on the
country. It demonstrates the trust we have in the Central
African Republic and our support for efforts to restore
State authority.
The signing of the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic,
on 6 February, marked a new beginning. We support
the Government in its efforts. We also call on other
signatories to respect their commitments. The recent
outbreaks of violence, in Birao, for example, are
19-27728

12/09/2019

The situation in the Central African Republic

S/PV. 8617

unacceptable. In that context, the sanctions regime
remains relevant.

made by the Government to fulfil the benchmarks set
by the Council in such a short time.

I will conclude by reiterating Belgium’s support
for President Touadera’s Government, Special
Representative Mankeur Ndiaye and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic.

The adoption of resolution 2488 (2019) is the
culmination of that progress. It further emphasizes that
sanctions are not the end but the means to achieving
our collective goals. It also shows that sanctions are not
forever and should be used in line with the real situation
on the ground. Indonesia supports the efforts made by
the Government of the Central African Republic and
calls on the wider membership of the United Nations
to continue supporting the Central African Republic.
The Council’s unity in adopting resolution 2488 (2019)
should serve as encouragement for the international
community to extend all its support to the Central
African Republic.

Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
I, too, would like to begin by warmly welcoming
Ambassador Kelly Craft, Permanent Representative of
the United States.
Peru voted in favour of resolution 2488 (2019)
because it reflects the Security Council’s firm
commitment to the efforts of the authorities of the
Central African Republic to restore State authority and
bring about peace and national reconciliation. At the
same time, with resolution 2488 (2019), the Central
African authorities can also continue benefiting from
the arms embargo exemptions and receiving support
from its partners to strengthen the capacity of its
national defence and security forces.
The situation in the Central African Republic
remains fragile. The Council must remain united in
order to work with the Central African authorities and
the international community to ensure peacebuilding
and lasting stability in the country. Peru, which
has a large troop contingent in the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic, will continue actively
supporting that objective.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Like others, I, too, would
like to welcome our new colleague, Ambassador Kelly
Craft, to the Security Council. I would also like to
thank Ambassador Jonathan Cohen for the friendship
and excellent collaboration with our delegation.
Indonesia also welcomes the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2488 (2019). We thank the
penholder and members of the Council for their
constructive engagement.
We have heard the call from the Secretary-General
with regard to progress in the Central African Republic
and the need to ease the current arms embargo on the
country. We have been following the country’s progress
since the signing, in Bangui on 6 February, of the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in
the Central African Republic. We welcome the efforts

Mr. Lewicki (Poland): First of all, let me join others
in warmly welcoming Ambassador Craft and wishing
her every success in her new capacity. She can count
on our support. I also take this opportunity to echo
my colleague from Indonesia and thank Ambassador
Cohen and his team for the excellent cooperation we
have had in recent months.
Poland welcomes the adoption of resolution 2488
(2019). We voted in favour of the resolution to express
our appreciation for the achievements made by the
authorities of the Central African Republic thus far in
meeting the necessary security standards and, above
all, in ensuring the safety of the people of the Central
African Republic.
We hope that the easing of the sanctions regime will
be a significant incentive for further efforts to ensure
the implementation of the benchmarks established
by the Security Council in April this year. That road
map is necessary for the Central African authorities to
take over full responsibility for the country’s security
in future.
Let me reiterate that the sanctions are not a
punishment, but a policy tool aimed at limiting the illicit
flow of arms into the country and ensuring the safety of
the people in the long term. It is worth emphasizing that
the current regime already allows a controlled delivery
of weapons to the national security forces. However,
ensuring real diligence and transparency in the area of
arms management is key, in particular with regard to
compliance with international humanitarian and human
rights standards. The Central African society expects a
clear message from the Central African Government on
the delivery of its security strategy. The restoration of

19-277285/7

S/PV.8617

The situation in the Central African Republic

national security forces, supported by the international
community, gives a promising perspective. The agreed
modifications place even greater responsibility on the
Central African authorities.
It is of the utmost importance whether or not the
Security Council remains in a constructive, honest
and open dialogue with the Government of the Central
African Republic on the evolution of a sanctions regime
in future. The people of the Central African Republic
can count on the support of Poland in that process.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): First of all, let me also
extend a very warm welcome to Ambassador Kelly
Craft, the new Permanent Representative of the United
States of America. Let me also thank Ambassador
Jonathan Cohen for the excellent cooperation, over the
past month in particular.
We welcome today’s unanimous adoption of
resolution 2488 (2019). It sends a crucial and clear
message of unity, support and commitment to the
Central African Republic, its Government and its people.
We commend the Government of the Central African
Republic for the hard work, commitment and results
achieved over recent months. The Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic and the ongoing efforts to implement it, as
well as the overall political process, are positive signs.
We also acknowledge the Central African Republic’s
work and progress on the benchmarks, especially given
the relatively short time since April, and we would like
to underline that we see this work as part of an ongoing
process. Therefore, we strongly encourage the Central
African Republic authorities to continue their efforts in
making further progress on the peace process, as well
as with regard to security sector reform, the process of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, and the
management of weapons and ammunition.
We believe that the Security Council has an
obligation to maintain its support and commitment to
the Central African Republic. Therefore, it is crucial to
continue to closely follow developments in the Central
African Republic and to be ready to review the measures
of resolution 2488 (2019) at any time, especially in the
light of the security situation in the country.
Finally, we believe that the sanctions regime and,
in particular, sanctions against spoilers and those
responsible for sexual violence in conflict will remain
an important instrument in helping the Central African
Republic to achieve lasting peace and stability.
6/7

12/09/2019

The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.
The Russian delegation voted in favour of
resolution 2488 (2019), proposed by France, adopting
the changes to the Security Council sanctions regime
in effect against the Central African Republic. We have
consistently worked towards and continue to insist on
the need to relax international arms embargo against
Bangui given the evolution of the military and political
situation on the ground. We are satisfied that our
arguments were heard and duly taken into account in
the drafting of the French text.
At the same time, we urge all to remember that the
authorities of the Central African Republic expect the
Security Council to go even further and to introduce
even deeper modifications to the arms embargo. In our
view, there is every reason to do so. We therefore intend
to return to the issue of further easing the arms embargo
during the discussion to take place in January on the
next draft resolution on sanctions relating to the Central
African Republic. We hope that by that time the views
of other Council members will have evolved towards
more substantive, practical decisions in this regard.
That would fully reflect the interests of strengthening
Government security structures, expanding State
institutions and safeguarding security, law and order
throughout the whole country. Furthermore, it would
also contribute furthering successful implementation
of the Khartoum Political Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic of
6 February, which we see as being in the interests of all
members of the Security Council.
We will continue to support the Central African
authorities in reforming the national security sector,
including in the area of strengthening the combat
effectiveness and capabilities of the armed forces. At the
request of the Government, we are providing military
and technical assistance to Bangui at no cost. Two
shipments of light arms and small weapons have already
been delivered. Russian instructors have been sent to
assist in training Central African soldiers. A number
of measures have been taken with the aim of improving
the humanitarian and social situation and creating
positive conditions to improve interconfessional and
inter-ethnic dialogue.
We intend to continue providing comprehensive
support to the Central African Republic and to take
19-27728

12/09/2019

The situation in the Central African Republic

energetic steps to achieve lasting peace in the country.
We are ready to engage in mutually respectful dialogue
with all stakeholders seeking to normalize the situation.
We believe that, given the conditions prevailing in the
situation in the Central African Republic, constructive
cooperation of all international players is extremely
important and needed.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I call on the representative of the Central
African Republic.
Ms. Kpongo (Central African Republic) (spoke
in French): My delegation welcomes the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2488 (2019), renewing the
sanctions regime relating to the Central African
Republic, in particular the arms embargo. The
resolution is aligned with the road map contained in
resolution 2454 (2019) and is yet another sign of the
great attention the Security Council accords to the
situation in my country.
I reiterate my sincere thanks and profound gratitude
to all members of the Security Council for the support
they provided with a view to achieving consensus
during the consultations. The provisions governing the
arms embargo have been modified positively, easing
the measures in the light of the situation on the ground.
Indeed, armed groups are still present on a large part of
the territory and continue to receive supplies through

S/PV. 8617

elicit flows of weapons and ammunition, largely from
neighbouring countries. In this regard, it is absolutely
crucial that all Member States, in particular those of
the subregion, join efforts to fully respect the sanctions
regime so as to ensure its effective implementation in
support of peace in the Central African Republic.
We are aware that exemption and notification
procedures remain effective tools to allow the security
and defence forces to be trained, equipped and armed.
They also provide for support to the Central African
authorities in the process of security sector reform and
in implementing their strategy to extend State authority.
We are also aware that sanctions are not an end in
themselves, but a tool for consolidating stability and
restoring lasting peace in the Central African Republic.
The resolution just adopted is a step in the right
direction towards a partial — and, why not, even
total? — lifting of the arms embargo. My country
expresses this hope because the power balance on the
ground puts the Central African State at a disadvantage
in terms of the supply of weapons, ammunition and
logistical resources reaching armed groups on a
significant scale.
I join the members of the Security Council in
welcoming the new Ambassador of the United States to
the United Nations.
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

19-277287/7
