S/2021/612

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
28 June 2021
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
I. Introduction
1.
The present report covers the period from 15 December 2020 to 17 June 2021
and contains an overview of developments and trends in West Africa and the Sahel
and the activities of the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS), including with regard to progress made in the implementation of the
United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel. In addition, it includes an update on
the situation in the Lake Chad basin, pursuant to Security Council resolution 2349
(2017), as well as a feasibility assessment for a joint civilian project to address
intercommunal violence in the subregion, in response to the request of the Security
Council (see annex).

II. Developments and trends in West Africa and the Sahel
2.
Following the series of presidential and legislative elections that were held during
the previous and current reporting periods (see S/2020/1293), new Governments were
installed in several countries of the region. In the Niger, the first-ever transfer of
power from one elected president to another took place. In Benin and Ghana,
incumbents were sworn in for a second term. In Cabo Verde and Côte d ’Ivoire, new
parliaments were formed, following their respective legislative elections. In Côte
d’Ivoire, that was a significant development, given that all major political leaders and
their parties participated in the elections after a decade-long hiatus, in marked contrast
to the 2020 presidential election, which certain segments of the opposition had
boycotted. Initiatives towards dialogue and national reconciliation have been
progressing in several countries, albeit at an uneven and, in some cases, slow pace.
Whereas dialogue and consensus-building between political actors in Burkina Faso
and Côte d’Ivoire have led to gestures and signs of reconciliation, the new permanent
framework for political and social dialogue in Guinea has yet to commence its
activities. In the Niger and the Gambia, political dialogue and deliberations over
constitutional reforms remain deadlocked.
3.
The period under review was also marked by a growing perception of democratic
reversal across the region, due to widespread views that State institutions and reform
processes, as well as restrictions to mitigate the spread of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, had been manipulated to prevent political opponents from
running for office and to constrain the activities of opposition parties, the media and civil
society. Concerns over the lack of judicial independence, and its instrumentalization

21-07705 (E)

010721

*2107705*

S/2021/612

in a number of countries, allegations of arbitrary arrests and detentions, as wel l as the
intimidation of journalists and activists, and the use of excessive force to quell civil unrest
highlighted the persistent risks of shrinking civic and political spaces. Perceptions of
impunity continued to undermine citizens’ confidence in State institutions, against a
backdrop of increasing incidence of hate speech.
4.
Continued attacks by terrorist and violent extremist groups, kidnapping,
banditry and intercommunal violence resulted in further increases in the levels of
insecurity and displacement in a number of countries. While the fallout from the
COVID-19 pandemic was less severe than initially feared, it nevertheless led to an
economic slowdown and a sharp rise in poverty, inequality and vulnerability to sexual
and gender-based violence. Notwithstanding an enhanced subregional response to the
pandemic, the roll-out of national vaccination plans has been uneven, slow and
marred by vaccine hesitancy and resistance linked to citizens ’ mistrust in their
Governments or of the vaccines.

A.

Politics and governance
5.
In Benin, the pre-election period was marked by unrest and violence in the centre
and north of the country, due to continuing disagreements over the constitutional and
electoral reforms of 2019. The presidential election was held on 11 April 2021, with
three candidates and their vice-presidential running mates competing in a largely
peaceful contest that excluded some opposition parties and candidates. On 15 April,
the Constitutional Court released the final results of the election, declaring the
incumbent, Patrice Talon, and his running mate, Mariam Chabi Talata, as President
and Vice-President, respectively, with 86.3 per cent of the vote. According to official
figures, voter turnout was 50.6 per cent, much higher than the 26.5 per cent estimated
by the national electoral platform of civil society organizations. The aspiring
presidential candidate of Les Démocrates party, Reckya Madougou, whose candidacy
was invalidated by the Constitutional Court, has been in detention since 3 March on
charges of terrorism.
6.
In Burkina Faso, following the re-election of the incumbent, Roch Marc Christian
Kaboré, as President, a new Government was announced on 11 January, with the Prime
Minister, Christophe Joseph Marie Dabiré, continuing as the Head of Government.
Former opposition leader and presidential candidate, Zephirin Diabré, was appointed
to the helm of a new Ministry of National Reconciliation and Social Cohesion. Nine
of the 33 cabinet members are women, compared with seven in the former
Government. The Government’s priorities, as presented to the National Assembly by the
Prime Minister on 4 February, are decentralization, national cohesion and electoral
and governance reforms.
7.
In Cabo Verde, parliamentary elections were held peacefully on 18 April. The
ruling Movement for Democracy party maintained an absolute majority, with 38 of
the 72 deputies. The main opposition parties, the African Party for the Independence
of Cabo Verde and the Democratic and Independent Cabo Verdean Union, obtai ned
30 and 4 deputies, respectively. Twenty-seven women deputies were elected to
parliament (37.5 per cent), in near compliance with the 40 per cent quota in the parity
law of 2019. On 20 May, the new Government, led by the Prime Minister, Ulisses
Correia Silva, was sworn in, comprising 19 ministers and nine secretaries of State, of
whom 5 and four, respectively, are women.
8.
In Côte d’Ivoire, on 18 March, the Constitutional Council declared the final
results of the legislative elections of 6 March. The ru ling Rassemblement des
houphouëtistes pour la démocratie et la paix party obtained 137 of the 255 seats in
the National Assembly, while the opposition and independent candidates secured 91 and

2/19

21-07705

S/2021/612

26 seats, respectively, and 1 seat remained vacant. With only 13 per cent of seats held by
women parliamentarians, there is a significant shortfall with regard to the 30 per cent
quota set by law. On 6 April, the President, Alassane Ouattara, nominated a 41 -member
Government, including 8 women, under the leadership of the Prime Minister, Patrick
Achi, who succeeded the deceased Prime Minister, Hamed Bakayoko. The opposition
presidential candidate, Kouadio Konan Bertin, was appointed Minister of
Reconciliation and National Cohesion. A final ruling of 31 March by the appeals
chamber of the International Criminal Court confirmed the acquittal of the former
President, Laurent Gbagbo and his former minister for youth, Charles Blé Goudé, of
all charges related to the post-electoral crisis of 2010 and 2011. The former President
returned to Côte d’Ivoire on 17 June.
9.
In the Gambia, preparations continued for the presidential election to be held on
4 December 2021, with provisions put in place for diaspora voting for the fi rst time.
Voter registration commenced on 29 May. Concerted efforts are ongoing, including
with support from the Peacebuilding Commission, to mobilize funding to address
deficits in the electoral budget for the period 2021–2023. A referendum on a new
constitution was cancelled after deliberations, facilitated by the former President of
Nigeria, Goodluck Jonathan, and supported by the International Institute for
Democracy and Electoral Assistance, ended in a deadlock over the issue of the
retroactivity of presidential term limits. The Truth, Reconciliation and Reparations
Commission concluded its hearings on 28 May and is expected to end its mandate on
30 June.
10. In Ghana, the President, Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo, was sworn in for a
second term on 7 January, following his re-election on 7 December 2020. On 4 March
2021, the Supreme Court dismissed the petition filed by the former President and
opposition National Democratic Congress party candidate John Mahama disputing
the election results for lack of evidence of alleged irregularities. On 9 March, the
President pledged to revitalize the economy and called for unity and cooperation. The
new 46-member Government unveiled on 21 January includes 8 women, as did the
previous one.
11. In Guinea, political tensions in the wake of the contested presidential election
of October 2020 persisted. The headquarters of the main opposition party, Union des
forces démocratiques de Guinée, remained closed on the orders of the Government,
while political actors raised allegations of acts of intimidation, arbitrary arrests and
travel restrictions. Despite continuing calls by opposition and civil society groups for
dialogue, the permanent framework for political and social dialogue, established by
presidential decree on 27 January, has yet to become operational. Dissatisfaction with
public services delivery and the environmental effects of mining, compounded by an
Ebola virus disease outbreak in the eastern region and ongoing restrictions to mitigate
the COVID-19 pandemic, triggered protests in several locations. The border with
Sierra Leone, which was closed in September 2020, reopened in February 2021,
whereas the borders with Senegal and Guinea-Bissau remain closed.
12. In Guinea-Bissau, the political landscape was marked by the return of the
opposition leader of the African Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cabo
Verde, Domingos Simões Pereira, on 12 March 2021, amid signs of the stabilization
of the political situation. Mr. Simões Pereira expressed his intention to cont ribute to
a climate of understanding, to relaunch the country forward. Progress on the
constitutional reform process has been hampered by two parallel and competing
processes undertaken by the Technical Commission of the President, Úmaro Sissoco
Embaló, and the parliament.
13. In Liberia, the National Elections Commission certified 13 of the 15 senators
elected in the midterm senatorial elections of 8 December 2020. The certification of
21-07705

3/19

S/2021/612

the remaining 2 was pending the decision of the Supreme Court. On 1 Apr il, the
Commission announced that the constitutional referendum held on 8 December had
failed to reach the two-thirds majority required for passage. Consultations continued
on a new electoral code, with a view to, among others, introducing a quota for the
political participation of women.
14. On 11 February, the agreement monitoring committee met in Kidal, Mali, for the
first time since the signing of the Algiers Peace Agreement in 2015 and recommitted,
among others, to beginning a new phase of the disarmam ent, demobilization and
reintegration process and new development projects. On 13 April, the President of the
Coordination of Azawad Movements and a key player in the Malian peace process, Sidi
Brahim Ould Sidati, was assassinated in Bamako by as yet unidentified armed individuals.
15. The transition of Mali was interrupted by the arrest and detention, on 24 May,
of the civilian interim President, Bah N’Daw, and the Prime Minister, Moctar Ouane,
who were forced to resign on 26 May before being released from detention. On 28 May,
the Supreme Court appointed the former Vice-President, Assimi Goïta, a military
officer and member of the Comité national pour le salut du peuple, as the new
President of the transitional Government. On 30 May, an extraordinary summi t of
Heads of State and Government of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), held in Accra, condemned what they referred to as a “second coup
d’état”, suspended Mali from the Economic Community and called for the immediate
appointment of a new civilian prime minister and the formation of an inclusive
Government. On 8 and 9 June, a high-level ECOWAS delegation led by the former
President of Nigeria, Goodluck Ebele Jonathan, visited Mali and urged the
transitional authorities to work towards the holding of presidential and legislative
elections accepted by all political actors within the stipulated transition timetable. On
11 June, a 28-member Government was appointed, headed by the Prime Minister,
Choguel Maiga.
16. In Mauritania, on 9 April, the former President, Abdel Aziz, joined the opposition
Ribat Al Watani party and called upon his supporters to follow suit. On 11 March, the
former President and 13 other officials had been indicted for corruption and other
charges. The current President, Mohamed Ould Ghazouani, continued his outreach
meetings with opposition leaders.
17. In the Niger, the second round of the presidential election took place on 21 February.
Violent protests against the preliminary results broke out in several cities, between 24 and
26 February, during which at least 650 individuals and opposition figures were
arrested and detained, including the former Prime Minister, Hama Amadou. On 21 March,
the Constitutional Court confirmed the victory of Mohamed Bazoum of the ruling
Parti nigérien pour la Démocratie et le Socialisme, with 55.7 per cent of the vote. The
opposition candidate, Mahamane Ousmane, of the Renouveau démocratique et
républicain party rejected the results. On 31 March, an attempted coup d’état was swiftly
quelled by the presidential guard. At his inauguration, on 2 April, the President vowed to
redouble efforts to address the security threats and prioritize education, in particular
for girls, while calling upon Malian authorities to extend State sovereignty in no rthern
Mali. The new 33-member Government formed on 7 April includes 5 women.
18. In Nigeria, amid calls for their dismissal due to worsening violence and insecurity
across the country, on 26 January, the President, Muhammadu Buhari, accepted the
resignation of the chiefs of the security service and announced their replacements. On
1 April, the Independent National Electoral Commission announced that the voter
registration exercise would commence on 28 June for the general elections to be held
in 2023.

4/19

21-07705

S/2021/612

19. In Senegal, violent demonstrations erupted at the beginning of March in several
cities, in the wake of charges of alleged rape having been brought against the
candidate in the presidential election of 2019, Ousmane Sonko, which were perceived
by his supporters as being politically motivated. On 8 April, the Government
announced the establishment of an independent commission to investigate the events.
An independent audit of the voter register concluded that the register was reliable,
but opposition parties have rejected that assessment. Deliberations continued under
the Political Commission for National Dialogue towards a reform of the electoral code
ahead of local elections, which have been further postponed by presidential decree to
January 2022. Following growing discontent over the pandemic-related curfew that
has affected livelihoods, on 22 April, the President, Macky Sall, convened a national
youth summit and committed $825 million to efforts to reduce unemployment.
20. In Sierra Leone, during a town hall meeting on 10 March, the President, Maada
Bio, urged civil society to work with all political parties and to respect the former
President, Ernest Bai Koroma, as a senior statesman. Nevertheless, tensions between
the ruling Sierra Leone People’s Party and the main opposition party, All People’s
Congress, remain surrounding the continued judicial pursuit of the former President
and his associates, as well as the midterm population census, leading to a heated
debate in Parliament on 19 April.
21. In Togo, a ministerial decree of 15 February established a national consultation
between political actors, as a framework for consultations between political parties to
examine possible amendments to the Constitution and electoral provisions. The
national consultation is also aimed at proposing confidence-building actions ahead of
the regional elections, which have yet to be scheduled, however, some opposition
parties are boycotting the framework.

B.

Security situation
22. The overall security situation in West Africa and the Sahel remained volatile,
with high levels of violence, notably in parts of the central Sahel and Nigeria. Despite
the scaling up of military and counter-insurgency operations by national armies, the
Multinational Joint Task Force, the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel and
international partners, attacks by extremist and criminal groups in the subregion,
targeting civilians, humanitarian personnel and assets, defence and security forces
and civil defence volunteers, continued to increase during the reporting period. In the
Liptako-Gourma tri-border area shared by Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger, rival
terrorist groups competed over territory and resources, in particular stolen goods,
trafficking routes, artisanal gold mines and illegal taxation. The absence of State
authority in the area also created a conducive environment for militant and criminal
groups to operate and recruit new members.
23. In Burkina Faso, in the first half of 2021, hundreds of civilians were killed in
attacks by presumed terrorist groups in the eastern region, while at least 15 civilians
were reportedly kidnapped and subsequently executed in Sitenga, Sahel region. In
April, 70 people were reportedly killed, including 30 civilians, of whom four were
children. Security forces and civil defence volunteers were also frequently targeted
in various provinces. In June, more than 100 civilians, including 7 children, were
killed and several others injured by unidentified assailants in a village in the Province
of Yagha, in the Sahel region.
24. In Mali, attacks against national and international security forces continued
unabated, with at least 40 reported incidents between 1 January and 1 April. On 15 March,
at least 33 Malian soldiers were killed, and 14 others injured, in an attack on a security
post in Tessit, Gao region. In attacks on a United Nations convoy on the Douentza -

21-07705

5/19

S/2021/612

Timbuktu axis on 13 January, and on the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) camp in Aguelhok, Kidal region, on 2 April,
4 peacekeepers were killed and 34 were injured. Furthermore, a total of 307 attacks
against civilians were reported in April and May.
25. In the Niger, civilians bore the brunt of extremist assaults. In the first quarter of
2021, large-scale attacks against civilians in Tillabéri and Tahoua regions resulted in
a record high combined death toll of more than 400 people. In Diffa, on 21 February,
alleged Boko Haram elements attacked a convoy carrying election materials, killing
an electoral official, while in Bankilare, Tillabéri region, a polling station was
attacked during the run-off presidential election.
26. The situation in Nigeria continued to pose multidimensional security challenges.
Boko Haram factions, bandits and unidentified armed groups increased their attacks
against security forces and humanitarian agencies, but mostly against civilians. In the
previously calm south-eastern region, there were numerous attacks by unidentified
shooters targeting security personnel and installations. During the reporting period,
the frequency of kidnappings for ransom increased exponentially, affecting more than
1,570 people, including 800 secondary school students, predominantly in Kaduna,
Katsina, Zamfara and Niger States. In late April, the Governor of Niger State
announced that Boko Haram factions had taken control of some territories in the state,
marking an extension of their operations beyond north-eastern Nigeria. Security
challenges in the country have triggered knock-on effects on public safety, food
security and social cohesion, with separatist voices growing louder.
27. In the period under review, terrorist groups continued to probe the border defences
of coastal countries. In Côte d’Ivoire, four attacks on security personnel were carried
out during the reporting period, in Kafolo, Tehini and Tougbo, close to the border
with Burkina Faso. In Senegal, the authorities dismantled a cell affiliated with Jama ’a
Nusrat ul-Islam wa al-Muslimin in the eastern town of Kidira, causing the President
to attend, for the first time, the ordinary session of the Authority of Heads of State of
the Group of Five for the Sahel, held in N’Djamena on 15 February.
28. Amid the increasing levels of violence, national and international military
operations registered some successes during the reporting period. A joint operation
conducted by 1,500 French, 900 Burkinabé, 850 Malian and 150 Nigerien soldiers,
from 2 January to 3 February, weakened the militants’ grip on parts of northern Mali
and facilitated the reopening of the road from Gao to Hombori. The deployment of
1,200 Chadian forces to the Niger bolstered the Joint Force of the Group of Five for
the Sahel in the Liptako-Gourma central corridor.
29. Efforts by local communities to engage in dialogue with armed groups also
resulted in tangible outcomes. In Burkina Faso, peace talks between the Volontaires
pour la défense de la patrie and local authorities in Soum and Yatenga provinces
facilitated the reopening of a road between Tiou, Burkina Faso, and Ko ro, Mali, used
by cross-border traders. Despite the continued violence in Djibo, Soum province,
local initiatives helped to create a tense calm in an area that had previously been a
hotspot for attacks. In Mali, local peace talks contributed to a reduction in the number
of security incidents and civilian casualties. From 12 to 24 January, the Center for
Humanitarian Dialogue facilitated talks that led to a series of agreements between the
Fulani and Dogon communities in Koro, Mopti region. On 14 March, the High Islamic
Council in Mali brokered a ceasefire agreement between traditional dozo hunters and
members of the Front de libération du Macina affiliated with Jama ’a Nusrat ul-Islam
wa al-Muslimin, in Niono district, Ségou region.
30. The Gulf of Guinea remained a piracy hotspot, despite indications of a slight
decrease in the number of incidents taking place, compared with the previous

6/19

21-07705

S/2021/612

reporting period. From January to March, the Interregional Coordination Centre for
Maritime Safety and Security in the Gulf of Guinea recorded 20 incidents, compared
with 45 incidents in the last quarter of 2020, including 9 in the maritime space of
ECOWAS, and 40 kidnappings. Kidnappings for ransom, which constituted the
primary modus operandi, became increasingly sophisticated, with the use of mother
ships to operate farther from shore, as evidenced in the pirate attacks perpetrated
between 7 and 10 February on four ships between Cameroon and Sao Tome and
Principe. According to the International Maritime Bureau, the sole crew fatality in
2021 occurred in the Gulf of Guinea.
31. During the reporting period, law enforcement agencies made large seizures of
drugs, counterfeit medicines and other smuggled items. In the first quarter of the year,
over 11 tons of cocaine and over 24 tons of cannabis were seized by authorities in
Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Côte d’Ivoire, the Gambia, Guinea, the Niger and Senegal.
On 21 March, the French Navy intercepted a ship in the Gulf of Guinea carrying more
than six tons of cocaine. Between February and May 2021, the airport anti-trafficking
unit in Guinea-Bissau carried out five seizures of a total 3,930 kg of cocaine. In
Senegal, authorities dismantled a smuggling ring of counterfeit medicines, and a group
of wildlife traffickers was arrested in Côte d’Ivoire.

C.

Sustainable development
32. In African Economic Outlook 2021, released on 12 March, the African
Development Bank estimated that the gross domestic product in West Africa had
contracted by 1.2 per cent in 2020. The contraction has led to a sharp rise in poverty
and inequality and accentuated social tensions. National responses to the COVID -19
pandemic continued to result in a reduction of the fiscal space, necessitating difficult
trade-offs between protective social services and productive investments. Border closures
between Guinea and its neighbouring countries affected trade and wealth creation.
33. United Nations country teams are implementing socioeconomic response plans
for long-term recovery, focusing on critical areas, including job creation for young
people and women, social protection, assistance to the health sector and access to
education, with catalytic effects towards the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals. Delayed COVID-19 vaccination campaigns, insecurity and
political instability risked jeopardizing recovery efforts.

D.

Humanitarian context
34. The humanitarian situation across the subregion remained highly precarious, as
insecurity, violence, internal displacement, poverty and malnutrition exacerbated
extreme levels of vulnerability. According to the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, almost 29 million people in the Sahel required assistance and
protection in 2021, which represented an increase of 5 million ove r the beginning of
2020. In Burkina Faso, a record number of 3.5 million people will require emergency
assistance in six priority regions. In Mali, 5.9 million people will need humanitarian
assistance, up from 4.3 million at the beginning of 2020. In the N iger, compared with
early 2020, the number of people in need of humanitarian assistance increased by
900,000, to 3.8 million. In addition, in north-eastern Nigeria, 8.7 million people
require some form of assistance, with critical support required for 6.5 million people
who are most vulnerable.
35. Across the Sahel, the population of displaced people increased to 5.3 million.
In Burkina Faso, a further 200,000 people fled their homes, bringing the total number
of displaced persons to 1.2 million, the majority of whom are women and children. In

21-07705

7/19

S/2021/612

Mali, the number of internally displaced persons increased by 60,000, to 347,000 in
total. In the Niger, the number of persons who have fled their homes rose by 34,000
during the reporting period, to reach 300,000 inte rnally displaced persons by end of
May 2021.
36. The level of food insecurity remained alarmingly high. Across the Sahel, 14 million
people were expected to face severe food insecurity during the upcoming lean season,
from June to August. A total of 6.3 million children were facing acute malnutrition,
including 1.6 million who were suffering from life-threatening severe acute
malnutrition. In the Niger, 2.3 million people faced acute food insecurity and 457,000
children under 5 years of age were exposed to severe acute malnutrition. In the Lake
Chad Basin, the number of people facing hunger in 2021 was expected to increase by
half a million compared with the previous year. In Nigeria alone, 4.3 million people
were expected to face acute hunger during the upcoming lean season.
37. Insecurity and attacks severely disrupted the delivery of basic social services
and constrained humanitarian access in many areas, depriving distressed communities
of essential assistance and exposing humanitarian personnel to increa sed risks. Across
the Sahel, more than 5,000 schools were closed or non-operational, jeopardizing the
realization of children’s right to education, especially for girls, who are the least likely
to return to school after prolonged interruptions. In the cen tral Sahel, 136 health
centres were closed due to insecurity, and most of those that are still open are not
fully functional. Maternal mortality in the crisis-affected areas was much higher than
national averages. Women and girls also faced increasing risk s of abduction, forced
marriage and sexual assault. In the Niger, more than 50 per cent of children between
7 and 16 years of age were out of school, and outbreaks of measles, cholera and
meningitis have affected the most vulnerable. In Nigeria, insecurity created
challenges in terms of access and logistics, which compounded the already dire
humanitarian situation.
38. Burkina Faso, Mali, the Niger and Nigeria have developed humanitarian response
plans requiring about $2.7 billion to reach 16.2 million peop le. As of mid-June, 16 per
cent of the funding for those plans had been secured.
39. As of 16 June, West Africa and the Sahel had registered nearly 500,000 cases of
COVID-19 and 6,833 deaths. Across the region, the COVID-19 pandemic further
increased vulnerability and contributed to an increase in gender-based violence.
Vaccination campaigns have started in all the countries of the subregion through
COVAX, the vaccine pillar of the Access to COVID-19 Tools (ACT) Accelerator.

E.

Human rights
40. During the reporting period, there were positive developments with regard to
human rights and the rule of law through the strengthening national normative
frameworks and measures to fight impunity in the region. In the Gambia, the ruling
on 27 January by the Supreme Court in the case concerning Yankuba Touray, alleged
to have committed gross human rights violations during the Jammeh presidency, was
welcomed as a prelude to more prosecutions. In Burkina Faso, on 15 April, a military
court charged the former President, Blaise Compaoré, the former Chief of Defence
Staff, General Gilbert Diendéré, and 12 others for the assassination of the former
President, Thomas Sankara, in 1987. On the same day, in Côte d ’Ivoire, the militia
leader, Amadé Ourémi, was convicted and sentenced to life imprisonment for crimes
committed during the post-electoral crisis of 2010 and 2011. In Liberia, authorities
continued to collaborate with European and neighbouring countries in investigations
into crimes committed during the civil war.

8/19

21-07705

S/2021/612

41. In several countries in the region, respect for human rights and the rule of law
was undermined by excessive use of force and arbitrary detention, especially during
violent protests. In the context of the pre-electoral violence in Benin, it reportedly
resulted in two deaths. In the Niger, several persons were arrested in the wake of the
post-electoral violence, although authorities claim that most of them have since been
released. In Guinea, an unknown number of opposition and civil society figures
remain in pretrial detention. Activists in all three countries have voiced concerns
about politically motivated arrests of civil society actors, opposition members and
political activists exercising their rights to freedom of speech and assembly. In
Senegal, the violent protests in March left at least 10 dead and more than 500
wounded, amid attacks against journalists and the closure of media outlets.
42. There were allegations of physical assaults perpetrated against journalists and
political activists in Guinea-Bissau that raised serious concerns about press freedom
and freedom of speech. Human rights actors and organizations in Ghana have urged
authorities to investigate incidents relating to the detention of media practitioners,
while those in Nigeria have denounced the human rights implications of the repeated
attacks against schools and abduction of students, including on the right to education
and freedom from inhuman or degrading treatment. Attacks against prisons in Nigeria
and the deaths of inmates in detention in Guinea further highlighted the need to
enhance the security and management of penitentiary facilities and for a thorough
inquiry into these deaths and the conditions of detention.
43. Persistent human rights violations allegedly committed by secu rity forces
during counter-terrorism operations remained of concern. In the Niger, on 28 March,
several allegations of sexual violence involving soldiers of the eighth Chadian
battalion of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel, in Tera, were b rought
to the attention of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights (OHCHR) and the Joint Force. The Joint Force responded swiftly through a series
of measures in line with its internal procedures on the conduct of internal investigations,
developed in the context of the compliance framework, with OHCHR support.
44. On 30 March, MINUSMA released a report on the findings of the human rights
investigation into the air strike carried out by French forces operating under Operation
Barkhane in Bounty, Douentza region, on 3 January. The investigation confirmed that
at least 22 people were killed, including alleged members of the Katiba Serma
extremist group. MINUSMA recommended that Malian and French authorities
conduct an independent, credible and transparent investigation in order to examine
the circumstances of the strike and any impact on the civilian population of Bounty.

F.

Women and girls
45. There was progress made in the development of institutional and regulatory
frameworks on women and peace and security, however, more efforts will be needed
to ensure their implementation. In the Gambia, new legislation on matrimonial issues
and access to property was adopted in March to safeguard the rights of women and
girls. In Liberia, new DNA-testing equipment for assessing evidence in rape cases
was installed, and the National Elections Commission developed a protocol on
combating violence against women. On 6 April, Mauritania validated its national
action plan for the implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000),
leaving Cabo Verde as the only country in the region without an adopted national
action plan. On 23 April, the ECOWAS Commission launched its guidelines for
mainstreaming the women and peace and security agenda throughout its departments.
46. There were mixed developments with regard to the political participation and
representation of women. On the one hand, social media campaigns and monitorin g

21-07705

9/19

S/2021/612

mechanisms enhanced the active participation of women and young people in the
elections in Benin, Cabo Verde, Côte d’Ivoire and the Niger. In Cabo Verde, the
opposition African Party for the Independence of Cabo Verde fielded a woman
candidate for Prime Minister. On the other hand, the overall number of women in the
new Governments of Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire and the Niger largely remained the
same. In the Niger, although the number of women parliamentarians (48 of 166 seats)
slightly exceeded the quota, with women holding 5 of the 33 ministerial posts, the
country failed to meet the 30 per cent quota set by law in the formation of the Cabinet.
The mixed results, while attributable in part to the lack of resources and political
support, call for enhanced engagement and outreach to implement existing legislation.

III. Activities of the United Nations Office for West Africa and
the Sahel
A.

Good offices and special assignments of the Special Representative
47. In the light of the developments and trends set out above, the Special Representative
for West Africa and the Sahel continued to support national and regional efforts to
prevent conflicts and sustain peace. These efforts were undertaken in close
collaboration with resident coordinators and United Nations country teams, as well
as through advocacy for institutional reforms and inclusive approaches to
constitutional, electoral and security processes. Owing to restrictions put in place to
mitigate the COVID-19 pandemic, several engagements were held virtually, which
affected sensitive processes that required confidentiality.
48. On 23 January, the Special Representative participated in the fifty -eighth
ordinary session of the ECOWAS Authority of Heads of State and Government, at
which he called for prioritizing dialogue to resolve political differences, build
consensus and ensure inclusive governance. The Authority appointed the Presidents of
Ghana and the Niger to lead resource mobilization for the ECOWAS action plan for
the eradication of terrorism, 2020–2024, and extended the mandate of the ECOWAS
mission in the Gambia until December 2021, to be succeeded by an ECOWAS police
mission. The Special Representative renewed the commitment of the United Nations
to working with ECOWAS in pursuit of common objectives.
49. On 25 January, the Special Representative and the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission visited Sierra Leone to discuss political developments, COVID -19
pandemic recovery plans and the Yenga border dispute between G uinea and Sierra
Leone. They commended efforts to foster national cohesion and reconciliation and
called for a consensual resolution of the border standoff with Guinea. Following their
visit, the two countries held exchanges at the ministerial level that c ulminated in a
visit by the President of Sierra Leone to Conakry on 15 February and the subsequent
reopening of the border.
50. On 26 January, the Special Representative, together with the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission, visited Cabo Verde. They discussed regional developments
and commended the commitment of Cabo Verde to democracy and the political
participation of women.
51. From 7 to 10 February and on 9 and 10 March, the Special Representative
undertook two visits to Benin in support of efforts to promote an environment
conducive to a credible and peaceful presidential election. He consulted with the
President of Benin and national stakeholders, including members of the opposition,
and called for dialogue to address contentious issues. While emphasizing persistent

10/19

21-07705

S/2021/612

grievances, stakeholders expressed their commitment to ensuring the holding of
peaceful elections.
52. In Guinea-Bissau, the Special Representative, together with the resident
coordinator, held consultations with national stakeholde rs, from 10 to 12 February, to
address the situation of the former Prime Minister, Aristides Gomes, who had sought
refuge at the United Nations premises since March 2020. Consequently, Mr. Gomes
was allowed to leave Guinea-Bissau on medical grounds on a special United Nations
flight on 12 February 2021.
53. On 15 February, the Special Representative attended the seventh ordinary session
of the Authority of Heads of State of the Group of Five for the Sahel, held in
N’Djamena. At the summit, the Chair of the ECOWAS Authority recalled the
ECOWAS commitment to contribute $1 billion to the fight against terrorism in the
region. The Chairperson of the African Union Commission reaffirmed the expected
deployment of African Union troops to support the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel.
54. On 20 February, the Special Representative returned to the Niger, in follow -up
to his visit of 27 December 2020, for the second round of the presidential election.
He consulted with national stakeholders and members of electoral observer missions
to help to facilitate a conducive environment for holding the election. He also
attended the inauguration of the President in Niamey on 2 April.
55. From 24 to 27 February, the Special Representative consulted with the President
of the Gambia, Adama Barrow, and other national stakeholders on preparations for
the presidential election to be held on 4 December, as well as on constitutional,
security sector and other reforms. The Special Representative advocated for the
establishment of credible mechanisms to ensure the implementation of recommendations
contained in the final report of the Truth, Reconciliation and Reparations Commission,
which is expected to be submitted to the President at the end of June.
56. Throughout the violent protests in Senegal in early March, the Special
Representative remained in close contact with national stakeholders, including the
President. He also engaged with the United Nations country team to explore ways to
support national authorities in addressing grievances and building trust in State
institutions.

B.

Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission
57. Restrictions imposed to mitigate the COVID-19 pandemic continued to affect
the work of the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission, as final mapping and other
processes largely relied on remote collaboration. Under the auspices of the
Subcommission on Demarcation, which met in Abuja from 21 to 28 February, the
parties advanced in discussions on some of the outstanding points of disagreement,
towards the final demarcation of the land boundary. With the easing of travel
restrictions, field operations for the construction and emplacement of 322 boundary
pillars resumed in March and were concluded in mid-May. To date, 1,673 pillars have
been constructed of an estimated total of 2,696.

C.

Enhancing regional and subregional partnerships to address
cross-border and cross-cutting threats to peace and security
58. UNOWAS maintained its close collaboration with regional and United Nations
partners. On 9 March, UNOWAS and ECOWAS held their annual meeting via
videoconference. Participants committed to strengthening joint communication and

21-07705

11/19

S/2021/612

adopted a joint workplan for 2021, which was focused on support for preventive
diplomacy, farmer-herder dynamics, climate security and gender-related and human
rights issues, among other things.
59. UNOWAS sustained its support to the rotating presidency of the Group of Five
for the Sahel in the implementation of its road map, including through the deployment
of a planning specialist who facilitated the transfer of institutional knowledge among
the presidencies. UNOWAS also continues to provide assistance to the Group ’s
Sahelian Threat Analysis and Early Warning Centre, which, in February, launched a
mapping exercise of armed groups in the region and established a network of research
centres to coordinate and prioritize research on peace and security.
1.

Dynamics between herders and farmers
60. Drawing on their study on pastoralism and security, UNOWAS and ECOWAS
jointly published a best practices handbook on managing and preventing farmerherder conflicts, which was based on lessons learned from Ghana, Guinea, Mali,
Nigeria and Senegal. To scale up the implementation of the decisions of the executive
committee of the Secretary-General on farmer-herder dynamics, the UNOWAS
working group on pastoralism and conflict prevention was expanded to include the
office of the Special Coordinator for Development in the Sahel, the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) and other United Nations entities. A
core team of the working group led the development of a joined -up analysis that took
stock of farmer-herder dynamics in West and Central Africa.

2.

Lake Chad basin
61. UNOWAS, UNOCA and the Lake Chad Basin Commission conducted joint
missions to Cameroon and Chad (21 February to 6 March), the Niger (11 to 17 April)
and Nigeria (25 April to 1 May). The delegation engaged with sta keholders in areas
affected by Boko Haram, assessed the human rights situation and advocated for
humanitarian support.

3.

Cross-border security strategy in the Mano River Union
62. During a high-level meeting held on 13 and 14 January, the Special Representative
and the Secretary-General of the Mano River Union discussed the challenges
confronting countries of the Mano River basin, including a spillover of insecurity
from the Sahel. The Special Representative called for enhanced cooperation with
ECOWAS and the full operationalization of the Union’s joint cross-border security
and confidence-building units. The United Nations resident coordinators from the
four countries who participated in the meeting agreed upon new initiatives to combat
hate speech.

4.

Piracy in the Gulf of Guinea
63. Cognizant of the negative impact of piracy on trade, security and the rule of law,
the Special Representative for Central Africa and the Special Representative for West
Africa and the Sahel jointly convened a virtual high -level meeting on 18 March with
the Presidents of the Commissions of ECOWAS and the Economic Community of
Central African States and the Executive Secretary of the Gulf of Guinea Commission.
Participants agreed upon steps to reactivate regional coordination mechanisms,
notably the inter-regional coordination centre and the West and Central African
subregional centres.

12/19

21-07705

S/2021/612

5.

Adverse implications of climate change
64. In an effort to strengthen gender sensitivity and resilience to climate change,
UNOWAS formed a partnership with the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality
and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) and members of the Working Group
on Women, Youth, Peace and Security in West Africa and the Sahel, that culminated
in two joint climate risk assessments, in Liberia and Nigeria.

6.

Security sector reform, drug trafficking and transnational organized crime
65. UNOWAS continued to support security sector reform processes in the
subregion. During a joint assessment mission conducted by UNOWAS and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) to the Gambia, from 8 to 12 February,
national and international counterparts expressed concern over the lack of
implementation of the security sector strategy, 2020 –2024. They called for the
strengthening of coordination mechanisms and for ad equate financial support. From
29 March to 2 April, UNOWAS deployed a technical mission to Conakry to assess
ongoing efforts to develop a policy for defence and security forces on addressing
sexual and gender-based violence and on the recruitment and promotion of women
within the force.
66. In relation to combating transnational organized crime, in February, UNOWAS
and UNODC adopted a workplan for enhancing joint analysis and advocacy. The two
entities are preparing a meeting of the high-level policy committee and the
programmatic advisory committee, scheduled for the latter part of 2021, to reactivate
the West Africa Coast Initiative on combating drug trafficking.

7.

Implementation of the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel
67. On 7 January 2021, the Secretary-General appointed Abdoulaye Mar Dieye as
Special Coordinator for Development in the Sahel. Working closely with UNOWAS
and other United Nations entities, the Special Coordinator is leading resource
mobilization efforts for the implementation of the United Nations integrated strategy
for the Sahel and the United Nations Support Plan for the Sahel. The Special
Coordinator has also engaged with other key stakeholders and partners to anchor the
strategy within existing frameworks.
68. On 8 and 9 February, the Special Representative for West Africa and the Sahel
and the UNDP Regional Director for Africa jointly chaired the eleventh meeting of
the steering committee for the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel,
organized jointly by UNOWAS and the United Nations Development Programme.
Participants reviewed progress made in key regions, including the Liptako -Gourma
tri-border area and the Lake Chad basin. They identified steps for resource
mobilization and committed to accelerating the provision of United Nations
integrated support to regional initiatives and partnerships with ECOWAS, the Group
of Five for the Sahel, the Lake Chad Basin Commission and the Liptako -Gourma
Authority. At the summit of the Group of Five for the Sahel held on 16 February, the
Secretary-General reiterated his call to ensure that the Joint Force of the Group of
Five for the Sahel had stable and predictable funding, through a mandate by the
Security Council under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations and sustained
financing, including through assessed contributions.
69. On 28 April, the Deputy Special Representative for West Africa and the Sahel
and the Special Coordinator provided a briefing to the Peacebuilding Commission on
ongoing efforts to increase cross-border investments and provide greater support for
women and young people. The Commission called for more structural investments,
as well as stronger multi-partner support to individual countries in the Sahel. The

21-07705

13/19

S/2021/612

Office of the Special Coordinator and UNOWAS organized a consultative meeting,
held on 20 and 21 May, between the Group of Five for the Sahel and the United
Nations entities in Dakar, which provided an opportunity to reaffirm common
priorities and identify new areas of targeted support, in cluding in the area of
intercommunal dialogue. At the meeting, the Special Coordinator advocated for the
harmonization of planned Group of Five for the Sahel activities with the United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel road map, 2021 –2022, which provides
strategic and programmatic reference points for United Nations country teams,
notably in terms of cooperation with communities and local authorities. The Special
Representative also underlined the need for flexibility, encouraged the reactivation of
the Ministerial Coordination Platform for the Sahel and reiterated United Nations
support for accompanying governance reforms and stabilization efforts. The chair of the
Group’s Council of Ministers drew attention to weak resource mobilization as one
obstacle that was hampering the implementation of the Group’s priority investment plan.
70. The Peacebuilding Fund has provided catalytic funding to support the Group of
Five for the Sahel and related priorities for the United Nations integrated strategy for
the Sahel, notably in the areas of cross-border cooperation, conflict resolution, access
to justice, building resilience to climate change, improving the management of natural
resources and empowering women and young people. Meanwhile, efforts are ongoing
to strengthen coordination for better communication on the Sahel. On 9 March, a
steering committee was launched to spearhead an initiative to change the narrative on
the Sahel, under the leadership of the Deputy Secretary-General. Members of the
steering committee include the singer, Baaba Maal, civil society representatives,
including young people and women, and representatives of the private sector, the
media and academia.

D.

Promoting good governance, respect for the rule of law, human
rights and gender equality
71. The Special Representative continued to advocate for the full implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda of the Security Council. On 12 February,
he chaired the eleventh regional open day on Security Council re solution 1325 (2000),
at which 160 participants from 17 countries identified ways to accelerate the
implementation of the resolution at the community level, which included the
recommendation to establish a specific fund for promoting the political participation
of women.
72. UNOWAS supported efforts to implement the youth and peace and security
agenda in the subregion, in line with Security Council resolution 2250 (2015). In
collaboration with resident coordinators and United Nations country teams, it
supported initiatives in Benin, Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana, Guinea, the Niger
and Togo aimed at promoting the integration of young women and me n into conflict
prevention, electoral and peace processes. In Benin and Côte d’Ivoire, UNOWAS
support for national chapters of the West African Network of Young Women Leaders
led to the launch of digital campaigns and the adoption of declarations on peacef ul
elections. Similarly, in Togo, UNOWAS supported peace clubs in 10 localities in
promoting youth participation in decision-making.
73. In April, UNOWAS, in collaboration with ECOWAS and OHCHR, organized a
virtual regional consultation on the instrumentalization of the justice system.
Consequently, a network of ministers of justice will be set up to serve as a platform
for facilitating engagement with civil society and international partners in
strengthening the autonomy of and confidence in the judiciary. On 12 and 13 April,
UNOWAS contributed to discussions on civic space and human rights in electoral

14/19

21-07705

S/2021/612

processes at the forum of non-governmental organizations preceding the sixty-eighth
session of the African Commission on Human and Peoples’ Rights.

IV. Observations and recommendations
74. I welcome the beginning of vaccination campaigns in countries of the subregion
to combat the spread of COVID-19, which continued to affect West Africa and the
Sahel, affecting economic development, causing hardship and exacerbating social
inequalities and tensions. In this regard, I reiterate my call for a global vaccination
plan to ensure equitable access to vaccines and enable societies to emerge from the
crisis with greater resilience.
75. The first-ever transfer of power from one democratically elected Head of State
to another in the Niger is a positive development. However, the subsequent attempted
coup d’état demonstrates the need for continued vigilance and sustained efforts to
strengthen social cohesion and national unity. The early warning signs of a democratic
retreat across parts of the region further warrant urgent attention and action by all
stakeholders to avert this trend.
76. The participation of several opposition parties in the legislative elections and
other national reconciliation initiatives in Côte d’Ivoire, the appointment of a Minister
for National Reconciliation from the ranks of the opposition in Burkina Faso and the
establishment of a comprehensive dialogue framework in Togo are welcome
developments. The creation of a permanent framework for political and social
dialogue in Guinea could be another encouraging step towards strengthening social
cohesion. This work should commence expeditiously, with the inclusive participation
of key stakeholders such as civil society, women and young people.
77. As the Gambia moves towards its presidential election in December, all
stakeholders should be encouraged to redouble efforts aimed at building consensus,
including around the constitutional reform process, which should produce a
constitution that reflects the aspirations and will of the Gambian people and set the
foundation for the consolidation of democracy.
78. The return to Guinea-Bissau of the former presidential candidate and opposition
leader, Mr. Simões Pereira, is a mark of progress in the country’s political
stabilization process, which should be strengthened through the implementation of
the pending institutional reforms outlined in the Conakry Agreement on the
Implementation of the Economic Community of West African States Road Map for
the Resolution of the Political Crisis in Guinea-Bissau and the ECOWAS road map,
in particular the completion of a consensual constitutional reform that will set the
basis for all reform processes.
79. Despite advances in national legislation on gender parity laws, the number of
women in the new governments and parliaments across the subregion remains
dismally low. It is essential that countries in the subregion take all measures necessary
to comply with their national and regional commitments on gender equality, including
by ensuring adequate budgetary allocations for the meaningful implementation of
national action plans on the implementation of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000) and related resolutions.
80. I am gravely concerned about the volatile security situation in the Sahel and the
Lake Chad basin, coupled with increasing competition between rival terrorist and
extremist groups over the control of resources and territory, which continues to place
civilian populations at risk. Kidnappings for ransom, which have evolved as a new
modus operandi of criminal groups partly working in concert with extremist groups,
compound the situation. In this context, the enhanced protection of educational
21-07705

15/19

S/2021/612

establishments and other vulnerable installations, as well as the implementation of
specialized rehabilitation measures for the hundreds of abducted people, especially
children, is essential.
81. I commend the mutual efforts of countries participating in the Joint Force of the
Group of Five for the Sahel and the Multinational Joint Task Force to address security
challenges. I am also encouraged by their efforts to better integrate human rights due
diligence into their operations. It is vital for countries of the subregion to further enhance
coordination and for international partners to scale up support for those initiatives.
82. The ongoing efforts of ECOWAS to accelerate resource mobilization for its
action plan for the eradication of terrorism should be encouraged. I call upon
ECOWAS member States and international partners to support holistic and integrated
approaches, including through the implementation of the regional strategy for the
stabilization, recovery and resilience of the areas of the Lake Chad basin region
affected by Boko Haram, the Group of Five for the Sahel priority investment plan,
the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel and the United Nations Support
Plan for the Sahel. Cognizant of the limitations of a security -focused approach,
countries of the subregion should intensify efforts to address the root causes of
instability, by integrating humanitarian, development, governance, human rights and
sustaining peace dimensions into their responses. While further promoting
community-based dispute resolution mechanisms, populations must not feel
compelled to rely on armed auxiliary groups as security providers. In addition, human
rights institutions should continue playing their crucial roles in the protection and
promotion of human rights and in ensuring accountability for human rights violations,
which remains a major challenge in the region.
83. High levels of displacement and food insecurity, as a result of conflict, drought
and flooding, require both short-term and long-term solutions, which draw on homegrown knowledge and partnerships that integrate local, national and regional policies,
across political, economic, humanitarian and other sectors. I urge all parties to respect
the humanitarian principles of impartiality and neutrality, remove barrie rs to
humanitarian access and facilitate the delivery of emergency assistance to populations
in need.
84. I commend the Governments of Cameroon and Nigeria for their continuous
commitment to completing the demarcation of their land and maritime boundaries,
despite security challenges and challenges related to the COVID -19 pandemic. All
parties should intensify efforts to accelerate the completion of the mandate of the
Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission.
85. I wish to express my appreciation to the Governments of the ECOWAS region,
the African Union, the Group of Five for the Sahel, the Mano River Union, the Gulf
of Guinea Commission and the Lake Chad Basin Commission for their continued
cooperation with UNOWAS. The close partnership between UNOWAS, the United
Nations entities in West Africa and the Sahel, civil society organizations and other
institutions is essential to supporting the region. I would also like to express special
appreciation to both my former Special Representative, Mohamed Ibn Cha mbas, who
completed his mandate on 7 April, and to my new Special Representative, Annadif
Khatir Mahamat Saleh, who assumed his functions on 26 April, as well as to the staff
of UNOWAS and the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission for their continuing
efforts to advance peace and security in West Africa and the Sahel.

16/19

21-07705

S/2021/612

Annex
Feasibility assessment for a joint civilian project to address
intercommunal violence

I. Mandate
1.
In its presidential statement of 3 February 2021 ( S/PRST/2021/3), the Security
Council requested the Secretary-General to explore the feasibility of a joint civilian
project between UNOWAS and relevant regional organizations, such as the Group of
Five for the Sahel, ECOWAS and the African Union, with the aim of stemming the
increasingly destabilizing phenomenon of intercommunal violence and preventing its
recurrence in the region. The Council requested the Secretary -General to include in
the present report recommendations with viable options for establishing the project.
Preliminary proposals are therefore set out below.

II. Context
2.
Intercommunal dynamics across West Africa and the Sahel stem from very
diverse issues and are often characterized by deadly cycles of attacks and r etaliation,
with direct implications for regional peace and security. While the root causes are
diverse and mutually reinforcing, manifestations include ethnic tensions, escalating
conflict and violence between farmers and herders, as well as artisanal min ers, violent
religious extremism, land disputes and disputed access to natural resources, such as
water and arable land. Although climate change constitutes a root threat multiplier,
the manipulation of identity for political purposes and the breakdown of traditional
dispute management mechanisms aggravate tensions and conflict. Addressing the root
causes and manifestations of intercommunal violence remains the primary
responsibility of national Governments.

III. Existing regional initiatives and frameworks
3.
A number of existing regional initiatives and frameworks address the issue of
intercommunal dynamics, and the attendant violence, in West Africa and the Sahel.
4.
The ECOWAS Conflict Prevention Framework is a collective operational and
structural conflict management tool, agreed upon by ECOWAS member States, aimed
at strengthening the peace and security architecture in the subregion, in order to
prevent violence, including at the community level. The ongoing review of the
Framework, which is focused on evaluating the status of implementation of the plans
of action for the implementation of its 15 components, is expected to lead to the
development of a new generation of action plans that are more in consonance with
the mutating conflict environment in the subregion. The exercise provides an
opportunity to apply a more strategic focus to addressing the root and proximate
causes and evolving manifestations of intercommunal conflicts. With support from
the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and UNOWAS, ECOWAS will
engage with civil society groups in the context of the review process, which is
expected to be finalized in the third quarter of 2021. The support is aimed at
promoting a more human security-focused approach to the development of the new
action plans and, upon adoption, their operationalization at the national and
community levels, in order to stem and prevent the recurrence of violent conflict.
5.
The Group of Five for the Sahel has identified the prevention of intercom munal
violence as one of the cornerstones of its efforts to complement military operations
21-07705

17/19

S/2021/612

with development and stabilization efforts across the Sahel. UNOWAS has partnered
with the Group on various initiatives to boost State-owned and community-owned
dialogue capacities to enhance early warning reporting and to prevent violent
extremism across the Sahel. The proposed joint civilian project could link its work
with the Regional Cell for the Prevention of Radicalization and Violent Extremism,
established in 2016 in collaboration with the Office of Counter-Terrorism, and the
Group’s Sahelian Threat Analysis and Early Warning Centre, as well as engage with
the Association of Local Authorities with the aim of enhancing the role of
decentralized communities in promoting dialogue and improving civil-military
cooperation in the Liptako-Gourma region.
6.
The Liptako-Gourma Authority has protocols for internal cooperation among
mayors and governors that envisage their collaboration for the prevention of local
conflicts. The United Nations is supporting the Authority’s efforts in that area,
including through initiatives such as the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP)-led stabilization facility, which targets 60 communities in selected localities in
Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger, with the aim of reoccupying abandoned territories,
restoring State authority and provision of basic social services and infrastructure and
creating economic activities able to generate revenues in the short term.
7.
Concerning the Mano River Union, UNOWAS has supported the Union’s crossborder security strategy with its cross-border security and confidence-building units
to promote cross-border community engagement.
8.
In the Lake Chad basin region, the African Union Commission and the Lake
Chad Basin Commission are implementing the regional strategy for the stabilization,
recovery and resilience of the areas affected by Boko Haram. Anchored on nine
strategic objectives, the strategy is designed to address the short-term, medium-term
and long-term needs of the region. It is also supported by relevant United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes.

IV. National peace architectures
9.
Countries in West Africa and the Sahel have multiple and often coexisting
mechanisms to address local conflicts, spearheaded by traditional, government, or
religious authorities at the national or sub-national level. Their achievements are often
under-reported. In some countries, such structures are under a coherent architecture
for peace, while in other countries they operate in an ad hoc fashion on the basis of
local, comparative advantages or specific interests.
10. In Burkina Faso, several institutions have been established with the aim of
promoting social cohesion and sustaining peace and upholding the traditions of
tolerance and peaceful coexistence. There are at least 11 ministries or State
institutions, including the recently created Ministry of Reconciliation and Social
Cohesion, focusing on causes of intercommunal conflicts, including land, national
resources, human rights issues and pastoralism. There are more than 13 peacebuilding
civil society organizations with a mandate to address specific intercommunal and
religious tensions. At the community level, many more mechanisms are still active,
involving councils of elders, traditional chiefs and kings, as well as local civil society
and women’s groups. Those actors share common features, including legitimacy and
acceptance by the local communities. The Department of Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs and UNOWAS are accompanying the national efforts to operationalize those
infrastructures for peace.
11. Several national initiatives geared towards addressing intercommunal conflicts
are also being undertaken in Ghana, Mali and Nigeria. In Ghana, the Nati onal Peace
18/19

21-07705

S/2021/612

Council has been involved in mediating and addressing intercommunal conflicts. In
Mali, negotiations between communities have resulted in local settlements that have
reduced the number of violent incidents. In Nigeria, farmer-herder peace forums in
Benue and Nasarawa States meet regularly to sustain inclusive dialogue and find
home-grown solutions to emerging conflicts.

V. Recommendations
12. Based on a preliminary mapping of the existing actors and initiatives in the
prevention and resolution of intercommunal violence in West Africa and the Sahel, it
can be concluded that the proposed joint civilian project should be grounded in
existing regional and national frameworks and interventions, to avoid duplication of
efforts. In addition, it would be important to ensure the meaningful participation of
local communities in its design and implementation. The joint civilian project should
leverage the comparative advantages of UNOWAS and the critical developmental and
coordination role of the Office of the Special Coordinator for Development in the Sahel
to address existing gaps, such as the need to increase information -sharing on ongoing
efforts to tackle intercommunal violence, design and implement microprojects to support
communal livelihoods and strengthen the harmonious coexistence of communities.
13.

The following options could be considered:

(a) Supporting the UNDP-led stabilization facility assisting the LiptakoGourma Authority by providing analysis and political accompaniment through the
good offices of the Special Representative for West Africa and the Sahel, as well as
the integrating and galvanizing role of the special coordinators of the United Nations
field presences in the region. The stabilization facility ’s interventions in terms of the
rehabilitation of basic services, the revitalization of economic activities and the
improvement of long-term civil-military cooperation, as well as intracommunal and
intercommunal cohesion, lend themselves to being scaled up w ith minimal delay.
Against a continuously degrading security environment, the facility operates in a context
that is politically highly sensitive, requiring continuous analysis and mediation;
(b) In collaboration with ECOWAS, promoting the holding of inclusive
dialogue initiatives at the local level in a number of countries, to facilitate ownership
and the meaningful operationalization of the forthcoming action plans for the
ECOWAS Conflict Prevention Framework. The dialogues should be aimed at
addressing issues of relevance for the targeted communities, with particular attention
given to the peace-development nexus, and involve all key stakeholders, including
civil society organizations and women’s and youth groups.
14. While proposing to initially focus on those two points of entry, UNOWAS will
pursue discussions with regional and subregional organizations, the Special
Coordinator, United Nations resident coordinators and other relevant regional
stakeholders to assess the feasibility of other options. In that regard, the
Peacebuilding Support Office will be a critical partner in the promotion of catalytic
funding. Other development partners, such as the World Bank and the African
Development Bank, could also be engaged, drawing on their respective work in t he
areas of conflict prevention and building resilience, and the conduct of fragility
assessments in the region.

21-07705

19/19
