VII. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

administering Power, to create such conditions in the ~erritory as will enable the people of the Turks and Caicos
Islands to exercise freely and without interference their
inalienable right to self-determination and independence
in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV), as well as all other relevant resolutions of the
Assembly;
5. Reaffirms that it is the responsibility of the administering Power under the Charter of the United Nations to
develop its dependent Territories economically and socially and urges the administering Power, in consultation with
the territorial Government, to take the necessary measures
to promote the economic and social development of the
Turks and Caicos Islands and, in particular, to intensify
and expand its programme of assistance in order to accelerate the development of the economic and social infrastructure of the Territory;
6. Emphasizes that greater attention should be paid to
diversification of the economy, particularly in the promotion of agriculture and fisheries, which will benefit the
people of the Territory;
7. Recalls that it is the responsibility of the administering Power, in accordance with the wishes of the people of
the Turks and Caicos Islands, to safeguard, guarantee and
ensure the inalienable right of the people to the enjoyment
of their natural resources by taking effective measures to
guarantee their right to own and dispose of those resources
and to establish and maintain control of their future
development;
8. Takes note of the statement of the administering
Power to the effect that the military facility in the Turks
and Caicos Islands has been closed and that the territorial
Government now has complete control over the disposition of the land vacated by the base; 26
9. Urges the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system, as well as such regional institutions as the Caribbean Development Bank, to
continue to pay special attention to the development needs
of the Turks and Caicos Islands and welcomes the continuing contribution of the United Nations Development
Programme;
l 0. Requests the administering Power, in consultation
with the territorial Government, to continue to provide
the assistance necessary for the training of qualified local
personnel in the skills essential to the development of economic and social sectors of the Territory;
11. Considers that the possibility of sending a further
visiting mission to the Turks and Caicos Islands at an
appropriate time should be kept under review;
12. Requests the Special Committee to continue the
examination of this question at its next session, including
·the possible dispatch of a further visiting mission to the
Turks and Caicos Islands at an appropriate time and in
consultation with the administering Power, and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its fortieth session.
87th plenary meeting
5 December 1984

245

Having examined the relevant chapters of the report of
the Special Committee on the Sit1;1ation with regard _to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 27
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
I 960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries an~ People~, and all _other
resolutions and decisions of the Umted Nations relating to
the United States Virgin Islands, including in particular its
resolution 38/48 of 7 December 1983,
Noting with appreciation the continued participation of
the United States of America, as the administering Power,
in the work of the Special Committee in regard to the
United States Virgin Islands, thereby enabling it to conduct a more informed and meaningful examination of the
situation in the Territory, and expressing its satisfaction at
the willingness of the administering Power to receive visiting missions in the Territories under its administration,
Welcoming the participation of a representative of t~e
territorial Government in the work of the Special
Committee,
Having heard the statement of the representative of the
administering Power relating to the United States Virgin
Islands, 28
Noting that the territorial Government has undertaken
to intensify its efforts to expand and diversify the economy
and further noting the growth in the manufacturing, construction and tourism sectors and in per capita income, as
well as the relatively low unemployment rate in the
Territory,
Noting that the territorial Government is encouraging
the growth of agriculture and to that end recently purchased 804 hectares of land on St. Croix for agricultural
development, home ownership and the construction of a
vocational school,
Reiterating the view that the participation of Territories
as associate members in organizations of the United
Nations system is a part of the overall strategy of accelerating the decolonization process,
A ware that in 196 7 the administering Power transferred
possession of its former naval base on St. Thomas to the
territorial Government while retaining the right to reoccupy it, and that it maintains a radar and sonar calibration
station and an underwater tracking range off the west coast
of St. Croix,
I. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting oflndependence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the United
States Virgin Islands; 29
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of the
United States Virgin Islands to self-determination and
independence in conformity with the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, contained in General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV);

Having considered the question of the United States
Virgin Islands,

3. Reiterates the view that such factors as territorial
size, geographical location, size of population and limited
natural resources should in no way delay the speedy exercise by the people of the Territory of their inalienable right
to self-determination and independence in conformity
with the Declaration contained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), which fully applies to the United States
Virgin Islands;

26 See A/ AC. I091778, para. 20.
27 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/39/23), chaps. IV, VI and XXV.

28 Ibid.. Thirty-ninth Session, Fourth Committee, 17th meeting, paras.
73-82.
29 Ibid.. Thirtl'-ninth Session Supplement No. 23 (A/39/23), chap. XXV.

39/38. Question of the United States Virgin Islands
The General Assembly,

246

General Assembly- Thirty-ninth Session

4. Reiterates that it is the responsibility of the administering Power to create such conditions in the United States
Virgin Islands as will enable the people of the Territory to
exercise freely and without interference their inalienable
right to self-determination and independence in conformity with General Assembly resolution I 5 I 4 (XV);
5. Calls upon the administering Power, taking into
account the wish of the people of the United States Virgin
Islands, to take all necessary steps to expedite the process
of decolonization in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and the Declaration, as well as all other relevant resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly;
6. Notes that the Senate of the United States Virgin
Islands has established a Select Committee to ascertain the
views of the people of the Territory on their future status
and to make recommendations in that regard to the Legislature and further notes that public hearings are being held
throughout the Territory:
7. Reaffirms the responsibility of the administering
Power under the Charter for the economic and social
development of the Territory:
8. Urges the administering Power, in co-operation with
the territorial Government, to strengthen the economy of
the Territory by taking additional measures of diversification in all fields and developing an adequate infrastructure
with a view to reducing its economic dependence on the
administering Power;
9. Notes with satisfaction the recent admission of the
United States Virgin Islands as an associate member of the
Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean and its subsidiary body, the Caribbean Development
and Co-operation Committee, and calls upon the administering Power to facilitate the participation of the Territory
in other organizations of the United Nations system;
10. Urges the administering Power, in co-operation
with the Government of the United States Virgin Islands,
to safeguard the inalienable right of the people of the Territory to the enjoyment of their natural resources by taking
effective measures to guarantee their right to own and dispose of those resources and to establish and maintain control of their future development;
l l. Also urges the administering Power, in co-operation with the territorial Government, to continue to
improve social conditions and to pay particular attention
to overcoming problems of public housing, health care.
education and crime and, in that connection, notes that
further efforts are necessary to revitalize the health care
programme, to improve crime prevention, to discourage
juvenile delinquency and to expand and upgrade school
facilities;
12. Further urges the administering Power to continue
to take all necessary measures to comply fully with the
purposes and principles of the Charter, the Declaration
and the relevant resolutions and decisions of the General
Assembly relating to military activities and arrangements
by colonial Powers in Territories under their
administration;
13. Considers that the possibility of sending a further
visiting mission to the United States Virgin Islands at an
appropriate time should be kept under review;
14. Requests the Special Committee to continue the
examination of this question at its next session, including
30 Ibid., chaps. IV and XX\' II
31 A/AC.1091799.
J2see A/AC.1091772

the possible dispatch of a further visiting mission to the
United States Virgin Islands at an appropriate time and in
consultation with the administering Power, and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its fortieth session.
87th plenary meeting
5 December 1984

39/39. Question of Anguilla
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Anguilla,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 30
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting oflndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
Visiting Mission dispatched to Anguilla in September
1984 31 at the invitation of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, as the administering
Power, 32
Having heard the statement of the Chairman of the
Visiting Mission, 3-'
Having heard the statement of the representative of the
administering Power, 34
Welcoming the co-operation of the administering Power
with regard to the work of the Special Committee relating
to the Territories under United Kingdom administration
and its readiness to permit access by United Nations visiting missions to those Territories,
Aware of the special problems facing the Territory by
virtue of its location, small size, limited resources and lack
of infrastructure,
Reiterating the view that such factors as territorial size,
geographical location, size of population and limited natural resources should in no way delay the implementation
of the Declaration contained in General Assembly resolution 15 14 (XV), which fully applies to Anguilla,
I. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to Anguilla; 35
2. Approves also the report of the United Nations
Visiting Mission to Anguilla in 1984; 31
3. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Anguilla to self-determination and independence in
accordance with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
4. Expresses its appreciation to the administering Power and to the Government of Anguilla for the close cooperation and assistance extended to the Mission;
5. Urges the administering Power, in co-operation with
the Government of Anguilla, to expand the programmes of
political education so as to improve the awareness of the
people of the Territory of the options available to them in
the exercise of their right to self-determination and independence, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and the Declaration:
33 Sec Official Remrds of the General Assembly, Thirty-ninth Session,
Fourth Committee, I 4th meeung, paras. I and 2.
34 lb,d., 16th meeting, paras. 45-50.
35 lh1d.. Th,rtv-n,nrh Scsswn, Supplement No. 23 (A/39/23), chap. XXVII.
