asdf

United Nations

A /66/PV.127

General Assembly

Offi cial Records

Sixty-sixth session

127th plenary meeting
Monday, 10 September 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Al-Nasser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Agenda item 13 (continued)
2001-2010: Decade to Roll Back Malaria in
Developing Countries, Particularly in Africa
Draft resolution (A/66/L.58)
The President: Members will recall that the
General Assembly held a debate on agenda item 13
jointly with agenda item 63 and its sub-items (a) and (b)
at the 32nd and 33rd plenary meetings, on 11 October
2011.
I now give the floor to the representative of Liberia,
who will speak on behalf of the African States to
introduce draft resolution A/66/L.58.
Ms. Farngalo (Liberia): It is with honour that
I introduce, on behalf of the African Group, draft
resolution A/66/L.58, entitled “Consolidating gains and
accelerating efforts to control and eliminate malaria in
developing countries, particularly in Africa, by 2015”.
In the past 10 years, more than 1 million lives have
been saved and mortality has been reduced by more than
a quarter globally and by more than a third in Africa
through the collaborative efforts of Governments,
United Nations agencies, international organizations,
donor agencies and other stakeholders. Notwithstanding
those gains, the grim reality is that malaria is still a
global threat, affecting 99 countries globally and
contributing to 655,000 deaths per year. Africa bears
the brunt of this burden. Malaria kills a child in Africa
every minute. The African region accounts for 81 per

(Qatar)

cent of malaria cases occurring worldwide; 90 per cent
of malaria deaths occur in the region, with 86 per cent
being children below five years of age.
The devastating impact of malaria on Africa
cannot be overstated. The social and economic toll is
significant, impacting our people, our Governments,
our communities and, inevitably, our livelihoods.
Financial costs to individuals and families for treatment
of the disease, and in many cases for funerals, are
substantial. Public health interventions against malaria
and ensuring consistent supplies of antimalarial drugs
burden Governments’ public health expenditures.
Not to be understated is the loss in productivity and
income.
Malaria control remains an emergency globally,
and even more so for Africa. The challenge now
for the global community is to intensify efforts and
commitments to avoid the reversal of the gains made
thus far and to push for greater progress in sustainable
interventions. That also includes the intensification of
resource mobilization. It is estimated that $3.2 billion
in aid will be needed through 2015 to overcome the
current funding deficit and continue the fight to
eliminate Malaria. “Addressing this shortfall will
prevent a health disaster”, as noted by Her Excellency
Ms. Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf, President of Liberia and
current Chair of the African Leaders Malaria Alliance.
This year’s draft resolution maintains last year’s
language with the exception of a few technical updates
and new developments. The new components are
as follows: the welcome of the designation by the

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

12-50131 (E)

*1250131*

A/66/PV.127

Secretary-General of malaria as one of his top priorities
under his second mandate and his commitment to
developing new partnerships and improving existing
ones and to scaling up high-impact interventions
aimed at significantly reducing the number of deaths
from malaria; the call for increased support for the
implementation of international commitments and
goals pertaining to the fight to eliminate malaria, as
stipulated in the internationally agreed development
goals, including the Millennium Development Goals;
recognition of the need for additional funding for
malaria interventions and for research and development
of preventive, diagnostic and control tools from the
international community; the recognition of the
impact of the Roll Back Malaria Partnership; and the
encouraging of sharing across regions of knowledge,
experience and lessons learned with regard to the
control and elimination of malaria, particularly
between the African, Asian-Pacific and Latin American
regions. The draft resolution conclusively requests
the Secretary-General, in close collaboration with the
Director-General of the World Health Organization
and in consultation with Member States, to report
on the implementation of the draft resolution at the
sixty-seventh session, and specifically on progress to
achieve the 2015 targets of the Abuja Declaration and
the Global Malaria Action Plan, as well as Millennium
Development Goal 6.
Our gratitude goes out to the representatives who
participated in the consultations for their engagement,
transparency,
constructive
contributions
and
demonstrated spirit of compromise. Further appreciation
goes out to the sponsors of the draft resolution. We
invite other delegations to join the sponsorship today.
We look forward to the adoption of the draft
resolution by consensus as in previous years.
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/65/L.58, entitled
“Consolidating gains and accelerating efforts to
control and eliminate malaria in developing countries,
particularly in Africa, by 2015”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have become

2

sponsors of draft resolution A/66/L.58: Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Honduras, Monaco, Montenegro, the
Republic of Korea and the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/66/L.58?
Draft resolution A/66/L.58 was adopted (resolution
66/289).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 13?
It was so decided.
Agenda items 14 and 117 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation of
and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium
Summit
Draft resolution (A/66/L.55/Rev.1)
The President: Members will recall that, at
its 72nd plenary meeting on 2 December 2011, the
General Assembly held a debate on agenda item 14
jointly with agenda item 117, agenda item 123 and its
sub-item (a), and agenda item 124. Members will also
recall that, under agenda item 14 and agenda item 117,
the Assembly considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral contained in document A/66/763 at its 112th
plenary meeting on 4 June 2012.
I now give the floor to the representative of Jordan
to introduce draft resolution A/66/L.55/Rev.1.
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan):
I have the honour to introduce, on behalf of the main
sponsors, Japan and Jordan, the draft resolution
contained in document A/66/L.55/Rev.1. I also have
the privilege to address the General Assembly as the
Chair of Human Security Network, which consists
of Austria, Chile, Costa Rica, Greece, Ireland, Mali,
Norway, Panama, Slovenia, Switzerland and Thailand,
with South Africa participating as an observer.
As the Assembly is well aware, at the 2005 World
Summit our leaders and Heads of State emphasized
the pivotal role of human security and mandated the
General Assembly to define the notion of human

12-50131

A/66/PV.127

security. Consequently, in 2010 the General Assembly
adopted resolution 64/291, by which the SecretaryGeneral was able to seek the views of the membership
on a common understanding of the notion of human
security, in accordance with paragraph 143 of the 2005
World Summit Outcome.
In his report (A/66/763), which reflects the various
views of Member States, the Secretary-General
proposes important elements that constitute a common
understanding on human security. As I announced to
the General Assembly during the formal debate on
4 June (see A/66/PV.112), the delegation of Japan and
my own delegation launched, on behalf of the Network,
open and inclusive informal consultations that enjoyed
the very active and constructive participation of all
Member States. As a result, those consultations have
produced for the first time a common understanding
on the notion of human security for the Assembly’s
consideration today.
The present draft resolution recognizes human
security as an approach designed to assist Member
States in identifying and addressing widespread and
cross-cutting challenges to the survival, livelihood
and dignity of their peoples. As an approach, human
security calls for, first, the right of people to live in
freedom and dignity and free from fear and want;
secondly, people-centred, comprehensive, contextspecific and prevention-oriented responses that
strengthen the protection and empowerment of all
peoples and all communities; and thirdly, recognition
of the interlinkages between peace, development and
human rights, while equally considering civil, political,
economic, social and cultural rights.
Therefore, human security is, first, distinct from the
responsibility to protect and does not entail the threat
or the use of force or coercive measures. Secondly,
it is based on national ownership, as Governments
retain the primary role and responsibility for ensuring
the survival, livelihood and dignity of their citizens,
while the role of the international community is to
complement and provide the necessary support to
Governments upon their request. Thirdly, and last but
not least, human security must be implemented with
full respect for the purposes and principles enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations.
In addition, the draft resolution recognizes the
role that human security could play in achieving
development, acknowledges the contributions made

12-50131

so far by the United Nations Trust Fund for Human
Security, and invites Member States to consider making
voluntary contributions to the Fund. Indeed, during the
past three months, Member States have shown great
interest in achieving a common understanding on human
security that would help in advancing its implications
at the national, regional and international levels. Japan
and my country, Jordan, are grateful to all delegations
that participated actively in negotiations and managed
to bridge the gaps between different points of view. On
behalf of Japan and Jordan, I ask the Assembly to now
adopt the draft resolution under consideration.
Before concluding my introduction, I would like
to thank all sponsors for their great and appreciated
support, and of course the facilitators, Ambassador Jun
Yamazaki and Counsellor Mohammad Al Nsour, for
their remarkable efforts.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/66/L.55/Rev.1, entitled
“Follow-up to paragraph 143 on human security of the
2005 World Summit Outcome”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that, since the submission of the
draft resolution and in addition to those delegations
listed in document A/66/L.55/Rev.1, the following
countries have also become sponsors of the draft
resolution: Australia, Benin, Chile, Fiji, Honduras,
Liberia, Madagascar, Nauru, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, the Philippines, the Republic of Korea,
Senegal, Tunisia and Uganda.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/66/L.55/Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/66/L.55/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 66/290).
The President: Before giving the floor to
the speakers in explanation of vote, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Mr. Siddique (Pakistan): I have the honour to speak
in explanation of vote on resolution 66/290, entitled
“Follow-up to paragraph 143 on human security of the
2005 World Summit Outcome”.

3

A/66/PV.127

Before commenting on the substance of the
resolution, we would like to put on record our deep
appreciation for the skilful handling of the negotiation
process by the two facilitators, Japan and Jordan.
Despite our differences in views on certain aspects
of the resolution, it has been a rewarding professional
experience to negotiate that important text with all
partners. We would accordingly like to congratulate the
facilitators on the successful adoption of the resolution
today.
Pakistan considers the notion of human security
an important tool for the States Members of the United
Nations for identifying and addressing widespread and
cross-cutting challenges to the survival, livelihood and
dignity of their peoples. We have accordingly supported
the resolution.
We also welcome the fact that the resolution
clearly distinguishes the notion of human security
from controversial elements such as the responsibility
to protect, the threat or use of force or coercive
measures, which have led to the undue polarization of
this concept. Important elements, such as the State’s
primacy in ensuring the survival and livelihood of
its citizens, national ownership of the notion and its
implementation with full respect for the purposes and
principles enshrined in the United Nations Charter, add
to the credibility of this concept.
Based on the origin and evolution of the notion
of human security, Pakistan continues to believe
that it must have a development-oriented focus to
ensure equitable progress in addressing the inherent
inequalities that lead to violations of human rights
at the national and international levels. Paragraph 4
of the resolution therefore conveys the core message
that while development, human rights and peace and
security are the three pillars of the United Nations,
development is a central goal in itself, and that the
advancement of human security should contribute
to realizing sustainable development as well as
internationally agreed development goals, including the
Millennium Development Goals. We regret, however,
that the text does not contain any reference to the
right to development, which would have strengthened
and appropriately contextualized the notion of human
security.
Pakistan looks forward to working with all
partners in promoting this concept in its proper
context — that is, development — and expresses the

4

hope that its implementation will lead to genuine
international cooperation, whereby Member States
are assisted, upon their request, to strengthen their
development capacities to respond to current and
emerging threats and challenges.
Ms. Alsaleh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): First of all, we would like to thank the
facilitators, the representatives of Jordan and Japan, for
their efforts to arrive at a common agreement on the
term “human security”, in keeping with the provisions
of the Charter and the principles of international law,
while reaffirming the rights of people to development,
freedom and a life of dignity free from poverty and
despair.
My country’s delegation joined the consensus on
resolution 66/290, entitled “Follow-up to paragraph 143
on human security of the 2005 World Summit Outcome”,
on the basis of our firm conviction of the importance
of clearly and precisely defining this important
concept and that any ambiguous definition could
lead to politicization and unilateral interpretations,
undermining the foundations of the international law
that govern international relations. All of these factors
could seriously jeopardize the implementation of this
important concept.
My delegation should like to reiterate its
understanding of the resolution. We wish to emphasize
the fact that the concept of human security encompasses
the following principles.
First, it involves a commitment to the principles of
the United Nations Charter, in particular the need to
uphold the territorial integrity of States and to respect
the principle of non-interference in their internal affairs,
the exclusive responsibility of the State to protect its
citizens, and its right to assess the risks and dangers
to its people’s security and decide on the means to deal
with them. In other words, any assistance on the part of
the international community should be granted upon the
request of the State concerned, with its consent, in order
to implement the international consensus embodied
in many United Nations resolutions on humanitarian
action, the most important of which is resolution 46/182.
In this respect, we affirm that the human security of
individuals cannot replace the security of the State and
society or be given priority over them.
Second, thie concept involves the basic principles
of international humanitarian law, in particular the
right of peoples to self-determination — especially

12-50131

A/66/PV.127

peoples under foreign occupation — and the inalienable
rights of all peoples to exploit their natural resources in
accordance with international law.
Third, the concept of human security is based on
the right to development. Indeed, human security is
based on sustainable human development, economic
development and the elimination of poverty and
underdevelopment by bridging the gap between North
and South, by ensuring justice, energy security and the
transfer of technology, and by eschewing unilateral
economic sanctions imposed by States and other entities
against developing countries in a manner not consistent
with international law.
Fourth, the concept of human security is based
on universality and not selectivity, and on the need to
avoid any double standards in addressing international
crises, while safeguarding the specific cultural and
religious elements of all communities. The concept
of human security has not been created to apply only
to the States of the South. There must be guarantees
for its implementation by all Member States, without
recourse to discretionary political Powers and far from
the hegemonic centres of power.
Fifth, there is a need to focus on worldwide
institutional reform in order to formulate an adequate
response to threats to humanitarian security, as trade
laws and international investment law do not stipulate
the need to establish a link between economic concerns
and international human rights. Some multinational
companies engage in practices that are in violation of
individual economic rights in the countries where they
operate.
Sixth, reform of the system of international
assistance is an important question that has an impact
on the way in which humanitarian and security issues
are dealt with. This entails the need for developed
countries to be convinced to offer assistance to poor
countries, as the increasing pressures that developed
countries are bringing to bear on natural resources
mean that they must compensate poor countries for the
damage done.
Seventh, hegemonic Powers must stop fanning
internal tensions in States by providing funding,
equipment and media and political coverage to further
their own agenda. This exacerbates the problems in
such countries, where citizens already find it difficult
to ensure their livelihoods and throw off the yoke of
poverty.

12-50131

Mr. Maksimychev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation did not join in the
consensus adoption of resolution 66/290, on human
security, because the text does take many of our
proposals into account.
Moreover, we are not convinced of the need for the
very concept of human security or its added value for
the work of the United Nations. We are not convinced
that the notion of human security can offer anything
particularly new to the work of the Organization;
rather, we are afraid that it could lead to an excessive
politicization of discussions.
In our approach to human security, we base our
views on the fact that the term “human security”
should be used only in the context of socio-economic
development, in line with such principles as the
non-use of force or threat of force, which run counter
to the principles and provisions of the United Nations
Charter concerning the non-interference in the internal
affairs of States and respect for national sovereignty.
Governments, which bear the primary responsibility
for ensuring the security of their citizens, must
themselves identify the challenges that, under each
country’s specific national conditions, create obstacles
to survival or to ensuring their peoples’ well-being
and dignity. The role of the international community
is to provide Governments, at their request and with
their consent, the assistance necessary in building their
capacity to overcome those challenges.
Mr. Escalona Ojeda (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to take
this opportunity to thank the facilitators of resolution
66/290, Ambassador Jun Yamazaki of Japan and
Counsellor Mohammed Ali Al Nsour of Jordan, for their
tireless efforts and the transparency they demonstrated.
In the spirit of being constructive, the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela decided to join the consensus in
the Assembly on this resolution. Nonetheless, we would
like to emphasize that, although we have made progress
towards a common understanding of the concept of
human security, we must continue to work together on
the process of defining that concept, its scope and its
implementation within the United Nations system. We
will always be ready to participate in a totally open and
and collaborative fashion in that process.
My delegation took an active part in the negotiations
on this resolution, presenting its view of the concept
of human security clearly and transparently. For the

5

A/66/PV.127

Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, that concept can in no
way challenge State security; in that sense, the concept
of human security is subordinate to State security. State
security is the cornerstone of the Charter of the United
Nations. The chief concern of those who drafted the
Charter was to put an end to acts of aggression between
States. A system was therefore established that would
safeguard the security of States, embodied in the
principles of sovereign equality, territorial integrity,
political independence and non-interference in States’
internal affairs.
In that regard, it should not be the role of human
security to weaken States’ security or endanger the
system of international relations that governs relations
between nations. On the contrary, the role of the
concept of human security should aim to complement
the role of State security. By emphasizing development,
human security can become a national policy capable
of promoting human well-being. The State continues
to be the entity best able to ensure the security and
the greatest happiness of its citizens and of people
throughout the world. For that it will rely on the backing
of the concept of human security.
Ms. Nemroff (United States of America): The
United States values the concept of human security as an
important innovation in our thinking about the purposes
and principles of the United Nations. It encourages us
to think about the interconnected nature of security in
the twenty-first century, and insists that we keep high
on our agenda consideration of the vulnerability and
insecurity that plague too many individuals around the
world, whether from extreme poverty, disease, natural
disaster, oppression or conflict. Those are important
values. We express our appreciation to the delegations
of Japan, Jordan and others, which have led efforts to
elaborate the concept.
In the context of the United Nations, human
security has been a sensitive issue. There is a wide
array of views on what human security is and is not,
and a shared definition or understanding has been
elusive. Indeed, from the concept’s very beginnings
there has been a tension between the ideas of freedom
from want and freedom from fear. In our view, both
of those are important to a holistic understanding of
human security. While we appreciate the efforts that
have led to the adoption of resolution 66/290 today, the
United States wishes to explain its position on three of
its elements.

6

First, we believe the text does not sufficiently
capture the diversity of views on human security and,
in particular, gives insufficient weight to the very
real human insecurity and fear that arise from such
threats as human rights abuses, discrimination and
conflict. Secondly, with reference to paragraph 3 (d),
while we agree that the concept of human security
is distinct from the responsibility to protect and its
implementation, we do not see that the reference to
the responsibility to protect is necessary or helpful in
advancing either human security or the responsibility
to protect. Thirdly, with regard to paragraph 3 (h), the
United States has strong reservations about the use of
selective references to the purposes and principles of
the United Nations Charter. The Charter is a prescient,
sophisticated and balanced document. It affirms the
centrality of human rights and fundamental freedoms
alongside other essential purposes and principles of the
United Nations. The United States firmly opposes the
selective treatment of Charter principles, which only
serves to diminish the true value of the Charter as a
whole.
Mr. Sun Xiaobo (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would like to emphasize the following three points with
regard to the issue of human security.
First, the concept of human security originated with
United Nations Development Programme reports on
development. Human security is in essence an issue of
development. Helping developing countries to emerge
from poverty as quickly as possible, achieve sustainable
economic and social development and implement the
Millennium Development Goals should be a priority
and the central aim of a human security policy.
Secondly, Governments have the primary
responsibility for ensuring the survival, development,
dignity and security of their peoples. Human security
must be based on the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter, namely, respect for national
sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity, non-interference in internal affairs and other
basic principles of international relations. The pursuit
of human security should not lead to the use of coercive
measures, and even less should it be used as an excuse
for carrying out humanitarian intervention.
Thirdly, Member States still have different
interpretations of the definition and the concept of
human security. It is necessary to continue the in-

12-50131

A/66/PV.127

depth examination of its content and extension so as to
achieve a clear and widely accepted definition.

agreed development goals, including the Millennium
Development Goals.

China hopes that the General Assembly will
continue its examination of the notion of human
security.

Egypt reaffirms that future discussions in
consideration of the notion of human security must
be only within the General Assembly. They should be
in accordance with the aforementioned parameters,
referenced in the current resolution, including
deliberations on the modalities of its application within
the United Nations system, thus enabling the general
membership to ensure its good use for the benefit of all
Member States.

Mr. Selim (Egypt): The adoption by consensus of
resolution 66/290, entitled “Follow-up to paragraph
143 on human security of the 2005 World Summit
Outcome”, as the first substantive resolution on the
notion of human security only reflects the level of
maturity that the discussions within the General
Assembly have reached on the notion since 2005.
Egypt was pleased to join the consensus, which
enabled the general membership to lay down one of
the foundations guiding future discussions of the
notion by the Assembly. In that regard, we extend our
appreciation of the skilful handling of the negotiation
process by Japan and Jordan and for ensuring that the
principles of transparency and objectivity are observed.
We also appreciate the constructive engagement of
most delegations in the negotiation process.
Although, as of yet, we have not developed a
clear definition of the notion of human security, the
parameters of the common understanding reached in
the current resolution set the framework for the general
membership to continue its consideration of the notion
within the following criteria. First, in particular, it is
distinct from the concept of the responsibility to protect
and thus does not entail the threat or use of force or
coercive measures. Secondly, that it does not replace
or undermine the principle of State security. Thirdly,
while it seeks to promote the right of people to live in
freedom and dignity free from poverty and despair, it
should fully respect the principle that Governments
retain the primary role and responsibility for ensuring
the survival, livelihood and dignity of their citizens.
Its implementation should be in full accordance with
the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations, namely, the sovereignty of
Member States, respect for their territorial integrity
and non-interference in their domestic affairs.
For Egypt, the central goal of human security is
to support the pillar of development — an aspect that
we recognize has been stressed in resolution 66/290.
We will strive to work towards achieving that. In that
regard, the advancement of human security should
contribute significantly to achieving the goals of
sustainable development, as well as internationally

12-50131

The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
European Union.
Mr. Vrailas (European Union): I will deliver this
explanation of position on behalf of the European Union
and its member States.
First, let me thank the facilitators, Ambassador Jun
Yamazaki of Japan and Counsellor Mohammad Ali
Al Nsour of Jordan, for their commendable leadership
and tireless efforts throughout this process, which has
successfully produced the first substantive resolution
of the General Assembly on human security (resolution
66/290). As the General Assembly has proceeded to the
adoption of the resolution, allow me to share a number
of considerations.
At the outset, I would like to reaffirm that the
European Union remains committed to promoting
and will continue to support human security as
a comprehensive, integrated, people-centred and
prevention-oriented approach to address interrelated
threats to the security, livelihood and dignity of people
and vulnerable communities. As such, it remains
also one of the priorities of the European Union at
the upcoming sixty-seventh session of the General
Assembly.
The European Union has actively engaged in the
General Assembly with a view to reaching an agreement
on the resolution. We acknowledge that significant
progress has been made in advancing human security
since the adoption of resolution 64/291 in 2010. The
reports of the Secretary-General and General Assembly
debates, as well as intergovernmental negotiations, have
contributed to that progress. The resolution adopted
today is the overall positive outcome of our collective
efforts. However, ultimately, what matters most is the

7

A/66/PV.127

work at the field level and its impact on people’s lives
and livelihoods. If we are to achieve further progress,
future intergovernmental deliberations at the United
Nations should be guided by such field work, ongoing
projects and their lessons, and best practices.
The elements of the common understanding
contained in the resolution are useful to elucidate
the boundaries of the human security concept and to
avoid possible interferences with other approaches.
The European Union and its member States continue
to believe that reaching a common understanding on
human security is not an end in itself but a means of
advancing implementation of human security in United
Nations activities at the field level in a coherent and
non-duplicative manner.
Throughout the process that led to the adoption of
the resolution, we have reiterated the basic principle
of interdependence and mutual reinforcement of the
three pillars of the United Nations. The report of the
Secretary-General (A/66/763) rightly recalled that
human security is precisely about linking the three
pillars through the protection and empowerment of the
individual. We therefore very much welcome the human
rights references in the text, the explicit mentioning
of the interlinkages between peace, development and
human rights in the preamble and paragraph 3 (c) and
the references to empowerment and people-centred
responses.
Such elements are central to human security, and
we will continue to strongly underline the equal status
and interdependence of those three pillars. We will
not enjoy development without peace and security or
without development; we will not enjoy either without
respect for human rights.
With reference to paragraph 3 (e), we underline
that coercive measures must remain part of the toolbox
available to the United Nations and other international
and regional organizations, as well as individual
States, in order to ensure that States comply with
their obligations under international human rights and
humanitarian law. That is important to the European
Union as sanctions are an instrument of our foreign
policy. In that context, we reaffirm the primary
responsibility of States to fulfil their obligations under
international human rights and humanitarian law.
As stated in paragraph 3 (h), human security must
be implemented with full respect for all the purposes
and principles enshrined in the United Nations Charter.

8

The European Union and its member States fully
support that view, while strongly opposing any selective
approach that singles out only some of the purposes
and principles of the United Nations Charter and
omits others that are equally relevant and important.
Selective quotation of the Charter can potentially
undermine the core principles of the United Nations
and negatively affect our work at the Organization.
Promoting and encouraging respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms for all is central to human
security. Furthermore, Article 2 of the Charter is
absolutely clear on the principles that should guide the
United Nations and its members in the pursuit of the
Organization’s objectives.
Respect for all human rights and the rule of law
must remain at the core of any application of the
human security approach. Human rights should be
mainstreamed and integrated into all aspects of the
work of the United Nations, and human security should
not be an exception. Promoting the rights of those in
vulnerable situations is a key concern, including with
respect to their representation in decision-making, as
well as ensuring them better access to justice, services,
work and social opportunities. These are issues that
need our full attention, and the human security approach
should enhance our ability to work even harder to reach
these goals.
The EU will continue to support a pragmatic and
action-oriented approach, focusing on working in areas
where human security can bring added value in terms
of the protection and empowerment of individuals.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
items 14 and 117.
Agenda item 117 (continued)
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium
Summit
Specific meeting focused on development
The President: The General Assembly will resume
its consideration of agenda item 117 to hold a specific
meeting focused on development, in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 60/265, of 30 June 2006.
Members will recall that the General Assembly held
a debate on agenda item 117 jointly with agenda item
14, sub-item (a) of agenda item 123 and agenda item
124, on 2 December 2011. Members will also recall that

12-50131

A/66/PV.127

under agenda item 117, the Assembly adopted resolution
66/2 at its 3rd plenary meeting, on 19 September 2011.
I am pleased to welcome all participants to this
development dialogue of the sixty-sixth session of the
General Assembly. The General Assembly development
dialogue was established as a specific meeting focused
on development aimed at assessing the progress
being made in the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs).
This year’s theme is “Macroeconomic policies for
the future we want: sustainable development and the
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals”.
The objective is to examine how macroeconomic
policymaking affects the achievement of the MDGs
and how it can accelerate progress in transitioning to a
more sustainable development paradigm.
Just this past June, I was in Rio de Janeiro
and witnessed the adoption by world leaders of the
outcome document of the United Nations Conference
on Sustainable Development (Rio+20) Summit. The
document, entitled “The future we want”, has the goal
of defining pathways to a safer, more equitable, cleaner,
greener and more prosperous world for all. Achieving
those objectives requires the balanced integration of
the three pillars of sustainable development, namely,
economic development, social development and
environmental protection.
The Rio+20 outcome document, endorsed by the
General Assembly in its resolution 66/288, provides a
solid foundation for advancing social, economic and
environmental well-being. It also calls for a wide range
of actions, including the establishment of a process to
develop and fully define global sustainable development
goals to be agreed by the General Assembly.
The outcome document also recognized the
importance of adopting forward-looking macroeconomic
policies that promote sustainable development and lead
to sustained, inclusive and equitable economic growth.
In addition, such policies should increase productive
employment opportunities and promote agricultural
and industrial development.
The recent global economic downturn has severely
disrupted economic growth worldwide and caused
significant setbacks in the progress being made
towards achieving the MDGs. The global financial
and economic crisis has now turned into a jobs crisis,
with millions of men and women — especially young

12-50131

people — becoming unemployed or underemployed.
An increasing number of families and individuals are
struggling to sustain their livelihoods. Many others
have to cope with a reduced income and high and
volatile food and energy prices.
Current macroeconomic governance and policies
have proved less than adequate in containing the risks
emanating from the current fragile global economy.
There is a growing recognition of the fact that
macroeconomic policymaking needs to be revisited and
reshaped to better achieve macroeconomic stability and
sustainable development.
However, there is always a cure for every scourge.
I have full confidence in the ability of the international
community to overcome the problems posed by this
difficult and challenging time by providing the necessary
collective response. Particular focus is being placed on
how macroeconomic policymaking can be reshaped to
achieve stability, create employment and decent work,
and promote productive capacities, including in the
green economy. That revision is crucial for reducing
poverty, advancing social equity, achieving the MDGs
and thereby advancing sustainable development.
It will therefore be important to give full
consideration to an effective integration of
macroeconomic policy-making into the post-2015
development agenda. Today’s dialogue will help us to
build on the outcomes of the Rio+20 summit. It provides
an excellent opportunity to deepen our understanding
of the interlinkages between macroeconomic policies,
sustainable development and the achievement of the
MDGs. The deliberations of the General Assembly will
feed into the work of both the Open Working Group
on Sustainable Development Goals and the High-level
Panel on the Global Development Agenda beyond 2015.
Regarding the Open Working Group on Sustainable
Development Goals, allow me to recall that I have
designated Her Excellency Ambassador Maria Luiza
Viotti, Permanent Representative of Brazil, to serve
as facilitator on my behalf in the establishment of this
process. I reiterate my call to all participants to extend
their cooperation and support to her, particularly by
exercising flexibility and a spirit of compromise.
This development dialogue is a timely conclusion
to the efforts made under my presidency in the field
of sustainable development and global prosperity, one
of the four key pillars I chose for our focus during the
sixty-sixth session of the General Assembly.

9

A/66/PV.127

Over the past year, we have had several opportunities
to address the anxieties of peoples worldwide on the
critical issues of jobs, food security, and how to secure
a better future for our children and their children. It is
in that context that, among other initiatives, I convened
the high-level thematic debate on the state of the
world economy and the high-level thematic debate on
excessive fluctuation of commodities prices. I would
like to take this opportunity to thank delegations,
the Secretary-General and all my partners for their
cooperation and support towards the success of those
meetings.
The United Nations exists for these noble
objectives — to coordinate international efforts to serve
the best interests of people worldwide. I am therefore
glad that our dialogue here today is being held in the
same spirit to find the means to invest in the future we
want. I look forward to members’ active participation,
creative ideas and concrete recommendations to
effectively address this challenging theme.
To help steer our deliberations here today, we are
fortunate to count on the assistance and expertise of
two accomplished experts. The Secretary-General’s
Senior Adviser on Economic Development and
Finance, Ms. Shamshad Akhtar, will act as moderator
of the interactive session. Ms. Nancy Birdsall, our
guest lecturer, is founder and President of the Center
for Global Development, a prestigious thinktank based
in Washington, D.C. To both of them I would like to
express my appreciation for accepting my invitation to
participate. I wish us all successful deliberations.
I now give the floor to the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, His Excellency Mr. Jan Eliasson.
The Deputy Secretary-General: I thank you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to address this
session of the development dialogue on behalf of the
Secretary-General, who is today in Geneva. It is a
particular privilege and pleasure for me to again be in
the Hall and to speak from the podium.
Economic policy has been front page news since
the outbreak of the global financial crisis in 2008, as
we all know. We should expect those issues to stay in
the headlines for some time. Many countries continue
to face deep-rooted economic problems that seriously
affect vulnerable segments of their populations.
I am gratified that those issues are being scrutinized
by experts, the media and the public. There is a
great deal of healthy debate, while policymakers are
10

struggling to come up with appropriate and effective
approaches to economic problems with tangible social
and environmental ramifications.
The debate has been hovering between two choices.
The first is to provide more fiscal stimulus to get back
on the growth track, unclog credit channels and take
measures to bring down unemployment. The second
choice is to shift into fiscal austerity to reduce public
debts to more sustainable levels.
The decisions facing policymakers in developing
countries are particularly difficult to make. Commodity
and financial markets are volatile. Policymakers may
need to create fiscal and monetary reserve buffers to
cope with the external shocks. But they know that those
precautionary steps can also impact their capacity to
invest in development.
The choices they make today are not theoretical;
they will have effects on whole societies, on families
and especially the poor. Women and youth are
particularly vulnerable. That is why we should
welcome the intention of the President of the General
Assembly and the development dialogue to establish a
clear connection between macroeconomic policies and
the fundamental objective of achieving the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs).
One of the most important tasks for the United
Nations and its Member States and, in fact, all other
stakeholders during the next three years and four months
is to work tirelessly for the achievement of the MDGs.
That is our duty and responsibility. Macroeconomic
policies of today should facilitate that task. Achieving
the MDGs by 2015 is part of the future we want and that
the people of the world deserve.
We then later face the daunting task of formulating
a bold, yet practical, development agenda for the
post-2015 period that embraces economic, social
and environmental perspectives. I note that the
President referred both to the Open Working Group
on the Sustainable Development Goals, set up in Rio
de Janeiro, and the High-level Panel on the Global
Development Agenda beyond 2015, which is starting its
work in September.
We must not lose sight of that broad and long-term
perspective. The conventional approach to economic
development in recent decades focused on low inflation
and balanced budgets as the best ways to stabilize
economies in the short run and ensure growth in the
long term. Those policies did not make full employment
12-50131

A/66/PV.127

an explicit target. It was almost as if macroeconomic
policies were not part of the work for daily sustenance
and poverty reduction. In reality, as the President just
underlined, those policies can spell the difference
between stability and crisis, between prosperity and
poverty, and even between life and death.
The United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development recognized the importance of those
interlinkages, not least the need for creating jobs.
Participants supported forward-looking macroeconomic
policies that promote sustainable development. The aim
was nothing less than sustained, inclusive and equitable
economic growth. That is and must be the way forward in
order to increase productive employment opportunities
and promote development. That means that we have to
allocate more resources to the key sectors: employment,
education and health. That would reduce poverty and
open doors to a better future for coming generations. At
the same time, it would contribute to economic stability
and long-term growth.
We also have to invest in protecting the environment,
our common future. If the environment is degraded,
crops may fail, food prices may go up and natural
disasters may become more frequent and more deadly,
as we have noticed recently. The economic, social
and, indeed, political implications of environmental
degradation and climate change are serious and farreaching.
As participants begin this dialogue, I urge them to
have a broad and forward-looking vision. Short-term
gain should never occur at the expense of long-term
progress.
Professor Jan Tinbergen, the first Nobel Prize
laureate in economics and the first chair of the United
Nations Committee for Development Policy, formulated
an important rule for economic policymaking. He stated
that we should always have as many policy instruments
as we have policy targets. That means that we need
more instruments as we add more targets. The way to
do that is to integrate economic policy decisions with
social, environmental and industrial and labour market
policies.
Before I was appointed as Deputy SecretaryGeneral, I was in fact a part-time blogger. I wrote about
the issues participants are discussing today — poverty,
hunger and, very often, the lack of clean water and
acceptable sanitation facilities. My audience was made
up of policymakers, but also concerned citizens. I tried

12-50131

to bring the plight of individuals, which I had seen far
too much of, to a broader public.
Although today’s discussion is mainly among
experts, I urge participants to remember the men,
women and children whose lives are affected by their
deliberations and decisions. Let us focus on how we can
reach them and help them. In the end, all our efforts
should be aimed at well-being and a life in dignity for
all.
I wish participants a meaningful, creative and
productive development dialogue.
The President: I thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral for his statement.
I now give the floor to the representaive of Mexico,
who will speak in his capacity as Vice-President of the
Economic and Social Council.
Mr. De Alba (Mexico), Vice-President of the
Economic and Social Council (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to recall, at the start of this dialogue, that almost
four years ago the global financial system was on the
brink of collapse. A new great recession similar to the
one that occurred in the 1930s seemed inevitable. In
order to avert the risk of systemic collapse, there was
a need for an unprecedented degree of international
cooperation and for bold and united decision-making
by our political leaders. Despite progress and signs of
recovery, in various parts of the world recovery still
seems distant, owing to the slow pace of the return to
global economic growth together with the persistent
level of trade protectionism, which has worsened in
many markets.
That scenario of economic uncertainty no doubt
jeopardizes the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals, targets that represent a very
important multilateral consensus to achieve sustainable
human development. The consequences of the global
environmental, food, economic and financial crises
have had a negative impact on global development, the
result of which has been weaker trade, more stringent
terms of financing throughout the world and an
increase in poverty, hunger and unemployment, which
has, in turn, given rise to social tensions in various
parts of the world and has endangered environmental
ecosystems. Achieving the Millennium Development
Goals therefore also depends on the world’s economic
recovery and on support for, and the implementation
of, international development commitments on the

11

A/66/PV.127

part of advanced economies in favour of developing
economies. That was clearly shown in the 2012 World
Economic Situation and Prospects report, which was
broadly analysed during this years’ substantive session
of the Economic and Social Council.
Similarly, in coming here today, we see that it
is increasingly evident that we need concerted and
determined actions leading to a macroeconomic policy
framework for sustained and inclusive development,
one that creates quality jobs. It is essential to change
the direction of fiscal policies, replacing the short-term
consolidation approach with one of long-term growth
in order to achieve sustainable public finances. Global
economic policies need to be redesigned in order to
strengthen their impact on job creation, by transitioning
from primarily stimulating demand to promoting
structural change with a view to sustained growth.
As a result of the Rio+20 International Conference
and its precursors, we have been able to reaffirm the
validity of sustainable development as a paradigm of
development. We also agreed in Rio to start a process
to develop sustainable development goals and establish
a process which allows us to develop a sustainable
development financing strategy. That strategy will
be aimed at mobilizing resources and strengthening
global efforts to fight poverty and address problems
relating to seas and oceans, food security, water,
energy, biodiversity, forests, desertification, urban
development and sustainable transport.

to address those issues, but also — I would like to
emphasize — the need to complement the efforts under
way, in particular those that were mentioned by both the
President of the General Assembly and by the Deputy
Secretary-General, in order to achieve a redefinition
of the post-2015 development agenda. Such an agenda
should include a new version of the development goals,
incorporate the sustainable development goals and does
not leave aside the efforts that we still have to make to
achieve the goals established in the year 2000, which,
as the Deputy Secretary-General aptly stressed, deserve
all of our attention in the next three years.
In sum, with an overall vision of the actions
that should be promoted, we should move towards a
more sustainable development model that effectively
integrates its three pillars. That is the major challenge
before the United Nations. It is the major challenge for
the Assembly and the Economic and Social Council,
namely, to integrate those three pillars in a balanced
manner and to renew the global financial and economic
architecture.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 117. The informal plenary meeting on the topic
“Macroeconomic policies for the future we want:
sustainable development and the achievement of
the Millennium Development Goals”, will be held
immediately following the adjournment of this meeting.
The meeting rose at 11.35 a.m.

The development dialogue organized by the
General Assembly today provides us an opportunity

12

12-50131
