VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

l. Commends the Special Representative of the Commission on Human Rights for his interim report on the situation of human rights in El Salvador;
2. Expresses its deepest concern at the fact that, as indicated in the report of the Special Representative, the gravest violations ofhuman rights are persisting in El Salvador
and that, as a result, the sufferings of the Salvadorian people are continuing, and regrets that the appeals for the cessation ofthe acts ofviolence made by the General Assembly, the Commission on Human Rights and the
international community as a whole have not been
heeded;
3. Again draws the attention of the Salvadorian parties
concerned to the fact that the rules of international law, as
contained in article 3 common to the Geneva Conventions
of 12 August 1949 121 and Additional Protocols I and 11
thereto, 122 are applicable to armed conflicts not of an
international character, such as that in El Salvador, and
requests all parties to apply a mínimum standard of protection of human rights and of humane treatment of the
civilian population;
4. Takes note of resolution l 983/18 of 5 September
1983 of the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, 123 in which the SubCommission suggested that the Special Representative
give attention in his report to respect for or violation of
humanitarian law in armed conflict;
5. Recommends that the reforms necessary for the
solution of the economic and social problems which are at
the root of the interna! conflict in El Salvador should be
put into effect so as to allow the effective exercise of civil
and political rights in that country, and reaffirms the right
of the Salvadorian people freely to determine their political, economic and social future without interference from
outside and in an atmosphere free from intimidation and
terror;
6. Cal/s upon the Government of El Salvador and
other political forces to intensify their talks and to work
towards the creation of suitable conditions in the common
search for a negotiated comprehensive political solution
which will put an end to the interna! armed conflict and
establish a Iasting peace which will allow the full exercise
both of civil and political rights and of economic, social
and cultural rights by ali Salvadorians;
7. Once again urges ali Sta tes to abstain from intervening in the interna) situation in El Salvador and to suspend
all supplies of arms and any type of military assistance, so
as to allow the restoration of peace and security and the
establishment of a democratic system based on full respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms;
8. Expresses its deep concern at reports which prove
that government forces regularly resort to bombarding
urban areas in El Salvador that are not military objectives,
and its concern for the fate of severa! hundred thousand
displaced persons who are currently located in camps in
which they are subjected to abuse and in which not even
the minimum conditions of internment, in terms of either
humane treatment or material needs, are observed;
9. A/so expresses its deep concern at the resurgence of
disappearances and murders of persons belonging to various sectors of the civilian population, for which the socalled "death squads" claim responsibility, and urges that
these activities be investigated with a view to punishing
those responsible;
1O. Expresses its concern at the consequences of the
damage done to the economy of El Salvador as a result of
121 United Nations, Treatv Series, vol. 75. Nos. 970-973.
122 N32/144, annexes I a·nd 11.

205

the attacks on the economic infrastructure attributable for
the most part, according to the report of the Special
Representative, to the opposition forces;
l l. Reiterates its urgent appeal to the Government of
El Salvador to fulfil its obligations towards its citizens and
to assume its international responsibilities in this regard
by taking the necessary steps to ensure that ali its agencies,
including its security forces and other armed organizations
operating under its authority, fully respect human rights
and fundamental freedoms;
12. Urges the competent authorities of El Salvador to
establish the necessary conditions to enable the judiciary
to uphold the rule of law, prosecuting and punishing
speedily and effectively those responsiblc for the grave violations of human rights which are being committed in that
country:
13. Reiterates its appeal to all Salvadorian parties in
the conflict to co-operate fully and not to interfere with the
activities of humanitarian organizations dedicated to alleviating the suffering of the civilian population, wherever
these organizations operate in the country;
14. Deplores the violent death of Marianela García
Villas, President of the Commission of Human Rights of
El Salvador, and, given the contradictory reports on the
matter, requests the Special Representative of the Commission on Human Rights to investigate the circumstances
of her death;
15. Renews its appeal to the Government of El Salvador, as well as ali other parties concerned, to continue to
co-operate with the Special Representative of the C'ommission on Human Rights:
16. Decides to keep under consideration, during its
thirty-ninth session, the situation ofhuman rights and fundamental freedoms in El Salvador, in order to examine
this situation anew in the light of additional elements provided by the Commission on Human Rights and the Economic and Social Council.
100th plenary meeting
16 December 1983

38/102.

Situation of human rights and fundamental
freedoms in Chile

The General Assembly,
Aware of its responsibility to promote and encourage
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for ali
and determined to remain vigilant with regard to violations of human rights wherever they occur,
Stressingthe obligation ofGovernments to promote and
protect human rights and to carry out the responsibilities
they have undertaken by virtue of various international
instruments,
Recal/ing its resolutions 3219 (XXIX) of 6 November
1974, 3448 (XXX) of 9 December 1975, 31/124 of 16
December 1976, 32/118 of 16 December 1977, 33/175 of
20 December 1978, 34/179 of 17 December l 979, 35/188
of 15 December 1980, 36/ 157 of 16 December 1981 and
37/183 of 17 December 1982, relating to the situation of
human rights in Chile. as well as its resolution 33/173 of
20 December l 978 on disappeared persons.
Recal/ing a/so the resolutions of the Commission on
Human Rights on the situation of human rights in Chile,
in particular resolution 1983/38 of 8 March 1983, 119 in
which the Commission decided. inter afia, to extend for a
123 See E/CN.4/1984/3-E CN.4/Sub.2/1983/43 and Corr. 1 and 2. cha p.
XXL sert. A.

206

General Assembly- Thirty-eighth Session
- --

year the mandate of the Special Rapportcur on the situation of human rights in Chile.
Dep/oring once 11gai11 the fact that the rcpeated appcals
of the General Asscmbly. the Commission on Human
Rights and othcr international organs to re-cstablish
human rights and fundamental freedoms havc heen
ignored by thc Chilcan authorities, which continuc to
refuse to co-operate with thc Commission on Human
Rights and its Spccial Rapporteur.
1:·xpressing ils ¡m~found cunccrn that. according to the
conclusions of thc Special Rapporteur, the performance or
the Chilean authorities with regard to the situation of
human rights has been negative in general and that they
have not been responsive to the concerns of the international community expresscd in resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Commission on Human Rights.
Observing that the Chilcan authorities have permitted a
limited number or nationals to return to thc country. but
noting that the rneasures taken to that effect have bcen
arbitrary and restrictivc.
l. Commends the Special Rapporteur on the situation
of human rights in Chile for his report. 124 prepared in
accordance with <·ommission on Human Rights resolution
1983/38;
2. Reitera/es its grave conccrn at the persistence of and
increase in serious and systcmatic violations of human
rights in Chile. as described in thc report of the Special
Rapporteur;
3. Expresses once again its conccm at thc disruption of
the traditional dcmocratic legal ordcr and its institutions
by the maintenance of exceptional legislation, the institutionalization of various states of emergency and the existence of a Constitution in Chile which does not reflect a
freely expressed popular will and the provisions of which
not only fail to guarantee the enjoyment of human rights
and fundamental freedoms hut also suppress, suspcnd or
restrict thc exercise of those rights and frecdoms;
4. A/so reiterares its gral"c conCi'rn at the inefficacy of
reeourse to habeas corp111 or amparo and of protertion in
view of the fact that the judiciary in Chile does not exercise its powers fully in this respect and carries out its functions under severe restrictions;
5. Once again rcqucs/1 the Chilean authorities to
respect and promote human rights in compliance with the
obligations they have assumcd under various international
instruments and. in particular. to cnd the régime of exception and especially the practice of dcclaring states of emergency, under which serious and continuing violations of
human rights are committcd, and to restore the principie
of legality, democratic institutions and the effective enjoyment and exercise of civil and political rights and fundamental freedoms without any discrimination:
6. Once more urges the Chilean authorities to investigate and clarify the fate of persons who have disappearcd
for political reasons, to inform their families of the results
of such investigation and to bring to trial and punish those
responsible for these disappearances;
7. Reiterares its appea/ to the Chilcan authorities to pul
an end to intimidation and persecution. as well as arbitrary detentions and imprisonment in sccret places and the
practice of torture and other forms of cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatmcnt which havc rcsulted in unexplained
deaths, and to re,p\'ct the right of persons to life and physical integrity:
124 See A/38138_, ""<l Ad<l. 1
1 2 5 Sec O/hcia/ Rn·1wd\ i f //¡c h 11110,n/(· a,u/ .\'ocwl (·,·un, 1/ . .\1, 11· W'(o11d
1 \ chap '\ '<l. ,f'Cl ll
Session. Suii11/c111{'111
1, ¡r· ,,,:

-

--

-~--------

-···---

------- ------ ----

8. Expresses its concern at the violent suppression of
the ever larger and more widespread popular protests in
!he facc of the incapacity of the authorities to restore
human rights and fundamental freedoms, as reported by
the Special Rapporteur. which have resulted in serious, flagran! and systematir violation of human rights, including
mass detcntions and numerous deaths:
9. Once again urges the Chilean authorities to respect
the right of Chileans to Iive in and freely enter and leave
lheir country. without restrictions or conditions. and to
cease thc practice of "relegation" (assignment of forced
,rsidence) and forced cxile;
1O. Renflrs its appeal to the Chilean authorities to
restore the full enjoyment and exercise of trade union
rights. in particular the right to organize trade unions, the
right to collectivc bargaining and the right to strike;
11. Once more urges the Chilean authorities to protect
and restore the economic. social and cultural rights of the
population and. in particular, to respect the rights
mtended to preserve the cultural identity and improve the
social status of the indigcnous population;
12. Conc/udes. on the basis of the report of the Special
Rapporteur, that it is necessary to keep under consideration the situation of human rights in Chile;
13_ Ca/Is again upon the Chilean authorities to coopcratc with the Special Rapporteur and to submit their
commcnts on his report to the Commission on Human
Rights at its fortieth session;
14. Invites the Commission on Human Rights to study
in depth the report of the Special Rapporteur at its fortieth
session and to take the most appropriate steps for the effecti vc restoration of human rights and fundamental freedoms in Chile, including the extension of the mandate of
thc Special Rapporteur for one more year. and requests the
Commission to report. through the Economic and Social
Council. to thc <irncral Assembly at its thirty-ninth ses,Hm_

/O0th p/enary meeting
16 December 1983

38/103.

Human rights and mass exoduses

!he General Asscmhly,
.\1indJúl of its general humanitarian mandate under the
Charter ofthe United Nations and its mandate to promote
and cncourage respert for human rights and fundamental
frcedoms for all.
Decp/_r disturhcd by the continuing scale and magnitude
of exoduscs and displacements of populations in many
rcgions of the world and by the human suffering of millions of refugees and displaced persons in ali regions of the
world.
Conscwus that human rights violations are among the
principal factors in the complex and multiple causes of
mass cxoduses of population.
Deeply preoccupied by the increasingly heavy burden
being imposed, particularly upon developing countries
with limited resources of their own. and upon the intemational communit) as a whole, by these sudden and mass
exoduses and displacements of population,
Recalling its resolution 32/130 of 16 December I 977
and Commission on Human Rights resolution 4 (XXXIII)
of 21 February 1977 i,; on thc full realization of economir. social and rnltural rights.
