144

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

3. Requests the Secretary-General to elaborate,
in consultation with Member States, the specialized
agencies and organizations concerned, and to submit
to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session,
through the Economic and Social Council, a draft
programme for the World Assembly on the Elderly
and to make recommendations on the organization
and objectives of the World Assembly;
4. Recommends that Member States, in formulating their comments on the draft programme, should
include, inter alia, attention to categorizing and analysing the problems of elderly persons in their societies;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda
of its thirty-fifth session the item entitled "Problems of
the elderly and the aged", under which the report of
the Secretary-General on the World Assembly on the
Elderly would be considered.
84th plenary meeting
14 December 1978
33/53.

Human rights and scientifie and technological developments

The General Assembly,
Recalling Commission on Human Rights resolution 10 A (XXXIII) of 11 March 1977, 40 in which
the Commission requested the Sub-Commission on
Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities to study the question of the protection of those
detained on the grounds of mental ill-health with a
view to formulating guidelines, if possible, and to
submit to the Commission a progress report on this
study,
Requests the Commission on Human Rights to urge
that the study of the question of the protection of those
detained on the grounds of mental ill-health be undertaken as a matter of priority by the Sub-Commission
on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of
Minorities, and to submit a progress report on this
question to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth
session.
84th plenary meeting
14 December 1978
33/54.

Review and co-ordination of human
rights programmes of organizations in
the United Nations system and eo-operation with other international programmes
in the field of human rights

The General Assembly,
Conscious of its responsibilities under Article 13 of
the Charter of the United Nations to initiate studies
and make recommendations for the purpose of promoting international co-operation in the economic,
social, cultural, educational and health fields, and assisting in the realization of human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race,
sex, language or religion,
Having in mind the responsibility of the General
Assembly for the discharge of the functions set forth
4 0 See Official Records of the Ecunumic and Social Council,
Sixty-second Session, Suppleme11t No. 6 (E/5927), chap. XXT,
sect. A.

in Chapter IX of the Charter and the particular role
of the Economic and Social Council under Chapter X
in co-ordinating activities in the field of human rights,

Taking into account the annual reports of the Human Rights Committee and the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination, in addition to
reports of the Economic and Social Council, including
those of the Commission on Human Rights, which
provide a broader basis for consideration of human
rights activities of the United Nations,
Recognizing that some of the specialized agencies,
especially the International Labour Organisation, the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization and the World Health Organization, have
developed procedures and programmes for the promotion of human rights within their fields of competence,
and that the work of these agencies significantly complements the work done by the United Nations human
rights organs,
Noting the existence of other human rights organs
and programmes which function under separate constitutional instruments of intergovernmental organizations and have compiled significant records of human
rights actions within their areas of jurisdiction,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1159 (XLI) of 5 August 1966, by which formal relations between regional organizations and the Commission on Human Rights were authorized,
Recalling that, in its resolution 32/ 130 of 16 December 1977, it reaffirmed that all human rights and
fundamental freedoms are indivisible and interdependent, and that equal attention and urgent consideration should be given to the implementation, promotion
and protection of both civil and political, and economic, social and cultural rights,
Considering that the interdependence and indivisibility of human rights and fundamental freedoms demand renewed efforts to stimulate greater co-operation,
co-ordination and communication among all the intergovernmental agencies and institutions involved in
protecting and promoting human rights and fundamental freedoms,
1. Requests the Commission on Human Rights,
in the context of the over-all analysis it has undertaken in response to General Assembly resolution 32/
J 30 and in accordance with Commission resolution 26
(XXXIV) of 8 March J 978, 41 to consult with specialized agencies and other organs and bodies of the
United Nations system which are, according to their
mandates, concerned with the protection and promotion of human rights and fundamental freedoms and,
as appropriate, with other regional intergovernmental
bodies related to the United Nations system particularly
concerned with human rights, on the various human
rights activities and programmes and the existing
modes of co-ordination, co-operation and communication among them;
2. Further requests the Commission on Human
Rights to submit to the General Assembly at its thirtyfourth session, through the Economic and Social Council and within the report of the aforementioned over-all
analysis:
41 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
1978, Supplement No. 4 (E/1978/34), chap. XXVI, sect. A.

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(a) A study of the existing modes of co-ordination, co-operation and communication in the field of
human rights within the United Nations system;
( b) Suggestions and proposals which the Commission might deem appropriate to make in this respect.
84th plenary meeting
14 December 1978

8. Decides to continue to consider as a matter of
high priority, at its thirty-fourth session, the item entitled "Implementation of the Programme for the
Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination".
86th plenary meeting
16 December 1978
33/99.

33/98.

Implementation of the Programme for
the Decade for Action to Comhat Racism
and Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3057 (XXVIII) of 2 November 1973, to which is annexed the Programme for
the Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial
Discrimination, and 32/10 of 7 November 1977 on
the Decade,
Noting that, at the mid-term of the Programme for
the Decade, the evils of apartheid, racism and racial
discrimination, including the denial of the right to
self-determination, continue to prevail in southern
Africa and elsewhere,
Convinced that the withdrawal of foreign investments and the termination of the activities of the
transnational corporations in southern Africa will contribute significantly to achieving the goals and objectives of the Programme for the Decade,
1. Condemns once again the policies of apartheid,
racism and racial discrimination which prevail in
southern Africa and elsewhere, including the denial
of the right to self-determination;
2. Urges all States to continue to co-operate fully
with the Secretary-General in the implementation of
the Programme for the Decade for Action to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination;
3. Reaffirms its strong support for oppressed peoples struggling to liberate themselves from racism, racial discrimination, apartheid, colonialism and alien
domination;
4. Calls once again upon all the Governments
whi~h have not yet done so to take legislative, administrative or other measures in respect of their nationals
and the bodies corporate under their jurisdiction that
own and operate enterprises in southern Africa, in
order to put an end to such enterprises;
5. Urges once again United Nations organs, the
specialized agencies and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations to strengthen and enlarge
the scope of their activities in support of the objectives
of the Programme for the Decade, in particular by
taking the measures specified in paragraph 6 of General Assembly resolution 32/10;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
give the utmost publicity to the Programme for the
Decade;
7. Urges once again all Governments and private
organizations to make available adequate resources
to enable the Secretary-General to undertake the activities entrusted to him under the Programme for the
Decade and in support of the activities envisaged
during the Decade;

145

World Conference to Combat Racism ancl
Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,

I
Recalling its resolution 3057 (XXVIII) of 2 November 1973, in which it designated the ten-year period beginning on 10 December 1973 as the Decade for
Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination
and adopted the Programme for the Decade,
Recalling also its resolution 32/129 of 16 December 1977, in which it decided to convene the World
Conference to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the work of the World Conference to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination,42 held at Geneva
from 14 to 25 August 1978,
Noting that the Conference, by the adoption of the
Declaration and the Programme of Action, 43 focused
the attention of the international community on the
problems of racism, racial discrimination, decolonization, foreign domination and apartheid and provided
the international community with an opportunity to
review and evaluate the activities undertaken during
the first half of the Decade,
Stressing the importance of continuous action at all
levels to eradicate the evils of racism, racial discrimination, colonial and alien domination and apartheid,
Inspired by the spirit of the thirtieth anniversary
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
of the International Anti-Apartheid Year to redouble
the efforts of the international community to eliminate
all forms of racism and racial discrimination,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the work of the World Conference to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination;
2. Approves the Declaration and the Programme
of Action adopted by the Conference;
3. Reaffirms that all forms of racism racial discrimination and apartheid are abhorrent 'to the conscience and dignity of mankind and must be eradicated
by effective international action;
4. Further reaffirms the special responsibility of
the United Nations and the international community
for the victims of racial discrimination as well as for
peoples subjected to colonial or alien domination;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate his
r~pc_irt on the _work of the Conference to States, specialized agencies, regional intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental organizations with a
12 A/33/262.
4 ~ Report

of the World Conference to Combat Racism and
Racial Discrimination, Genn·a. 14-25 Au{?ust 1978 (United
Nations publication. Sales No. F.79.XIV.2).' chap. II.
