S/2017/1025

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
6 December 2017
Original: English

Small arms and light weapons
Report of the Secretary-General
Summary
In its resolution 2220 (2015), the Security Council requested the SecretaryGeneral to continue to submit to the Council on a biennial basis a report on the issue
of small arms and light weapons, including on the implementat ion of the resolution.
The impact of the misuse and illicit circulation of small arms continued to be of
considerable concern to the United Nations and to the broader international
community. Poorly regulated small arms are key enablers of armed conflict and a
means of sustaining it. Their easy availability and the lack of adequate control
systems facilitate a vast spectrum of human rights violations, aggravate poverty and
impede sustainable development.
The landmark 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development crucially recognizes
that only peaceful societies will achieve their desired level of sustainable
development. Adequate small arms regulation and control is an important means of
reducing armed violence, making communities better able to pursue sustain able
development.
In an effort to operationalize many of the small-arms-related recommendations
made previously to the Council, recommendations contained in previous reports
(S/2008/258, S/2011/255, S/2013/503 and S/2015/289) and suggested concrete
actions to address them are set out in annex I to the present report.
Pursuant to the request made in paragraph 28 of resolution 2220 (2015),
annex II to the present report includes best practices and arrangements that could be
used by the United Nations peacekeeping operations and other relevant Councilmandated entities to guide the implementation of their mandated tasks on the
implementation and compliance monitoring of arms embargoes and the provision of
assistance and expertise to host States, sanctions committees and expert groups.

17-20637 (E)

111217

*1720637*

S/2017/1025

I. Introduction
1.
In its resolution 2220 (2015), the Security Council requested the SecretaryGeneral to continue to submit to the Council on a biennial basis a report on the issue
of small arms and light weapons. The present report is submitted pursuant to that
request.
2.
Resolution 2220 (2015) is the second Council resolution devoted to the
thematic issue of small arms, and was adopted following the issuance of the
previous report of the Secretary-General on this subject (S/2015/289). 1
3.
The present report provides an overview of significant developments and
trends with regard to the issue of small arms and light weapons. In annex I, key
recommendations made to the Security Council on this issue in previous reports of
the Secretary-General (S/2008/258, S/2011/255, S/2013/503 and S/2015/289) are
examined and concrete actions to take them forward are suggested.
4.
Annex II contains a set of good practices and arrangements that could be used
by United Nations peacekeeping operations and other Council -mandated entities to
guide the implementation of their mandated tasks on the implementation and
compliance monitoring of arms embargoes (as mandated in paragraph 28 of
resolution 2220 (2015)).

II. Significant developments and trends
5.
The colossal negative consequences of the misuse and illicit circulation of small
arms have been indicated in previous reports of the Secretary-General on this topic.
6.
The excessive accumulation and widespread availability of these weapons
have increased the lethality and duration of violence. The international small arms
trade was worth at least $6 billion in 2014 alone, with ammunition accounting for
38 per cent of all global transfers. 2 A significant portion of direct conflict deaths are
attributable to the use of small arms, and nearly half of all violent deaths between
2010 and 2015 were caused by firearms. 3 Significantly, the rate of firearms-related
homicides in post-conflict societies is frequently higher than that of battlefield
deaths. These weapons are also the dominant tools of criminal violence in ostensibly
non-conflict societies.
7.
Small arms continued to facilitate a vast spectrum of acts that constitute
human rights violations, including killing and maiming, rape and other forms of
sexual and gender-based violence, enforced disappearance, torture and the forced
recruitment of children. More human rights violations and abuses are committed
with them than with any other weapon. Small arms have frequently played a role in
the deaths of United Nations employees and peacekeepers, as well as workers from
humanitarian and non-governmental organizations.
8.
Armed violence erodes legal and peaceful dispute resolution mechanisms and
undermines the rule of law. Contemporary armed conflict is the main cause of
people fleeing their homes, and has become the most common cause of food
insecurity, as illustrated by the crises in Somalia, South Sudan and Yemen.
__________________
1

Security Council resolution 2117 (2013) was the first Council resolution devoted to this theme.
Paul Holtom and Irene Pavesi, Trade Update 2017: Out of the Shadows (Geneva, Small Arms
Survey, 2017). Available from www.smallarmssurvey.org/fileadmin/docs/S -Trade-Update/SASTrade-Update-2017.pdf.
3
Firearms were used in 32 per cent of conflict deaths in the period 2010 –2015 (see
www.smallarmssurvey.org/fileadmin/docs/H-Research_Notes/SAS-Research-Note-60.pdf).
2

2/23

17-20637

S/2017/1025

9.
Armed violence aggravates poverty, inhibits access to social services and
diverts energy and resources away from efforts to improve human development.
Armed conflict and high levels of armed violence represent a grave impediment to
economic growth. There is nothing more damaging to an investment climate as
armed insecurity. 4 Its detrimental effect on poverty and on access to social services,
development and economic growth has a profound impact on fundamental economic
and social rights. This understanding dovetails with the concept of “sustainable
peace”, as outlined in Security Council resolution 2282 (2016) and General
Assembly resolution 70/262. Sustainable peace is both an enabler and an outcome
of sustainable development.
10. Of growing concern are the increased links between transnational organized
crime, illicit small arms trafficking and terrorism, as well as the increasing use of
the Internet, including the “dark web”, and emerging technologies for illicit
trafficking and production.
11. While many challenges still exist, there have been several successes in the past
two years. These include the adoption by consensus of the outcome document of the
Sixth Biennial Meeting of States to Consider the Implementation of the Programme
of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and the International Instrument to Enable States
to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and Light
Weapons (the International Tracing Instrument) ( A/CONF.192/BMS/2016/2, annex).
At the Sixth Biennial Meeting, held in 2016, States made progress in discussions on
key areas such as technological developments in small arms manufacture and the
contribution of the Programme of Action to the attainment of the 2030 Agen da for
Sustainable Development.
12. The successes also include the recommendations on practical confidence building measures in the field of conventional weapons adopted by consensus by the
Disarmament Commission at its 2017 substantive session (see A/72/42, annex).
After nearly two decades without success, the Commission adopted measures that
seek to enhance cooperation and build confidence with a view to promoting
progress in arms control. The measures underscore the importance of conventional
arms control to the maintenance and enhancement of regional and international
peace and security.

III. Adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
13. Through the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development by the
General Assembly in September 2015, Member States recognized that sustainable
development cannot be realized without peace and security and that peace and
security would be at risk without sustainable development. In the 2030 Agenda,
Member States called for peaceful, just and inclusive societies that are based on
respect for human rights, effective rule of law and good governance. Target 16.4
under Sustainable Development Goal 16, which is focused on promoting peaceful
societies, providing access to justice and building effective institutions, includes a
call for a significant reduction in illicit arms flows.
14. By virtue of the adoption of target 16.4, States have acknowledged that arms
regulation contributes to mitigating the proliferation of illicit weaponry, thus
creating minimum security conditions at the community level and, as a result,
promoting conditions conducive to sustainable development. Furthermore, the 2030
__________________
4

17-20637

See World Bank, World Development Report 2005: A Better Investment Climate for Everyone
(Washington, D.C., 2004), p. 79.
3/23

S/2017/1025

Agenda demonstrates that arms regulation, more than ever before, s hould be
pursued through policies and actions built on the concept of measurability.
15. At the Sixth Biennial Meeting, States underlined the importance of the full and
effective implementation of the Programme of Action on Small Arms and the
International Tracing Instrument to attaining Sustainable Development Goal 16 and
target 16.4. States also noted that the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons
has implications for the realization of several other Sustainable Development Goals,
including those relating to poverty reduction, economic growth, health, gender
equality, and safe cities and communities (see A/CONF.192/BMS/2016/2, annex,
paras. 25–26).
16. Also at the Sixth Biennial Meeting, States encouraged the development of
national indicators based on the Programme of Action and the International Tracing
Instrument to measure progress made towards target 16.4. The data received from
national reports on the implementation of those instruments could provide a solid
basis for national indicators for progress on the target. Similarly, the Conference of
the Parties to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime
acknowledged at its eighth session the relevance of the Protocol against the Illicit
Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, Their Parts and Components and
Ammunition, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime (the Firearms Protocol) in supporting the implementation of targ et
16.4 of the Sustainable Development Goals (see CTOC/COP/2016/15).

IV. Weapons and ammunition management in peace operations
and conflict-affected settings
17. Weapons and ammunition management has become a critical component of
United Nations peacekeeping operations and in the activities of the Security Council
to address conflict-affected situations more generally. Attention to this issue was
often reflected in disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes and
physical security and stockpile management activities. For example, in the Central
African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Mali, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration components have established weapon registration
and marking systems to ensure the traceability of all weapons and ammunition
collected during the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process.
18. Adequate management of contingent- and civilian-controlled materiel, both
arms and ammunition, is of utmost importance to ensure that these weapons are not
lost, including through theft, seizure or diversion.
19. In 2010, the term “Second generation disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration” was used to describe evolving practices in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes. 5 As a result of the changing nature of
conflict, the international community has recognized an increased need for
“community violence reduction” approaches to complement traditional
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration operations. Consequently, small
arms and light weapons control activities have increasingly been prioritized in peace
operation settings.
__________________
5

4/23

United Nations, Department of Peacekeeping Operations, “Second generation disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration practices in peace operations: a contribution to the New
Horizon discussion on challenges and opportunities for United Nations peacekeeping”,
18 January 2010. Available from www.un.org/en/peacekeeping/documents/
2GDDR_ENG_WITH_COVER.pdf.

17-20637

S/2017/1025

20. Further demonstrating shifts in approaches to peacekeeping, the High -level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations, in its 2015 report, recog nized the complex
linkages between transnational illicit trafficking in weapons and the resilience of
conflict-affected and post-conflict States (see A/70/95-S/2015/446).
21. In 2016, the Security Council, in resolutions regarding United Nations
missions in Afghanistan, Côte d’Ivoire, Darfur and Haiti, acknowledged the role of
poor arms and ammunition management in fuelling conflict and instability. 6
22. Also in 2016, by its resolution 2287 (2016), the Security Council decided to
make the Abyei Area “demilitarized” of any forces other than the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei and the local police. In this connection, the Force
is empowered to confiscate and destroy weaponry and report on possible arms
movements into the Abyei Area. This mandate is an effective response to the
previous recognition by the Council of the threat posed to peace and security in the
Abyei Area arising from the illicit transfer, destabilizing accumulation and misuse
of small arms and light weapons.
23. With regard to the work of the Security Council concerning Côte d ’Ivoire (see,
for example, resolution 2284 (2016)), the successful prioritization by the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire of weapons and ammunition management,
including through the registration of arms and related lethal materiel and the
improvement of armouries, has been a concrete contribution to p romoting stability.

V. United Nations support for weapons and
ammunition management
24. United Nations entities undertook work in cooperation with host Governments
to address weapons and ammunition management in conflict-affected settings. The
United Nations continued to support States, upon request, in areas such as stockpile
management and physical security, marking, tracing and record -keeping. Moreover,
awareness-raising on the impact of small arms and light weapons remains an
important component of United Nations work in this area.
25. Examples of United Nations support for national arms and ammunition
management efforts are provided in the table below. These are in addition to the
long-standing, critical support provided by the Department of Peacek eeping
Operations and the Department of Political Affairs to United Nations missions,
including through disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes and
mine action activities.
Examples of United Nations support for national arms and ammunition
management efforts
Country

Decision/action

Central African Republic

The Security Council decided that the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic would support the Central African Republic
authorities in developing and operationalizing a national
commission for small arms and light weapons to address civilian
disarmament and illicit proliferation (resolution 2301 (2016),
para. 34 (c) (iv)).

__________________
6

17-20637

See resolutions 2274 (2016), 2283 (2016), 2313 (2016) and 2296 (2016).
5/23

S/2017/1025
Country

Decision/action

Haiti

The Security Council requested the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti to continue to support the Haitian authorities in the
control of small arms, the development of a weapons registry and
the revision of current laws on the importation and possession of
arms (resolution 2313 (2016), para. 34).

Libya

The United Nations Support Mission in Libya has assisted national
authorities, at their request, in establishing a national arms and
ammunition management committee to improve coordination and
decision-making between different ministries and agencies, as well
as to ensure the consistent application of standards across
government agencies, adequate resource mobilization and the
development of an overarching national arms and ammunitions
control framework and strategy.

Mali

The Security Council authorized the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali to assist
Malian authorities with the removal and destruction of mines and
other explosive devices and with weapons and ammunition
management (resolution 2295 (2016), para. 20 (b)).

VI. Community-based initiatives
26. Several successes and lessons learned can be identified with regard to
community-led violence and gun control programmes in various contexts. In the
past two years, the increasing shift by law enforcement towards raising community based public awareness on illegal firearms control has been notable. This shift has
been evident in States such as Belize, Costa Rica, El Salvador, H aiti, Honduras,
Jamaica, Mexico, Nicaragua and Panama. To further promote alternatives to gang
recruitment and the use of firearms during conflict resolution, the United Nations
has supported various local gun-free school initiatives through the use of culture,
arts, sports, life skills, positive parenting, gender identity, ethnic cohesion and faith based programmes. Currently, more than 12 schools in Costa Rica are running a
gun-free school programme and 22 municipalities with the highest firearms
homicide rates in Honduras have developed community-based prevention models
around firearms use. I encourage Member States to strengthen partnerships and
coordination by further allocating the necessary resources to community policing
and enforcement, capacity development, evidence-building and victim support
programmes.
27. Local gun-free zones — which can address pressing feelings of insecurity at
the community level — can be established if there is communal demand for such
measures. Gun-free zones can only be successful if accompanied by effective
policing. 7

__________________
7

6/23

The Gun-Free Zone — A Tool to Prevent and Reduce Armed Violence, Office for Disarmament
Affairs, Occasional Paper No. 25 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.14.IX.6). Available
from www.un.org/disarmament/publications/occasionalpapers/no -25.
17-20637

S/2017/1025

VII. Use of existing tools and instruments in the management of
arms and ammunition in post-conflict settings
28. In previous reports to the Security Council on small arms, the value of the
Register of Conventional Arms in providing a national baseline inventory of arms
was emphasized. In its final report, the Panel of Experts on Yemen used data from
the Register (see S/2016/73). More groups of experts are encouraged to make use of
the information submitted to the Register, especially as a means of establishing a
baseline to monitor potential violations of arms embargoes.
29. With regard to the scope of the Register of Conventional Arms, the General
Assembly decided to adapt the Register in line with the recommendations made
with the assistance of the 2016 Group of Governmental Experts on the matter (see
A/71/259). Furthermore, States agreed to report on small arms and light weapons in
parallel with the seven categories of the Register, on a trial basis, as part of a
so-called “seven plus one” model.

VIII. Protection of civilians and human rights
30. High levels of arms and ammunition in circulation, exacerbated by poor
management and controls, contribute to violations of international humanitarian and
human rights law (see S/2016/447, para. 17). In a report submitted to the Human
Rights Council in 2016, the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
highlighted the direct risks posed to the rights to life, security and physical integrity
by firearm-related violence and insecurity. Such violence and insecurity also affect
other civil, political, social, economic and cultural rights, such as the rights to
health, education, an adequate standard of living and social security and the right to
participate in cultural life (see A/HRC/32/21, para. 52; see also A/54/2000,
paras. 238–239, and E/CN.4/Sub.2/2002/39, para. 16). The Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Violence against Children has noted the
relationship between easy access to firearms and the denial of children ’s rights and
acknowledged that access to firearms facilitates the recruitment of children to
engage in organized crime. 8
31. Recognizing and integrating gender as a factor in all cycles of small arms
control enables the creation of more targeted measures focusing on, for example, the
negative impact of small arms on the rights of women or methods that address
masculinity and the need for power projection of young men. Given the highly
gendered nature of the topic, mainstreaming gender into small arms control efforts
ensures more effective outcomes. A growing body of research has demonstrated the
visible linkages between gender and small arms and light weapons, including
considerations related to domestic and intimate partner abuse, masculinity and
cultural norms. 9 At the Sixth Biennial Meeting, States encouraged the collection of
disaggregated data on gender and the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons,
in particular for the purpose of improving corresponding national policies and
assistance programmes (see A/CONF.192/BMS/2016/2, para. 60).
32. Enhancing respect for the law requires action in response to the high levels of
poorly controlled arms and ammunition in circulation, which continue to contribute
__________________
8

Protecting children affected by armed violence in the community (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.16.I.15). Available from http://srsg.violenceagainstchildren.org/sites/default/files/
2016/armedviolence/Armed%20Violence%20Publication%20Web.pdf.
9
Dragan Božanić, Gender and SALW in South East Europe: Main Concerns and Policy Response ,
United Nations Development Programme (Belgrade, Grafolik, 2016), available from
www.seesac.org/f/docs/Armed-Violence/Gender_and_SALW_publication_eng-web.pdf.
17-20637

7/23

S/2017/1025

to violations of international humanitarian and human rights law (see S/2016/447,
para. 17). Violations have also occurred through illicit arms transfers, the diversion
of arms and their transfer to States with insufficient regulations. In this regard,
ratifying and complying with the Arms Trade Treaty, as well as relevant regional
conventions are of key importance.

IX. Transnational organized crime
33. Transnational organized criminal groups generated increased levels of harm
and violence. In its resolution 2220 (2015), the Security Council expressed concern
about the close connection between international terrorism, transnational organized
crime, drug trafficking, money-laundering, other illicit financial transactions, illicit
brokering in small arms and light weapons and arms trafficking.
34. There remained the need to adopt integrated approaches to address the root
causes of transnational organized crime, including the illicit manufacture of and
trafficking in small arms, their parts and components and ammu nition. These
approaches should take into account, where appropriate, economic and social
factors that have an impact on arms-related crime, as well as cross-border
criminality and trafficking flows, in particular relating to arms.

X. Terrorism and violent extremism
35. There has been growing recognition of the dangers posed by the acquisition of
weapons by terrorist groups. The use of firearms in the perpetration of terrorist
attacks in many countries has raised the urgency of addressing this issue.
36. The Security Council has been active in that regard. In its resolution 2370
(2017) on denying terrorists access to weapons, the Council urged Member States to
undertake a set of measures at the national level to eliminate the supply of weapons
to terrorists, as well as to enhance regional and international cooperation in that
regard. In its resolution 2322 (2016), the Council expressed its concern that
terrorists benefit from transnational organized crime in some regions, including
from the trafficking of arms.
37. In its resolution 2253 (2015), the Security Council authorized the global arms
embargo against individuals, groups, undertakings and entities on the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida Sanctions List. In line with the
Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism, Member States
should also strengthen subregional and regional organizations in monitoring the
trafficking of small arms and heavy weapons (see A/70/674, para. 45 (a)). The
adoption by the African Union, in January 2017, of its master road map of practical
steps to silence the guns in Africa by the year 2020 constituted an important effort
to enhance national capacities to prevent violent extremism, strengthen national
disarmament programmes and address the illicit trafficking of arms. 10

XI. Observations
38. Weapons and ammunition are tangible commodities upon which concrete and
measurable actions can be taken to manage and control them (see S/2015/289,
para. 14). On the basis of this understanding, I will consistently advocate for
__________________
10

8/23

See African Union decision contained in Assembly/AU/6(XXVIII)/Rev.1, annex.
17-20637

S/2017/1025

strengthening physical security and stockpile management measures for both
weapons and ammunition and encourage the Security Council to do the same.
39. I encourage the continued, regular consideration by the Secur ity Council of the
issue of small arms. While a recurring thematic discussion is of key use in prioritizing
action, I also support the mainstreaming of the issue of the illicit weapons trade,
misuse and excessive accumulation into all relevant Council discussions. The
maintenance of international peace and security, advances in development and the
realization of human rights cannot be fully achieved and sustained if illicit small arms
and ammunition continue to wreak havoc on communities.
40. I encourage the Security Council to continue to address weapons and
ammunition management issues in a comprehensive manner. It is evident that
addressing both issues together has proven effective when discussing the challenges
of conflict and post-conflict situations. In terms of peace operations, I note the
benefit when peace missions include a dedicated cell dealing with weapons and
ammunition control matters.
41. I underscore the indispensability of introducing measurability in all activities
relating to small arms control, consistent with the indicators for measuring progress
on the Sustainable Development Goals.
42. Preventing conflict and building sustainable peace on the basis of respect for
human rights, including accountability and non-discrimination, must be a key
priority for the international community in its efforts to address the wide -reaching
harm to civilians caused by small arms and light weapons.
43. It is also essential to enhance respect for international law and ensure
accountability and good practice in that regard by parties to conflict. Preventing armed
attacks against civilians in conflict settings, including United Nations personnel and
humanitarian actors, must remain a central objective of the Security Council.
44. I will continue to encourage national authorities to make use of existing, practical
standards and guidelines such as the International Small Arms Control Standards and
the International Ammunition Technical Guidelines, with a view to enhancing small
arms and ammunition control in support of the attainment of the Sustainable
Development Goals. In addition, I will continue to advocate for the universalization of
relevant legally-binding instruments, such as the Firearms Protocol and the Arms Trade
Treaty, and the implementation of agreed instruments such as the Programme of Action
on Small Arms and the International Tracing Instrument.
45. I encourage Member States to make use of the International Criminal Police
Organization Illicit Arms Records and Tracing Management System, which
facilitates information exchange and investigative cooperation between law
enforcement agencies in relation to the international movement of illicit firearms, as
well as licit firearms that have been involved in the commission of a crime.
46. The consideration by the Security Council of measures to restrict the supply of
ammunition to countries or regions threatened by, engaged in or emerging from
armed conflict is a beneficial approach (see S/PRST/2002/30). It is important that
the Council remain cognizant of the recurrently destructive effect of weapons and
ammunition flows into vulnerable and fragile settings, irrespective of whether a
United Nations mission is present.
47. Finally, the Third Review Conference of the Programme of Action on Small
Arms, scheduled to be held in June 2018, will provide an important opportunity for
Council members and all States to demonstrate reinvigorated commitment to
collective efforts at the national, regional and global level s to combat the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons.
17-20637

9/23

S/2017/1025

Annex I
Addressing past recommendations
1.
The present report is the fifth report of the Secretary-General on the thematic
issue of small arms and light weapons. In the four previous repo rts, numerous
substantive recommendations have been made to address the cross -cutting and
multidimensional challenges associated with the management of small arms, light
weapons and their ammunition. In total, 48 recommendations have been provided to
the Security Council for its consideration, relating to, inter alia, physical security
and stockpile management, peacekeeping, arms embargoes, international standards
and guidelines, armed violence and gender.
2.
Many of the recommendations remain highly relevant in the context of the
work of the Security Council and the United Nations more broadly. In this regard,
particularly pertinent recommendations made in previous reports ( S/2008/258,
S/2011/255, S/2013/503 and S/2015/289) are listed in the table below, and specific
suggestions to operationalize them are offered.
3.
The suggested actions are intended to be as concrete as possible and are
directed towards specific stakeholders, namely, the Security Council and, in some
cases, the wider United Nations membership. Actions to operationalize the
recommendations are also identified for the Secretariat and relevant entities, where
applicable.

10/23

17-20637

17-20637

Small arms and light weapons: past recommendations and suggested future actions
Recommendation
Reference

Text of recommendation

Suggested actions for States/actions identified for the United Nations system and other relevant entities
Entity

Action

Security
Council

• May wish to request an assessment of:

Weapons and ammunition management
S/2015/289,
recommendation 1

Given the wide-ranging impact of the
misuse and illicit circulation of small arms
and light weapons, it is recommended that
the Security Council consistently address
the arms situation when considering both
geographic and thematic issues on its
agenda.

◦

The treatment of small arms by the Security Council across
its whole agenda, with the results to be presented in the
next biennial report to the Council on small arms

◦

The women and peace and security mainstreaming model
as a point of reference for the further mainstreaming of
weapons and ammunition matters into the work of the
Council.

• Could consider requesting relevant United Nations entities,
such as the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Mine
Action Service, the Office for Disarmament Affairs, the Office
of Counter-Terrorism, UN-Women and UNODC, to participate
in thematic and issue-focused briefings. Could refer to the best
practices contained in the voluntary International Small Arms
Control Standards and the International Ammunition Technical
Guidelines.
S/2015/289,
recommendation 8;
S/2013/503,
recommendation 3

The Security Council should consider, on a
case-by-case basis, the relevance of
technologies such as time limitation or
geographical limitation devices or
biometric or radio frequency identification,
to improve weapons stockpile management
and reduce the diversion of weapons.

Security
Council

S/2011/255,
recommendation 1

The Security Council may wish to
encourage States to strengthen their
tracing capacity and to enhance
international cooperation regarding tracing
in these contexts [conflict, post-conflict
and conflict-prone situations], including
with the United Nations.

Security
Council

• May wish to request a report outlining specific technologies
that could improve weapons stockpile management with a
view to combating diversion and improving tracing.
• Could consider supporting measures to ensure the marking and
registration of all weapons, particularly in cases where United
Nations entities are deployed and can assist.

11/23

• Should consider providing support to the work of groups and
panels of experts on tracing requests.

S/2017/1025

• Could encourage States to make use of tools to promote
effective international and regional cooperation in tracing,
such as with INTERPOL, the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocols
thereto and the International Tracing Instrument.

Reference

Text of recommendation

Suggested actions for States/actions identified for the United Nations system and other relevant entities
Entity

Action

• May wish to promote the practical assistance provided by the
United Nations on weapons tracing, including through module
05.31 of the International Small Arms Control Standards, the
work of United Nations regional centres for peace and
disarmament and UNODC.
• May encourage States to share information and best practices
on safe storage, marking and destruction of surplus weapons
to further prevent illicit transfers.
• May wish to consider encouraging States to keep
comprehensive records of seized arms to facilitate tracing.
S/2008/258,
recommendation 11

The Security Council may wish to
consider encouraging States to
significantly enhance their efforts to verify
end user certificates.

Security
Council

All Member
States

May wish to consider supporting further research on various
aspects of end use and end user controls, including risk
assessment, end use and end user documentation, assurances
and post-delivery cooperation. UNIDIR, along with other
relevant research institutions, could be engaged by the Council
in such tasks.
• Could consider development of an international framework for
the authentication, reconciliation and standardization of end
user certificates in the framework of, inter alia, a General
Assembly resolution establishing a group of governmental
experts to further explore the issue, and/or the Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and the
International Tracing Instrument.
• Could adopt a decision to begin work on such a framework at
the Third Review Conference of the Programme of Action, in
2018.

S/2013/503,
recommendation 2

17-20637

I encourage all Member States to make
every effort to secure arms and
ammunition stockpiles from diversion. I
encourage the Security Council to ensure
that peacekeeping and peacebuilding
missions are mandated to assist host
countries in their stockpile management.

United Nations
system and
other relevant
entities

• The International Small Arms Control Standards and the
International Ammunition Technical Guidelines, as well as
relevant tools that facilitate their use, should be integrated into
the core training curricula of international peacekeeping
training centres, and peacekeeping and peacebuilding missions
should receive training as needed on the application of
international standards.

S/2017/1025

12/23

Recommendation

17-20637

Recommendation
Reference

Text of recommendation

Suggested actions for States/actions identified for the United Nations system and other relevant entities
Entity

Existing standards such the International
Ammunition Technical Guidelines
developed under the “SaferGuard”
programme and the International Small
Arms Control Standards should be fully
utilized in arms and ammunition stockpile
management practices. Member States in a
position to do so should consider providing
technical and financial assistance in this
regard.
S/2013/503,
recommendation 11

The Security Council is encouraged to
mandate United Nations peacekeeping,
political and peacebuilding missions, in
particular with respect to the disarmament
aspects of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration and security sector
reform programmes, to support host
countries’ efforts to implement their
commitments under relevant global and
regional conventional arms control
instruments, including the development of
capacities to put in place longer-term arms
control and regulation measures. Such
support should be considered when
planning integrated peace operations
missions, as well as in the day-to-day
operations of the missions. To this effect,
use should be made of the International
Small Arms Control Standards developed
by the Coordinating Action on Small Arms
mechanism and of the International
Ammunition Technical Guidelines.

Action

• Efforts should be made to enhance the practical applicability
of existing standards and guidelines to assist host countries in
conflict-affected and post-conflict settings.
• Support should continue to be provided, upon request, to
States in building capacity for arms and ammunition
management, including through the activities of the
SaferGuard programme.

Security
Council

United Nations
system and
other relevant
entities

May consider consulting with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, the Office for Disarmament Affairs, the
Department of Political Affairs, UNDP, the Mine Action
Service and other relevant entities on the issue of mandating
missions to assist host countries with disarmament aspects,
including specific tasks related to disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration/community violence reduction and security
sector reform.
• The International Small Arms Control Standards and the
International Ammunition Technical Guidelines should be
integrated into the peace support operations planning process,
as well as into the day-to-day activities of such operations, as
relevant.
• The Department of Peacekeeping Operations will appoint a
Fire Explosive Safety Officer in each peacekeeping operation,
where feasible, in accordance with module 12.10 of the
International Ammunition Technical Guidelines.

13/23

• UNICEF and UNDP should continue to support reintegration
programmes for former combatants and children associated
with armed groups.

S/2017/1025

• Vulnerable States should continue to be assisted, upon request,
in establishing longer-term arms control and regulation
measures (legislative and operational), using the International
Small Arms Control Standards and the International
Ammunition Technical Guidelines for guidance.

Suggested actions for States/actions identified for the United Nations system and other relevant entities

Reference

Text of recommendation

Entity

Action

S/2011/255,
recommendation 3

The Security Council may wish to
encourage Member States to provide the
United Nations, on a voluntary basis, with
public information on the markings
applied to ammunition for small arms and
light weapons by manufacturers under
their jurisdiction, as well as the markings
on ammunition recovered from illicit use.

Security
Council

• Could call upon all States, as appropriate, in the context of its
relevant items, to provide support and ammunition marking
information to the INTERPOL Firearms Reference Table, the
INTERPOL Ballistic Information Network and the Illicit Arms
Records and Tracing Management System.
• Could call upon States to share information submitted on
national ammunition marking practices with INTERPOL for
inclusion in the Illicit Arms Records and Tracing Management
System.

All Member
States

• May consider providing resources to the SaferGuard
programme to undertake training on ammunition marking and
capacity-building.
• May consider aligning national marking practices with module
05.30 of the International Small Arms Control Standards, as
appropriate.

Peacekeeping
S/2015/289,
recommendation 7

The Security Council should ensure that
peacekeeping and special political
missions are consistently mandated to
assist host countries in the effective
management of their arms and
ammunition stockpiles.

17-20637

This includes, in accordance with the good
practice demonstrated in Côte d’Ivoire and
Liberia, provisions on the training of
national security forces in weapons
disposal, marking and recording and largescale weapons collection and destruction
programmes, in addition to the
refurbishment of weapons and ammunition
storage facilities and the promotion of
compliance with existing standards.

Security
Council

• May request briefings on good practices and lessons learned in
peace operations mandated to assist host countries with
effective arms and ammunition management (for example, in
Abyei, the Central African Republic, Côte d’Ivoire, Darfur,
Haiti, Liberia, Libya and Mali).
• May also request briefings from the Mine Action Service on
its relevant activities relating to weapons and ammunition
management.
• May consider mandating United Nations peacekeeping and
special political missions to assist States in their efforts to
establish baselines and benchmark progress made in arms and
ammunition management.

All Member
States

• May consider use of existing guidance on destruction
activities, including the International Small Arms Control
Standards (module 05.50) and the International Ammunition
Technical Guidelines (module 10.10).

S/2017/1025

14/23

Recommendation

17-20637

Recommendation
Reference

Text of recommendation

Suggested actions for States/actions identified for the United Nations system and other relevant entities
Entity

Member States should consider the
provision of adequate technical and
financial assistance in this regard.

Action

• May consider means of harmonizing information collected on
illicit weapons and ammunition across United Nations missions
to better understand trends of illicit cross-border flows.
• May wish to consider providing support to UNIDIR to
undertake relevant studies, in cooperation with host States and
relevant United Nations mission staff, to identify approaches
to strengthen the management of arms and ammunition by
peacekeeping missions.

S/2008/258,
recommendation 9

S/2011/255,
recommendation 2

Destruction of surplus ammunition
stockpiles should be a priority for relevant
peacekeeping missions and Governments.

Security
Council

May wish to request a review of the mandate of the peace
operations in Abyei, taking into account the destruction
component, and derive good practices and lessons learned.

United Nations
system and
other relevant
entities

Peacekeeping operations should consider supplementary
budget lines for project-specific ammunition stockpile
destruction, including for relevant Mine Action Service
operations.

In post-conflict weapons collection
programmes, weapons should be recorded
in sufficient detail to ensure accountability
and to facilitate their tracing in the event
of diversion. Record-keeping systems
should be designed in such a way as to
ensure that personnel are aware of the
types of information that they need to
record, including ammunition markings.
The International Small Arms Control
Standards currently being developed by
the United Nations will provide practical
guidance in this regard.

All Member
States

Should consider utilizing, promoting and supporting the use of
module 05.30 of the International Small Arms Control
Standards, on marking and tracing, and the relevant modules
of the International Ammunition Technical Guidelines.

Countries subject to an arms embargo
should consider reporting to the existing
transparency mechanism of the United
Nations Register of Conventional Arms.

Security
Council

Arms embargoes
• May wish to request the Secretariat to organize a briefing on
reporting to the United Nations Register of Conventional
Arms in the context of peace operations.

15/23

S/2017/1025

S/2015/289,
recommendation 9

Reference

Text of recommendation

Suggested actions for States/actions identified for the United Nations system and other relevant entities
Entity

Action

• May consider including language in relevant resolutions
calling upon States subject to an arms embargo to report to the
United Nations Register of Conventional Arms.
S/2008/258,
recommendation 5

Peacekeeping missions mandated to
monitor arms embargoes should
increasingly seek to assign this task to a
dedicated unit equipped with the capacity
to carry it out comprehensively.

Security
Council

May wish to review the cases of Côte d’Ivoire and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo with a view to outlining
good practices and lessons learned on the role of monitoring
the relevant arms embargoes.

S/2013/503,
recommendation 9

The Security Council may wish to call for
increased assistance for States bordering a
country where an arms embargo is in
place. If these bordering States themselves
host a United Nations peacekeeping,
political or peacebuilding mission, the
Council should mandate these missions to
assist their host Governments in
complying with their arms embargo
obligations by, inter alia, setting up arms
and ammunition management cells.

Security
Council

May wish to hold informal consultations with States bordering
a country where an arms embargo is in place and invite an
exchange of views on additional resources that may be
required to assist in compliance with the embargo; discussions
could include relevant implementing entities, such as the Mine
Action Service of the United Nations, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, UNDP and the Department of Field
Support.

Community safety and law enforcement
S/2015/289,
recommendation 6

States should aim to have their relevant
law enforcement officials trained in the
Basic Principles on the Use of Force and
Firearms by Law Enforcement Officials.

Security
Council

• May request the Secretariat to provide an implementation
support manual for the Basic Principles.
• May wish to consider encouraging States to make use of the
resource book on the use of force and firearms in law
enforcement, developed jointly by UNODC and OHCHR.

Protection of civilians/gender
S/2013/503,
recommendation 4

17-20637

I encourage regular information exchange
between the informal expert group on the
protection of civilians of the Security
Council, the Office for Disarmament
Affairs and other relevant United Nations
entities, as appropriate, including the
Office of the Special Representative for

Security
Council

• May wish to request the Secretariat to share relevant
information with the informal expert group on the protection
of civilians on situations created or exacerbated by illicit arms
flows, not only prior to the renewal of mandates of peace
operations, but also during the consideration of new protection
of civilians mandates.

S/2017/1025

16/23

Recommendation

17-20637

Recommendation
Reference

Text of recommendation

Suggested actions for States/actions identified for the United Nations system and other relevant entities
Entity

Children and Armed Conflict, the Office
of the Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, the United Nations
Children’s Fund and the United Nations
Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women. I also
encourage the informal expert group on
the protection of civilians to consider
ways in which relevant Council
resolutions might better respond to
challenges relating to the protection of
civilians, in particular women and
children, in situations created or
exacerbated by illicit arms flows.

Action

• May also request a cross-cutting briefing on small armsrelated issues, including on gender perspectives (in the form
of an Arria-formula meeting of the Council).

Armed violence
S/2011/255,
recommendation 5

There is a continued need to develop
measurable goals on armed violence
prevention and reduction to be achieved
by 2015.

Security
Council

• Taking into account the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, data reported with regard to Sustainable
Development Goal indicator 16.4.2 could be considered in the
context of the work of the Council insofar as relevant trends
and conclusions drawn from the data could inform Council
resolutions and reports and the work of groups of experts.
• Could encourage States to report on indicator 16.4.2 on illicit
arms flows, for example, through their biennial national report
on the Programme of Action on Small Arms and data
collection on illicit firearms trafficking through the framework
of the Firearms Protocol.

S/2011/255,
recommendation 6

Security
Council

In view of the likelihood that non-State actors may store
weapons and ammunition in temporary conditions or in
smaller quantities than government forces, the Council may
encourage the dissemination and utilization by peacekeepers,
United Nations police and other stakeholders of existing
voluntary guidance, such as module 04.20 of the International
Ammunition Technical Guidelines.

17/23

S/2017/1025

The Security Council may wish to further
identify ways to increase compliance by
non-State armed groups with international
norms relating to the use and stockpiling
of weapons and ammunition in times of
conflict.

Suggested actions for States/actions identified for the United Nations system and other relevant entities

Reference

Text of recommendation

Entity

S/2015/289,
recommendation 3

More research to assist policymakers in
addressing the causes and consequences of
armed violence is required. The criminal
violence that frequently replaces political
violence in post-conflict periods is often
difficult to redress through disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration
programmes and small arms control
measures.

Security
Council

Action

May wish to request, through the Secretary-General, relevant
United Nations entities to undertake research on the causes
and consequences of armed violence, including links to the
illicit trafficking in arms and its connection with organized
crime and criminal violence, and to encourage Member States
to provide qualitative and quantitative data for such research.

Abbreviations: INTERPOL, International Criminal Police Organization; OHCHR, Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights; UNDP, United Nations
Development Programme; UNICEF, United Nations Children’s Fund; UNIDIR, United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research; UNODC, United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime; UN-Women, United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women.

S/2017/1025

18/23

Recommendation

17-20637

S/2017/1025

Annex II
Role of United Nations field missions in supporting the monitoring
of arms embargoes
1.
In paragraph 28 of its resolution 2220 (2015), the Security Council requested
the Secretary-General to examine and present best practices and arrangements that
could be used by the United Nations peacekeeping operations and other relevant
Council-mandated entities to guide the implementation of their mandated tasks on
the implementation and compliance monitoring of arms embargoes and the
provision of assistance and expertise to host States, sanctions committees and expert
groups.
2.
Pursuant to that request, the various mechanisms instituted by the United
Nations in its field missions (also referred to as peace operations) were examined
and best practices drawn from those experiences for the consideration of the
Security Council when mandating new missions or adjusting the mandates of
current ones with arms embargo measures. These practices, which apply to all arms
embargo measures, including with regard to small arms and light weapons, can be
used by field missions in carrying out their mandated tasks.
Arms embargo monitoring and compliance arrangements of United Nations
field missions
3.
Eight field missions are currently mandated by the Security Council to support
United Nations arms embargoes, 1 but the arrangements by which they implement
their mandates to monitor the implementation and compliance with Councilmandated arms embargoes vary considerably.
4.
In a peacekeeping context, highlighted in my previous reports on small arms
and light weapons, an Integrated Embargo Monitoring Unit was established within
the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI). 2 In addition to personnel
from the Mission’s military component, the Unit was staffed by specialized civilian
experts (arms, customs and information analysts). The permanent presence of such
staff in the country allowed for the continuous monitoring of the flows of arms and
ammunition, centralized and systematic data collection and on-site analysis. The
Unit established country-specific arms and ammunition profiles and other tools that
greatly advanced arms embargo monitoring.
5.
The United Nations Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
Congo (MONUSCO), by comparison, created an arms embargo working group in
January 2015 to collect and synthesize information. In October 2015, the working
group was reinforced by an arms embargo cell situated within the Mission’s Joint
Mission Analysis Cell, with support from the Mine Action Service of the United
Nations. The development of the cell is still under way, but includes arms embargo
analysts and technical experts.

__________________
1

The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA), the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya, the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
(UNSOM), the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) and the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon.
2
The arms embargo mandate of the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire was terminated in
2016 pursuant to Security Council resolution 2283 (2016).
17-20637

19/23

S/2017/1025

6.
Another mechanism used to monitor compliance with arms embargoes in the
United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) 3 were the firearms inspection teams
from the Mission’s civilian police contingents, which regularly inspected the
Government’s armouries to ensure weapons were properly marked and stored. The
United Nations-African Union Mission in Darfur, on the other hand, established a
focal point within the Mission to share information on the arms embargo with the
Panel of Experts on the Sudan.
7.
Most missions, however, do not have dedicated units but have relied on their
respective Joint Mission Analysis Cells to implement such mandated tasks. The
United Nations Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
is an example of a field mission whose Joint Mission Analysis Cell monitors arms
embargo compliance.
8.
In special political missions, arms embargo monitoring and compliance
arrangements are generally not as extensive as those in peacekeeping operations.
Nevertheless, these missions have established a variety of arrangements to support
relevant arms embargo regimes. The Rule of Law and Security Institutions Group of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM), for example, provides
advisory and capacity-building support to the Federal Government of Somalia to
help it to meet its arms embargo obligations.
9.
There is no one arrangement that is appropriate for all field missions in
implementing arms monitoring mandates. It is important, however, that form follow
function. Some field missions are mandated to cooperate with sanctions committees
and their respective expert panels 4 by sharing relevant information and assisting host
Governments with exemption requests. 5 Others have been mandated to carry out a
more comprehensive set of tasks that may include monitoring compliance with the
arms embargo and, in some cases, actively conducting inspections to enforce the
arms embargo. 6 On the basis of the feedback received from expert panels and other
relevant stakeholders, the presence of dedicated arms embargo monitoring staff
within field missions where an arms embargo is in place stre ngthens monitoring and
compliance of the arms embargo measures. This is all the more important given that
many of the expert panels dealing with arms embargo monitoring are not based in
the mission area on a permanent basis.
10. The appropriate structural arrangements and capabilities of a United
Nations peace operation to carry out any arms embargo-related tasks should be
factored into mission planning at the time of establishment of the mandate and
whenever the mandate is reviewed. Dedicated arms embargo monitoring units,
appropriately resourced with the requisite experts, should be considered in
countries where the mission has an extensive Council-mandated arms embargo
inspection and enforcement mandate. Where arms embargo mandates are more
limited and where field missions have utilized their Joint Mission Analysis Cells
to undertake arms embargo-related tasks, such missions could consider
dedicating a small number of staff to assist in the monitoring of and compliance
with arms embargoes. The review carried out by the Secretariat has shown that
the ability of United Nations peace operations to effectively carry out the arms
embargo-related tasks is largely dependent on the technical expertise and
relevant skill sets in areas such as arms tracing, border control, customs and
__________________
3

The arms embargo mandate of the United Nations Mission in Liberia was terminated in 2016
pursuant to Security Council resolution 2288 (2016).
4
Currently, of the nine expert panels, two are based in New York, one is based in Nairobi and six
are home-based.
5
These missions include UNAMA, UNAMI and UNSOM.
6
These missions include MINUSCA, MONUSCO and UNAMID.
20/23

17-20637

S/2017/1025

weapons storage. According to the review, there are therefore benefits to be
drawn from Member States engaging with the Secretariat on how best they can
contribute personnel with applicable technical expertise to serve in relevant
United Nations field missions.
11. While the structural arrangements for missions to fulfil arms embargo related mandates may vary, the review has highlighted the importance of
consistency across field missions in undertaking arms embargo-related tasks.
In this connection, the Secretariat intends to develop relevant guidelines and
standard operating procedures on how field missions could be structured to
undertake arms embargo monitoring and compliance tasks, where appropriate.
Particularly in contexts in which the United Nations is engaged in the exercise
of good offices, mediation and reconciliation efforts, the role of a mission
should be considered carefully.
Provision of assistance and expertise to host States
12. Where mandated and requested, United Nations field missions provide
essential and effective assistance to host States in strengthening the monitoring of
and compliance with arms embargoes through technical assistance and capacity building. MINUSCA and UNSOM, for example, provide technical assistance with
other United Nations partners to host States to manage weapons, ammunition and
related infrastructure. The Maritime Task Force of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon works to enhance the capacity of the Lebanese Navy, including through
joint training, to prevent the entry of unauthorized arms and related materiel into
Lebanon by sea.
13. Field missions are also well placed to raise awareness about the arms
embargoes with the respective host Government. The United Nations Support
Mission in Libya, for example, has provided briefings to the Libyan authorities on
the purpose, scope and implementation of the arms embargo, including detailed
guidance on the exemption provisions. This has included the provision of simplified
flow charts and checklists, as well as “model language” for drafting exemption
requests and end user certificates. MONUSCO has been working with the military
and justice sectors in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to increas e cooperation
and access to information related to non-compliance with the arms embargo.
14. Regular, direct and structured engagement between the field mission and the
appropriate government authorities, specifically on the implementation of the arms
embargo or the provision of assistance, is critical. A good example is provided by
UNSOM, which assists the Federal Government of Somalia through the Office of
the National Security Adviser to build its capacity to comply with obligations under
the arms embargo, including advisory support for the development of notifications
and reporting, as well as longer-term capacity for the development of a national
framework for weapons and ammunition management in accordance with
international standards and the improvement of infrastructure for the reception and
processing of weapons imports and donations and capacity-building. Host States
are encouraged to appoint national focal points through which missions can
engage and channel capacity-building assistance to relevant government
departments and agencies crucial to the implementation of the arms embargo.
Where feasible, a joint arms embargo working group, comprising the United
Nations peace operation and relevant government agencies, could also be
formed to strengthen information-sharing and capacity-building assistance.
Missions should also draw upon the Security Council Affairs Division of the
Department of Political Affairs, which, as the repository of knowledge and
practice on sanctions issues, has the responsibility to assist them in providing

17-20637

21/23

S/2017/1025

relevant support and assistance to host countries and other Member States in
the implementation of arms embargoes.
15. Where appropriate, the needs of and the provision of technical assistance
to host States with respect to the implementation of arms embargoes should be
reviewed periodically, particularly when the Council is considering adjusting
the measures. In 2014 and 2015, United Nations inter-agency missions were
undertaken at the request of the Council to assess the arms embargoes in Somalia
(see S/2014/243) and Liberia (see S/2014/707 and S/2015/590). Assessment
missions have proven to be a useful tool to bring together all relevant United
Nations actors in the field and at Headquarters to provide the Council with relevant
input for their reviews of sanctions measures. Relevant tools developed by the
United Nations, such as the International Small Arms Control Standards and the
International Ammunition Technical Guidelines, should be fully utilized in such
assessments in order to ensure that gaps in capacity to safely and securely manage
arms and ammunition are identified and addressed prior to an embargo being eased
or lifted.
Provision of assistance and expertise to sanctions committees and expert panels
16. Field missions mandated to support the implementation of arms embargoes are
specifically tasked with engaging with relevant sanctions committees and their
expert panels. Under the Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire sanctions regimes, which have
now been terminated, UNMIL and UNOCI were mandated to provide written
reports to their respective sanctions committees. While current field mis sions do not
have similar reporting requirements, information is shared directly by the mission
with the committee through periodic briefings often undertaken by the Head of
Mission. The Security Council and its sanctions committees are encouraged to
continue to request such briefings from the field on arms embargo monitoring
and compliance to better consider the appropriate complementarity of
sanctions with political, peacekeeping and peacebuilding processes.
17. Feedback from host Governments, regional States and members of the
Security Council and its subsidiary bodies has highlighted the value of regular
regional briefings as an opportunity for regional States to provide feedback on
strengthening monitoring of and compliance with sanctions measures. Fu rthermore,
visits by the Chair of the sanctions committee to countries have also been identified
as useful for the work of the Council and its subsidiary organs to raise awareness
about United Nations sanctions regimes and strengthen monitoring of and
compliance with the specific sanctions measures. In this regard, the Security
Council and its subsidiary organs may wish to reinforce regional briefings, as
well as periodic visits by committee Chairs, to concerned States and to engage
directly with field missions on the ground to both promote awareness and
strengthen monitoring of and compliance with sanctions measures.
18. Given that many expert panels are not based in a country subject to an arms
embargo or in nearby countries in the region, most direct coo peration on arms
embargo implementation and compliance monitoring occurs between field missions
and expert panels. Several good examples of ways in which missions had structured
information-sharing relationships with expert panels and the Security Council
Affairs Division were found in the review. Field missions typically nominate a
focal point within the mission to facilitate information exchange and logistical
support with expert panels. In general, placing the focal point in the Office of
the Chief of Staff is a useful modality to promote awareness of the mandate of
the expert panel across the mission.

22/23

17-20637

S/2017/1025

19. While all expert panels have appreciated the cooperation with field missions,
the nature of the information exchanged differs in scope and quality. S uch
differences are a product of many factors, including variations in the mandates of
field missions, the specifics of the arms embargo sanctions regime, the receptivity
of the host State to field mission involvement on arms embargo issues, the
availability of resources and specialized personnel, and guidance provided to the
field mission.
20. Informal guidelines developed in 2009 to enhance cooperation and
information-sharing between peacekeeping missions and expert panels are now
outdated. The Department of Political Affairs and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, under the auspices of the Inter-Agency Working
Group on United Nations Sanctions, have been tasked with developing uniform
guidance for all field missions. These new guidelines will address the
substantive and administrative aspects of cooperation, taking into account
relevant challenges in relation to resources, the examination of new
technologies, mandates, operational constraints, knowledge transfer and
information-sharing.

17-20637

23/23
