S/PV.8036

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8036th meeting

Wednesday, 30 August 2017, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Aboulatta . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Egypt)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Alemu
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skau
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015) and 2332 (2016)
(S/2017/733)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-27241 (E)
*1727241*

S/PV.8036

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.30 a.m.
The adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258
(2015) and 2332 (2016) (S/2017/733)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the following briefers to participate
in this meeting: Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Syria, and Mr. Stephen
O’Brien, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator.
Mr. De Mistura is joining today’s meeting via
video-teleconference from Geneva.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/733, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191
(2014), 2258 (2015) and 2332 (2016).
I now give the floor to Mr. De Mistura.
Mr. De Mistura: Let me say how pleased I am,
Mr. President, that we have been able to hold this
briefing before the end of your presidency. I wish a
happy Eid to you and everyone around the world.
I last briefed the Security Council after the seventh
round of the intra-Syrian talks in Geneva, which
concluded on 14 July. Since then, we have been active
in a range of diplomatic efforts and continuing contacts.
I have recently held high-level consultations in Tehran
and Paris, and my Deputy Special Envoy Ambassador
Ramzy was earlier in Moscow and is currently in Saudi
Arabia. Contacts are continuing with other actors as we
seek to lay the ground for further rounds of talks that
bring the parties into a genuine negotiation.
Let me elaborate on how I assess the situation at
present, and what we think we can expect in the period
ahead in de-escalating violence, in combating terrorism
and in advancing the political process.
2/10

30/08/2017

While undoubtedly there is still violence in Syria,
the trend of de-escalation and the operationalization
of de-escalation zones is indeed continuing. We are
encouraged by the calm in the south-west and the
opening of a trilateral Amman monitoring centre by
the Russian Federation, the United States and Jordan.
Meanwhile, following a series of agreements with
armed groups, including with the active support of
Egypt and the Russian Federation, we have seen a
significant reduction of violence in parts of the Ghouta
de-escalation zone, although not in all of it. In Homs,
we note the Russian Federation’s efforts to reach a
ceasefire agreement are continuing. We are, however,
worried about reports of shelling and air strikes north
of Homs city, which we believe require the guarantors’
urgent attention.
Meantime, the situation in Idlib is complex
and complicated and needs close attention. Hay’at
Tahrir al-Sham — or as we all continue to call it, the
former Al-Nusra, a terrorist group identified by the
Council — has taken over territory from other armed
opposition groups in this area. Its stated intention
is to set up some kind of new Al-Nursa-dominated
administration. It is very important that the Astana
guarantors, in liaison with the Government and armed
opposition groups, come to a speedy agreement to
operationalize the de-escalation zone in Idlib. This
will also require a very important element: protecting
civilians, but that will be addressed, I am sure, by my
colleague Stephen O’Brien.
As efforts to combat terrorism continue, we are
seeing the areas of control of the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)/Da’esh being constantly
shrunk — something I think everyone welcomes in the
ongoing fight against terrorism. While the Government
of Syria is proceeding towards Deir ez-Zor, the
Lebanese army has advanced against ISIL/Da’esh on
the Lebanese side of the border. The Syrian Democratic
Forces and the United States-led coalition continue
their efforts to eliminate ISIL from Raqqa, while the
Russian Federation is supporting the Government of
Syria in proceeding towards Deir ez-Zor. While military
operations are under way, rapid, safe and sustained
humanitarian access remains essential, as well as the
work for the release of the arbitrarily detained persons
and at least the shedding of light on the fate of the
thousands of disappeared.
All parties must also do their utmost to protect
civilians and civilian infrastructure while this is
17-27241

30/08/2017

The situation in the Middle East

happening. As I said, I am sure my colleague and
friend, Under-Secretary-General O’Brien — who I
would like personally, since this is my last opportunity
to do so, to thank him publicly for his immense efforts
on Syria — will further address these issues in his
briefing on the humanitarian aspects. I also want to
thank publicly the United Nations Mine Action Service
for its continued readiness to support humanitarian
demining efforts in Syria.
The developments I have described are the result of
a very timely process of prioritization and cooperation
among key external players, and a realization among
internal players of the need to compromise. The
challenge ahead will be to extend this spirit into the
political realm. This requires clear and new thinking
from the opposition and the Government, and enhanced
international cooperation.
Let me start with the opposition. The opposition
people and representatives who have been invited to
the Geneva talks — the High Negotiations Committee,
the Cairo platform and the Moscow platform, those
which have been specified by name in resolution 2254
(2015) — have important and urgent work to do to
develop common negotiating positions and strengthen
their own unity. It is high time for that. I briefed the
Council last time (see S/PV.7983) on the progress we
have made with them in two rounds of United Nations
technical talks in Geneva and nearby, at which we saw
a lot of important substantive progress. There is not
that much distance between them, except on one or two
crucial points. That substantive progress should now be
used as a springboard for further efforts.
Given that many developments and intense
discussions are taking place elsewhere between the
actors of the opposition, we have refrained from
holding further United Nations technical talks in
order to give time for these developments to unfold
and progress. But time must not be lost. Elevating
common technical commonalities to the political level
remains an imperative. They have agreed at least on the
technical commonalities. Now we need to bring them
to a higher level.
I am grateful to Saudi Arabia for taking the
initiative to convene a new, more inclusive meeting of
the opposition — a Riyadh 2 conference as it is called,
including with the hosting of a preparatory meeting last
week. Our technical work and political support will be
important contributions to those efforts. We will work

S/PV. 8036

closely with Saudi Arabia and all who have traditionally
supported or engaged with the opposition in this
pursuit. I recall in this respect that resolution 2254
(2015) encourages me to be active in any finalization
effort in this regard.
As we counsel fresh thinking and initiatives on the
part of the opposition, we may also need urgently to
do the same with the Government. The Government
has indicated that it would be prepared to intensify
its engagement with a unified opposition and with
clarity on principles that govern the political process.
But there are times when strong public signals are
sent that indicate an exclusively military approach,
and a dismissal of the prospects of any meaningful
political negotiation.
However, we have seen too many instances in
other conflicts where, despite military advances, a
Government has not able to turn those gains into a
sustainable post-conflict situation, due to unmet political
grievance and lack of genuine inclusion of all in the
future of the country. That is why we are convinced that
both the opposition and the Government have, or should
have, a genuine interest now in actually engaging in
serious discussions. Ultimately, it will only be Syrians
who determine the future of their country — we know
that — but an internationally supported and inclusive
political process will be required to lay the foundation
for a sustainable future and for genuine reconstruction.
It is in the profound interests of the long-suffering
people of Syria that the Government and the opposition
realize that the time has come to engage in more serious
and concrete negotiations.
In this regard, I would like to note that we are not
only focused on the Government and opposition, but
are listening to the full range of Syrian stakeholders.
Immediately after the seventh round of our own talks,
our own Office related to the Civil Society Support
Room completed regional consultations in Beirut,
Gaziantep and Amman. This discussion involved over
120 civil-society actors and networks, establishing the
foundation for future consultations in Geneva. It is
becoming increasingly clear from these consultations
that regardless of their perceived differences — and
they do have differences — all Syrians are impatient
for the conflict to end and the political process to
deliver. We will continue to encourage and facilitate
their collective work.

17-272413/10

S/PV.8036

The situation in the Middle East

Let me also update the Council on the Syrian
Women’s Advisory Board. Following its regular
contributions to the work that was done during the
seventh round of intra-Syrian talks, the 12-member
board is now currently undergoing a rotation exercise to
ensure continuous diversity of perspectives. I count on
the continued support of the Women’s Advisory Board
to advise me and my team to ensure the meaningful
representation of diverse women’s voices and women’s
rights perspectives in the political process as we move
forward. We hope to see the same in the delegations of
both the opposition and the Government.
So how do we now bring all this activity together
into one common effort in the coming months to
genuinely advance a political solution? What is the
path forward?
First, Russia, Iran, Turkey and others — including
the United States of America, Egypt and Jordan — will
need to keep working actively, as they have been
doing, on de-escalation. The next Astana meeting,
now scheduled for 14 and 15 September — and related
meetings elsewhere, both in Geneva and Amman, as we
have seen — should help to address these matters, and I
and my team will be there, in Astana, to help.
Secondly, it will be important for Saudi Arabia and
all who have influence with the opposition to focus, as
they are currently doing, on a single plan to foster the
cohesion and realism of the opposition. On our side,
we shall be actively involved in those efforts as well,
while, let me reiterate, my own Office stands ready to
convene further technical talks to support what Saudi
Arabia has been trying to do in unifying the opposition.
Thirdly, it will be vital for those with influence
on the Government of Syria to assess the situation
carefully and signal a genuine readiness for dialogue
and inclusion on the political future of Syria.

30/08/2017

Government and the opposition will come to Geneva
then to engage in formal negotiations.
This is a time for realism and focus, for shifting from
the logic of war to that of negotiation, and for putting the
interests of the Syrian people first. If I could identify
one thing above all that can make a difference, it would
be a sense of unity of purpose internationally with clear
priorities and common goals. We need therefore to find
creative ways to proceed along the path of peace that
the Security Council, through resolution 2254 (2015),
has long sought to advance. With that, and our common
encouragement to the Syrians in this regard, we can
make a real difference in this tragic conflict.
I also look forward to the occasion of the
forthcoming opening of the seventy-second session of
the General Assembly to see further opportunities and
initiatives related to an accelerated political process on
Syria. I would like to summarize the foregoing so that
we have some points on our radar screens that may help
us to focus.
First, we have had today’s Security Council meeting,
and the Council will hold its own deliberations. Next,
the Astana meeting is due to take place, and we want it
to succeed and look at additional de-escalation areas.
Then there is the opportunity that all of us, including
Council members, will have at the opening of the
seventy-second session of the General Assembly to
promote and push for discussions and initiatives related
to accelerating the political process on Syria. Then, in
October, we hope to see and we will be working and
pushing for the Riyadh II meeting to contribute to
producing a common platform among the opposition
parties, hoping meanwhile that the Government will
be helped also to realize that there is now a need for a
genuine political concrete negotiation.

Fourthly, I appreciate the continued engagement and
support of the European Union and view the meeting it
intends to host during the opening of the seventy-second
session of the General Assembly as an opportunity to
address future resilience and stabilization efforts and
support the humanitarian needs of civilians.

Meanwhile, hoping, if I may use that word in
relation to Eid — insha’Allah — that Deir ez-Zor and
Al-Raqqa get closer to being liberated, we urge that a
sustainable political solution be found so that Da’esh
will not and should not reappear like it did in Iraq. In
late October, there will be talks in Geneva. This time
we hope to see serious and concrete talks. We are
planning for two weeks back to back.

Bearing all of this mind, it is my intention to
reconvene the formal intra-Syrian talks in Geneva
later in October. In this way, we are giving time for
the dynamics I have just described to reach a further
stage of maturity. It is my hope that both the Syrian

The foregoing is basically what we are seeing
on our radar screens. Things may happen to move in
that direction or to stop moving in that direction, to
complicate the movement or to move forward, but we
need to have a common vision.

4/10

17-27241

30/08/2017

The situation in the Middle East

The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. De
Mistura for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. O’Brien.
Mr. O’Brien: I wish an Eid Mubarak to you,
Mr. President, and to all.
I would like to start by thanking my good friend
and indeed my colleague, Special Representative and
Envoy, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for all his tireless,
unstinting determination and skill in seeking to find a
way forward, above all, for the Syrian people who have
suffered so long.
In the violent, brutal chaotic world we live in
today, it is a sad, tragic and blunt truth that on this,
my last appearance in this role in this Chamber,
the Security Council, the highest body in the world
charged with preventing and resolving wars, conflicts
and the desperate human death, pain and suffering
directed caused by war and conflict, I am still urging
its members, in the name of our common humanity, to
find a way to stop the Syrian people from paying the
price of political failure.
Syria is a conflict with an atrocious, incalculable
human cost, one that has forced us to see the very
worst of human behaviour. It is a conflict that as a
consequence has consumed all of us without respite for
seven bloody years. When we pause to think even for
a moment that I say this knowing the sheer scale of the
needless man-made, violent, deliberate humanitarian
horror that has made 21 million Yemenis a sad lot
today, or the desperation with which Somalia, South
Sudan and north-eastern Nigeria, with the brave help
of humanitarian workers, are trying to avert famine
for 20 million of our fellow global citizens, or the
142 million people in 40 countries who need us tonight,
or the fact that month after month the unremitting
fearful plight of the Syrian people sears into our hearts
and outrages and torments our minds, I am bound to
reflect: “surely we can do better”.
Some 27 reports of the Secretary-General on the
Syrian crisis have been submitted to the Security
Council since I took up this Office in June 2015, and
countless briefings presented both in this open Chamber
and in private consultations — in 27 months, a record
55 consultations, to be accurate, 30 on Syria alone.
The Security Council is fully on notice and has heard
in minute detail about the crisis as the deadliest years of
the Syrian conflict has unfolded. We are all witnesses

S/PV. 8036

to the destruction of a country, its people, its children
and its future. We have endured the sight of people
dying of starvation or a child drowning and washed up
on the beach in his family’s desperate, dangerous bid
to escape the scandalous ravages of Syria then, which
continue today; pictures of emaciated starving children
in the besieged town of Madaya; and harrowing images
of bombs and mortars raining down on schools, medical
facilities and internally displaced settlements — where
there are meant to be sanctuaries — on public markets
and, yes, on those trying to bring the citizens of Syria
hope and support: humanitarian and health workers and
aid convoys.
We watched the parties cynically, methodically,
take out every single medical facility in eastern
Aleppo, one by one, day after day, with babies dying in
their incubators due to oxygen interruptions following
such attacks. We have all been shocked by reports of
double-tap attacks, where a helicopter or a jet bombs a
building, then waits, just long enough, for rescue and
medical workers to arrive before attacking again. We
witnessed nothing less than an all-out effort by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) to impose a
new Dark Age. We were at a loss for words at reports of
Yazidi girls scratching their faces out of fear of being
bought and sexually enslaved, and of reports of men
being thrown of tower blocks for being gay — and then
being stoned to death, even after surviving the fall. Just
last week, we were reminded of the biggest chemical
attack in Syria’s war, which hit the sieged eastern
Ghouta four years ago.
Meeting after meeting, therefore, we have detailed
this destruction, and yet failed to see accountability
for any of the countless war crimes and crimes against
humanity committed on the ground. As I leave the
United Nations, despite every humanitarian’s best
efforts in the United Nations and beyond, none of us
can escape a share in the shame that collectively we
have not put a stop to this despite at least 300,000,
even maybe 500,000, Syrians now killed, let alone the
millions injured, displaced or who have fled, petrified.
I call again, one final time, as the United Nations
Emergency Relief Coordinator, for members of
the Council to urgently refer the situation and the
people responsible for it in Syria to the International
Criminal Court. I also call on Member States to fully
support the International Impartial and Independent
Mechanism and ask, once more, the Syrian authorities
to finally grant access to the Independent International

17-272415/10

S/PV.8036

The situation in the Middle East

Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic.
To fail to do this simply reinforces impunity and
encourages the perpetrators, whoever they are, to feel
unthreatened and undeterred from their malevolent,
dastardly inhuman actions.
Over the month of July and into August, however
hideous it remains in so many parts of Syria, to remain
true to the facts, I am the first to be glad to report
that we continue to see a reduction in violence in
some areas of the country following the 4 May Astana
memorandum on de-escalation. Of course, I welcome
that. The impact of this conflict on the basic needs
and dignity of ordinary Syrians every day is clear, and
efforts to push the so-called ISIL out of its strongholds
continue to come with a terrible cost of killing, injuring
and displacing scores of civilians.
In Raqqa governorate, and since the beginning of
the Euphrates Wrath Operation in November last year,
over 271,00 men, women and children — including an
estimated 75,000 people from Raqqa city — have been
displaced from their homes to other locations within
the governorate, as well as to Hassakeh, Aleppo, Deir
ez-Zor and Hama governorates. That comes on the
heels of an increasing number of reported civilian
casualties as military operations, including air strikes,
are intensifying as the area that the so-called ISIL holds
shrinks. Last week alone, reports indicated that over 30
civilians were killed in the Al-Sakhani neighbourhood,
while eight people from the same family lost their lives
in a separate attack in another part of the city.
Just days before, dozens more had reportedly been
killed and injured in Raqqa city due to airstrikes and
shelling. The United Nations estimates that an average
of 27 people are being killed in Raqqa every day. Up
to 25,000 civilians still remain trapped in the city and
are increasingly exposed to the crossfire of the ongoing
fighting. They risk being killed, either by airstrikes
or by ISIL snipers or mines if they try to flee, or of
being used as human shields if they remain. Can you
imagine being faced with that choice, clinging to your
young child’s hand? It is a clear clarion call: in line
with international humanitarian law, the safety of those
trying to flee must be guaranteed, without excessive
screenings or restrictions on movement. Nothing is
more important than protecting civilians during this
conflict; that has always been the case.
Be in no doubt: the heinous fault lies with the
fighters and their masters on every side. But the
6/10

30/08/2017

international community cannot hold its head up high
when it comes to protection. Again, I therefore urge all
parties fighting in Raqqa and across Syria to take every
possible measure, however difficult and constraining
they may feel it is on their military action, to spare
and protect civilians and civilian infrastructure in
ever-increasing urban settings, which compounds the
mortal risk to the innocents — as required under the
obligations they freely entered into under international
humanitarian law, are bound by and to which they have
to be held to account.
Further to the south in Syria, the security and
protection of an estimated 4,000 Syrians in Hadalat
and 45,000 Syrians in Rukban — mainly women and
children — who remain stranded at the berm along
Syria’s border with Jordan, continue to deteriorate.
Airstrikes have been reported in the area in recent
weeks, causing serious distress and panic among this
already displaced, very vulnerable population, stuck in
barren desert, fearing for their lives. The establishment
of a Government of Syria-controlled corridor from
Damascus to Iraq, north of the berm, has effectively
trapped the population, restricting the movement of
both people and goods to the area. Military action has
intensified, thereby heightening levels of insecurity
and exposing the civilian population in both Hadalat
and Rukban settlements to massively greater and
graver risks. Moreover, the last cycle of distribution
of humanitarian assistance was halted on 15 June, and
we urgently seek the resumption of the distribution of
lifesaving assistance. I visited Jordan multiple times,
where I had positive discussions with the authorities on
the berm, and appreciated their continued engagement
to see that those at the berm receive the support they
so desperately need. Under today’s new threat, their
best chance is to be allowed to go, even if temporarily,
into Jordan.
Back in the north of Syria, in Idlib, the situation of
displaced people in the governorate remains a cause of
deep foreboding. As local agreements continue to be
reached with various non-State armed grouped across
Syria and in neighouring Lebanon — agreements that
I am bound to say are not in line with international
standards or humanitarian principles and often force
civilians to choose between remaining and fearing
for their safety, or evacuating to insecure areas they
have never been to — 1 million people have now been
displaced to the governorate. Even though airstrikes have
diminished at least somewhat since the de-escalation
17-27241

30/08/2017

The situation in the Middle East

memorandum was signed in May, the situation remains
perilous for those displaced who arrive into an area
unable to cope with such voluminous movement.
It is the heroic work of our partners from
non-governmental organizations (NGO), who provide
the main part of the response to Idlib cross-border
from Turkey, that is responsible for keeping people
alive. That has been challenged, however, as the former
Al-Nusra Front — as Mr. De Mistura said, a proscribed
terrorist organization, along with the so-called ISIL, on
the Security Council sanctions list group Hayat Tahrir
al-Sham — have been battling against other opposition
groups for control of parts of Idlib. The insecurity
during fighting forced some NGOs to stop their work
temporarily.
I am gravely concerned with the current brutal
push by Al-Nusra to control local councils and other
important institutions. I call on all parties to respect
humanitarian principles and ensure the independence
of those who are providing humanitarian assistance.
As Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura has said, in Idlib
protection is key. And international humanitarian law
apply to all parties, not just States — vitally important
as that is in Syria as elsewhere — it also applies to all
fighters, factions, movements and non-State actors
everywhere. It applies to them all, to us all. That is what
my colleagues in the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights need, and must be
allowed, to do: gather, preserve, document and, one day,
present such evidence to an appropriate, accountable
tribunal in order to ensure that impunity is banished.
Let me now turn to inter-agency operations
aimed at besieged and hard-to-reach locations. On
19 July, the United Nations submitted its August and
September inter-agency convoy plan to the Syrian
authorities, which seeks to reach 1,231,000 people
across 36 locations. In their response, received
on 3 August following subsequent United Nations
efforts to clarify, the Syrian authorities affirmed
that the United Nations and its partners could deliver
multi-sectoral assistance to 1,638,114 people. The
authorities clarified, and even increased, the number
of beneficiaries — owing, in part at least, to persistent
United Nations engagement — and authorized more
people than requested for seven locations. That is
welcome news. But the key now is to turn those
requests and approvals for outreach to besieged and
hard-to-reach locations into actual deliveries to Syrians
in need. The team on the ground is working day and

S/PV. 8036

night to make that a reality, including negotiating with
the Syrian authorities to turn partial approvals into full
approvals and — let me stress, with all the force at my
command — to put an end to the removal of medical
supplies, which continues.
It has finally been accepted that birthing kits are
not hostile weapons. What is in the minds of the brutes
who remove such items, and of the people at the highest
levels in the Syrian Government who order that to
happen? No wonder they have not allowed me back into
Syria since December 2015. Speaking truth to power
only hurts when the truth is shameful.
So far this month, humanitarian convoys have
delivered desperately needed lifesaving assistance to
the besieged towns of Douma, in rural Damascus, and
Barzeh. In total, 55,000 people in besieged locations
have received assistance: 35,000 people in Douma on
17 August were provided with multisectoral assistance,
and 20,000 people in Barzeh received food and nutrition
assistance on 26 August. The delivery to Douma
was notable in that it was the first convoy to proceed
into eastern Ghouta since the deployment of Russian
military police to the area as part of the de-escalation
area initiative. In addition, two inter-agency convoys
delivered lifesaving assistance to the area around
northern rural Hims, one to the hard-to-reach towns of
Talbiseh and Tlul Elhomor on 19 August, and a second
to Al-Rastan on 27 August. In total, 191,500 people in
need were provided with multisectoral assistance.
I am the first to acknowledge, as demonstrated
by concurrent developments in Astana, Amman and
Cairo in recent months, that there remain persistent
and determined efforts to reduce violence through
de-escalation agreements. I welcome those efforts,
and I hope the Astana guarantors will soon be able
to finalize the remaining operational and technical
modalities for all de-escalation areas and for promoting
confidence-building measures regarding the issues
of detainees, abductees and missing persons and
humanitarian demining. I urge all parties to work
together to consolidate and expand those ceasefires. I
also wish to reiterate that any reduction in hostilities must
also generate concrete results for the safe, unimpeded
and sustained freedom of movement and humanitarian
access by the United Nations and our partners in full
conformity with international humanitarian law, that
is, in accordance with the principles of impartiality,
independence and neutrality, in order to relieve the
suffering and meet humanitarian needs wherever they

17-272417/10

S/PV.8036

The situation in the Middle East

30/08/2017

arise, and where we determine the beneficiaries, the
quantities and what is needed.

deliveries to areas where violence has ceased through
the de-escalation agreements. It is as simple as that.

Access to areas identified for de-escalation, and
to many other areas across Syria where needs remain
high, still falls short of what is required. In particular,
in areas where there has been a decrease in fighting
there is no excuse for any side to restrict access. And
let me say it loud and clear yet again: humanitarian and
health workers are not a target.

I must also share my frustrations about the little
progress made in recent months in responding to the
needs of the many thousands of people still besieged
in Fo’ah, Kafraya and Yarmouk. Following months of
difficult negotiations, we were informed in mid-August
that an agreement had finally been reached between
the various parties for aid distributions to take place
simultaneously in those three locations. We loaded
our trucks on 17 August, only to off-load them again
a week later, on 23 August — the day on which we
were informed that the agreement was no more. That is
disgusting. It is scandalous and an outrage, and I urge
all Member States, in particular those with influence,
to do all they can to bring the parties to their senses. I
am told that a new agreement among the parties was
apparently reached on 27 August, but where is the
evidence? I have to be hopeful that this time we will
succeed in getting through. Thousands of people, for
the most part women and children, depend upon our
collective action.

I would like to reiterate our impartial appreciation
to the Russian Federation and to voice our support for its
initiative, presented in the Council on 9 August, aimed
at scaling up humanitarian operations in de-escalation
areas. Be assured that the United Nations and its
humanitarian partners have been actively working
on preparedness planning and remain committed
to scaling up operations and providing lifesaving
assistance to men, women and children in need in the
de-escalation areas and throughout the country, despite
the challenging and dangerous operational environment
on the ground.
In recent days, the deployment of convoys to
Douma, Barzeh, Al-Rastan, Talbiseh and Tlul Elhomor
has shown that, when there is sufficient political will,
with the active engagement of the Russian Federation
and other Member States, access to besieged and
hard-to-reach locations is possible. That said — and
I cannot stress this point strongly enough — the only
way of guaranteeing that the Russian initiative will be
a continuing success is by ensuring that administrative
delays on the part of the Government of Syria are lifted
once and for all.
We cannot keep waiting for the signing of the
necessary facilitation letters. Give us the letters, and
we will deploy. In fact, every month thousands of
facilitation letters have been readily signed for regular
programmes in Government-controlled areas — the
vast majority of those that have been requested. Yet
for access to cross-line areas, only a small percentage
of those areas approved by the Government actually
receive facilitation letters. Of course, that is not right.
It is outrageous and morally reprehensible, let alone in
breach of international humanitarian law. That must
change — and now. Non-State armed groups must also
provide the necessary security guarantees in an equally
timely manner. Otherwise, despite our very best
intentions, we will not be able to noticeably increase our
8/10

As I draw to a close, let highlight a vital point. Ten
days ago we commemorated World Humanitarian Day,
where we took time to pay tribute to all the brave women
and men who have died in humanitarian service, in Syria
and around the world. Let us together honour them here
today, as well as those who continue to risk their lives
every day in Syria and elsewhere in their quest to help
others. Let us also stand in solidarity with the millions
of civilians in Syria whose lives have been destroyed
by the conflict, their dignity obliterated, their loved
ones killed, their towns reduced to rubble, their hope
for the future shattered. We stand in solidarity with
them to send a clear message to the world: civilians,
humanitarians and health workers, wherever they are,
are not a target.
As I take my leave, despite all the grave humanitarian
challenges being faced by our fellow human beings
today in over 40 countries, I remain inspired and
eternally grateful for the selfless, skilled, persistent,
brave and courageous work of the humanitarian and
health workers around the world — in the field as well
as those running organizations and coordinating, be
they in the United Nations or in international and local
non-governmental organizations and partners. They
have worked to save millions of lives and, in today’s
world of overwhelmingly protracted, man-made
17-27241

30/08/2017

The situation in the Middle East

and avoidable conflict settings, to protect civilians
wherever possible.
Yes, we have to have safe, unimpeded access and the
absolute right to principled humanitarian relief through
action in line with international humanitarian law to
meet the needs of the vulnerable. And yes, we will need
more and more of the continuing generosity of an everbroadening number of donors of financial resources.
And yes, that is best done, for the scale necessary
to meet the exponentially rising demand, through
coordinated United Nations and multilateral channels,
as fully endorsed at the World Humanitarian Summit.
I leave with a heavy heart, however. As I survey
this famous horseshoe table, I see the 15 members of
the Security Council who represent the world’s hopes
for peace and security and are charged, even while
representing their own capitals and their respective,
competing perspectives, with rising above those separate
interests to reach the collective responsibility for the
interests of all the peoples of the world by recognizing
and acting to put our common humanity and our
responsibility to our fellow global citizens first — their
lives and their protection — that is the humanitarian
imperative. That is our and Council members’ collective
responsibility and collective accountability.
In Syria, Yemen, or the countless other areas where
we encounter the desperate man-made humanitarian
needs of people caught up in conflict crises, surely
what divides members in the Council cannot be more
important than what must unite them and us all — our
common humanity and our goal of relieving the suffering
of the world’s most vulnerable. We must give hope and
a future to those women, men, elderly, sick and the
children — the young girls and boys — caught up in
crises, who deserve no less of a life than each member
sitting around this horseshoe table.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. O’Brien
for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): During
the past 20 months as a non-permanent member of the
Security Council, I believe that I have already said on
other occasions that it is always difficult to listen to
the words of Mr. Stephen O’Brien because he confronts
us with the uncomfortable reality of the horrors of war
with absolute and uncompromising frankness.

S/PV. 8036

The Charter of the United Nations refers to the
“scourge of war”, and that scourge is represented to
us in what Mr. O’Brien has shown us, regrettably not
just this month but continuously, as he has briefed the
Council with compassion, conviction and in a direct
and frank manner — and I should say that he has been
brutally frank. Although during the past 20 months I
have learned to appreciate each of his briefings, however
frank they have been, they do not leave us feeling very
much at ease, because ultimately they confront us with
our failures and our inability to effectively contribute
to stopping the horrors in Syria in an effective and
swift manner, as is the case today. As Mr. O’Brien
leaves us, he also leaves us with a major life lesson and
has set the bar very high for his successor. On behalf
of my Government, I wish him every success in his
future endeavours.
I should also like to take this opportunity to thank
our tireless friend Staffan de Mistura, whom we have
long admired for his unyielding optimism. He is
determined and continues to do all that he can to carve
out spaces and forums in which an agreement can be
forged regarding the situation in Syria. He is struggling
in the worst of all situations, which is to a great extent
the result of the absolute lack of political commitment
on the part of all the opposition groups in Syria,
which, through their disunion and lack of common
interests, makes it very difficult for them to come to
the negotiation table, because the same groups appear
very far from finding the necessary common front to
begin serious negotiations. Once again, we extend to
Staffan de Mistura and his entire team our gratitude
and prayers that he will never let up.
Since Uruguay took up its mandate as a
non-permanent member of the Council 20 months
ago, we have focused our work on the protection of
civilians and international humanitarian law, and have
continuously worked to prevent efforts to hinder the
access to and distribution of aid, while demanding
the protection and safety of humanitarian workers in
carrying out their work.
Stephen O’Brien recalled that only a few days
ago, we commemorated World Humanitarian Day, and
my delegation recognized the hard work and personal
sacrifice of every one of the thousands of humanitarian
workers throughout the world, who, on a daily basis,
put their lives at risk to help those most in need in the
interests of peace and a more humane world. The case
of Syria is the best example of that today.

17-272419/10

S/PV.8036

The situation in the Middle East

We therefore vigorously reject the unfounded
accusations made by the Syrian delegation against the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) during our meeting on this agenda item (see
S/PV.8015) in July. We firmly attest to the absolutely
professional, impartial and depoliticized attitude of
OCHA in Syria and wherever else it carries out its
work, and we reiterate the full support of Uruguay for
the Office. At this point in time, with the transition
of leadership in the Office, we believe that Damascus
should make the positive gesture of inviting its new
Director to visit Syria, which could lead to a fluid
relationship, thereby allowing for the regular delivery
of humanitarian aid.
The Astana process and other initiatives launched
over the past months aimed at bringing about a
cessation of local hostilities have led to a significant
reduction in the violence in the country. We stress
that it is truly important that those areas maintain a
transitional status with a view to maintaining for the
future the unity and territorial integrity of the Syrian
Arab Republic. We must, however, express our concern
that for four consecutive months we have not received
any information regarding the implementation of the
memorandum of 4 May, particularly since, to date,
unrestricted access has not been provided to the United
Nations or to groups seeking to distribute humanitarian
assistance to those areas. Stephen O’Brien mentioned
the work carried out with the Russian Federation over
the past days, but it is also necessary to ensure the
unrestricted access of the United Nations to those areas.
That should provide assurances that the fundamental
principles of international humanitarian law, including
the prohibition of forced displacement and the freedom
of movement to enter and leave voluntarily those
territories, will be respected. Regrettably, aid deliveries
are increasingly being discontinued, thereby preventing
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs from being able to discharge its work. The
ongoing fighting, security issues and — what is even
more incomprehensible — the lack of authorizations

10/10

30/08/2017

and the bureaucratic obstacles imposed by the Syrian
Government prevent humanitarian aid from being
delivered to those who need it.
As we have already said on previous occasions,
that is not a failure on the part of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, but of the
Security Council and of the Member States with
influence over the parties. Thus far we have not been
able to persuade all the various actors in the Syrian
conflict to allow regular access to convoys with
humanitarian aid. To date, all parties to the conflict in
Syria have consistently ignored and violated that basic
principle of international law. For that reason, Uruguay
supported the establishment of the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011, including those that constitute war crimes, such
as the use of chemical weapons against civilians.
Providing justice to the hundreds of thousands of
innocent victims of that conflict will be essential for
lasting peace in Syria and for that country and its entire
population to overcome the horrors of the protracted
war. It will also have a persuasive effect for the future.
On a related note, we also support the SecretaryGeneral’s request that incidents in Syria be referred to,
and considered by, the International Criminal Court.
The priorities in Syria have been clearly
defined — achieving a political settlement that can
end the war and pave the way for a peaceful political
transition; consolidating local ceasefires; and ensuring
humanitarian access to the millions of people in need in
areas that are besieged or hard to reach.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.20 a.m.

17-27241
