S/2005/793

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 December 2005
Original: English

Letter dated 15 November 2005 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
The mandate of my Special Representative for the Great Lakes region,
Ibrahima Fall, will expire on 31 December 2005.
During 2005, Mr. Fall has continued to support the efforts of the 11 core
countries towards achieving the objectives of the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region. Important progress has been made in this regard over the past
year. At the first Summit of the Conference, convened under United Nations and
African Union auspices on 19 and 20 November 2004 in Dar es Salaam, the Heads
of State adopted the Declaration on Peace, Security, Democracy and Development in
the Great Lakes Region, which lays out a set of principles and established a road
map for the process.
Since then, the core countries, with the support of the United Nations and
other partners, have been working together to translate the Declaration into concrete
programmes of action and protocols. Following intensive work and a series of recent
meetings, at expert and ministerial levels, on key issues of common interest in the
four themes of the Conference, a limited number of draft projects and related draft
protocols have been selected as priorities.
It is envisaged that the protocols and programmes of action will, together with
the Dar es Salaam Declaration, form the Security, Stability and Development Pact
for the Great Lakes Region, which is expected to be adopted by the Heads of State
during the second Summit of the Conference.
The Conference has been successful in providing a framework for the core
countries to collectively address their common concerns and identify viable
solutions to their common problems. The process has also served as an important
confidence-building mechanism for the region. The real measure of the
Conference’s success, however, will be the extent to which the proposed Security,
Stability and Development Pact is implemented, as a regional peacebuilding
initiative, following the second Summit.
The core countries will therefore continue to require the support of the
international community up to and beyond the Summit, to maintain the momentum
and help ensure that the work accomplished thus far will have a tangible and lasting
impact on peace, stability and development throughout the region.
In view of the above, it is my intention to extend the mandate of my Special
Representative for the Great Lakes Region until 31 December 2006. I should be
grateful if you would bring this matter to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi Annan

05-64851 (E) 191205

*0564851*
