United Nations

A/RES/63/175

General Assembly

Distr.: General
20 March 2009

Sixty-third session
Agenda item 64 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 18 December 2008
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/63/430/Add.2)]

63/175. Human rights and extreme poverty
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1 the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 2 the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights,2 the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, 3 the Convention on the Rights of the Child, 4 the
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, 5
the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 6 and other human rights
instruments adopted by the United Nations,
0F

1F

2F

3F

4F

5F

Recalling its resolution 47/196 of 22 December 1992, by which it declared
17 October the International Day for the Eradication of Poverty, and its
resolution 62/205 of 19 December 2007, by which it proclaimed the Second United
Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty (2008–2017), as well as its resolution
61/157 of 19 December 2006 and its previous resolutions on human rights and
extreme poverty, in which it reaffirmed that extreme poverty and exclusion from
society constitute a violation of human dignity and that urgent national and
international action is therefore required to eliminate them,
Recalling also its resolution 52/134 of 12 December 1997, in which it
recognized that the enhancement of international cooperation in the field of human
rights was essential for the effective understanding, promotion and protection of all
human rights,
Reaffirming the internationally agreed development goals, including the
Millennium Development Goals,
Deeply concerned that extreme poverty persists in all countries of the world,
regardless of their economic, social and cultural situation, and that its extent and
_______________
1

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.
4
Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
5
Ibid., vol. 660, No. 9464.
6
Resolution 61/106, annex I.
2

08-48129

A/RES/63/175

manifestations, such as hunger, trafficking in human beings, disease, lack of
adequate shelter, illiteracy and hopelessness, are particularly severe in developing
countries, while acknowledging the significant progress made in several parts of the
world in combating extreme poverty,
Deeply concerned also that gender inequality, violence and discrimination
exacerbate extreme poverty, disproportionally impacting women and girls,
Stressing that special attention should be given to children, persons with
disabilities and indigenous peoples who are living in extreme poverty,
Concerned by the challenges faced today, including those derived from the
food crisis, the energy crisis and the financial crisis, and by their impact on the
increase in the number of people living in extreme poverty and their negative effect
on the capacity of all States, especially developing countries, to fight extreme
poverty,
Recalling Human Rights Council resolutions 2/2 of 27 November 2006, 7 7/27
of 28 March 2008 8 and 8/11 of 18 June 2008, 9 as well as resolution 2006/9 of
24 August 2006 of the Subcommission on the Promotion and Protection of Human
Rights, 10 and taking note of the annex thereto, containing the draft guiding
principles on extreme poverty and human rights: the rights of the poor,
6F

7F

8F

9F

Welcoming the Summit of World Leaders for Action against Hunger and
Poverty of 20 September 2004, convened in New York by the Presidents of Brazil,
Chile and France and the Prime Minister of Spain with the support of the
Secretary-General,
Recognizing that the eradication of extreme poverty is a major challenge
within the process of globalization and requires coordinated and continued policies
through decisive national action and international cooperation,
Stressing the necessity of better understanding the causes and consequences of
extreme poverty,
Reaffirming that, since the existence of widespread extreme poverty inhibits
the full and effective enjoyment of human rights and might, in some situations,
constitute a threat to the right to life, its immediate alleviation and eventual
eradication must remain a high priority for the international community,
Stressing that respect for all human rights, which are universal, indivisible,
interdependent and interrelated, is of crucial importance for all policies and
programmes to fight extreme poverty,
Reaffirming that democracy, development and the full and effective enjoyment
of human rights and fundamental freedoms are interdependent and mutually
reinforcing and contribute to the eradication of extreme poverty,
Reaffirms that extreme poverty and exclusion from society constitute a
1.
violation of human dignity and that urgent national and international action is
therefore required to eliminate them;
_______________
7

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/62/53), chap.
I, sect. A.
8
Ibid., Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/63/53), chap. II.
9
Ibid., chap. III, sect. A.
10
See A/HRC/Sub.1/58/L.11.

2

A/RES/63/175

2.
Reaffirms also that it is essential for States to foster participation by the
poorest people in the decision-making process in the societies in which they live, in
the promotion of human rights and in efforts to combat extreme poverty, and that it
is essential for people living in poverty and vulnerable groups to be empowered to
organize themselves and to participate in all aspects of political, economic and
social life, in particular the planning and implementation of policies that affect
them, thus enabling them to become genuine partners in development;
Emphasizes that extreme poverty is a major issue to be addressed by
3.
Governments, civil society and the United Nations system, including international
financial institutions, and in this context reaffirms that political commitment is a
prerequisite for the eradication of poverty;
Reaffirms that the existence of widespread absolute poverty inhibits the
4.
full and effective enjoyment of human rights and renders democracy and popular
participation fragile;
Recognizes the need to promote respect for human rights and
5.
fundamental freedoms in order to address the most pressing social needs of people
living in poverty, including through the design and development of appropriate
mechanisms to strengthen and consolidate democratic institutions and governance;
Reaffirms the commitments contained in the United Nations Millennium
6.
Declaration, 11 in particular the commitments to spare no effort to fight against
extreme poverty and to achieve development and poverty eradication, including the
commitment to halve, by 2015, the proportion of the world’s people whose income
is less than one United States dollar a day and the proportion of people who suffer
from hunger;
10F

Reaffirms also the commitment made at the 2005 World Summit to
7.
eradicate poverty and promote sustained economic growth, sustainable development
and global prosperity for all, including women and girls; 12
1F

8.
Encourages the international community to strengthen its efforts to
address challenges that are contributing to extreme poverty, including those posed
by the current food, energy and financial crises in all parts of the world, especially
in developing countries, by enhancing its cooperation to help build national
capacities;
Reaffirms the critical role of both formal and informal education in the
9.
achievement of poverty eradication and other development goals as envisaged in the
Millennium Declaration, in particular basic education and training for eradicating
illiteracy, and efforts towards expanded secondary and higher education as well as
vocational education and technical training, especially for girls and women, the
creation of human resources and infrastructure capabilities and the empowerment of
those living in poverty, and in this context reaffirms the Dakar Framework for
Action adopted at the World Education Forum in 2000, 13 and recognizes the
importance of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
strategy for the eradication of poverty, especially extreme poverty, in supporting the
12F

_______________
11

See resolution 55/2.
See resolution 60/1.
13
See United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Final Report of the World
Education Forum, Dakar, Senegal, 26–28 April 2000 (Paris, 2000).
12

3

A/RES/63/175

Education for All programmes as a tool to achieve the millennium development goal
of universal primary education by 2015;
10. Invites the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to
continue to give high priority to the question of the relationship between extreme
poverty and human rights, and also invites her to further pursue the work in this
area;
11. Calls upon States, United Nations bodies, in particular the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the United Nations
Development Programme, intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental
organizations to continue to give appropriate attention to the links between human
rights and extreme poverty, and encourages the private sector and the international
financial institutions to proceed likewise;
12. Invites States, as well as relevant United Nations agencies, the
specialized agencies, programmes and funds, intergovernmental organizations,
United Nations treaty bodies, special procedures, including the independent expert
on the question of human rights and extreme poverty, national human rights
institutions, within their respective mandates, and also non-governmental
organizations, especially those in which people in situations of extreme poverty
express their views, to contribute further to the consultations led by the High
Commissioner on the draft guiding principles on extreme poverty and human rights:
the rights of the poor;10
13. Welcomes the efforts of entities throughout the United Nations system to
incorporate the Millennium Declaration and the internationally agreed development
goals set out therein into their work;
14. Also welcomes the appointment of the new independent expert on the
question of human rights and extreme poverty and the renewed mandate that she has
received, and takes note with appreciation of her report to the General Assembly; 14
13F

15. Decides to consider the question further at its sixty-fifth session under
the sub-item entitled “Human rights questions, including alternative approaches for
improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms”.
70th plenary meeting
18 December 2008

_______________
14

4

A/63/274.
