VI.

191

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recalling the principies associated with the right of individuals to own property described in the relevant articles of regional human rights instruments of the Organization of American States, the Organization of African
Unity and the Council of Europe,
1. Recognizes that there exist in Member States many
forros of legal property ownership, including private, communal, and state forros, each of which should contribute
to ensuring effective development and utilization of human resources through the establishment of sound bases
for political, economic and social justice;
2. Emphasizes the role of individual initiative as an invaluable resource in promoting economic and social development;
3. Affirms, in accordance with article 30 ofthe Universal Declaration ofHuman Rights, that nothing in the Declaration, including the right of everyone to own property
alone as well as in association with others, may be interpreted as implying for any State, group or person any right
to engage in any activity or to perform any act aimed at
the destruction of any of the rights and freedoms set forth
therein;
4. Invites the regional commissions to consider the relationship between the full enjoyment ofthe right of everyone to own property alone as well as in association with
others, as set forth in article 17 of the Universal Declaration ofHuman Rights, and the economic and social development of Member States;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a report,
taking into account the views of Member States, specialized agencies and other competent bodies of the United
Nations system, within existing resources, on:
(a) The relationship between the full enjoyment by individuals of human rights and fundamental freedoms, in
particular the right of everyone to own property alone as
well as in association with others, as set forth in article 17
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and the
economic and social development of Member States;
(b) The role of the right of everyone to own property
alone as well as in association with others, as set forth in
article 17 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
in ensuring the full and free participation of individuals in
the economic and social systems of States;
6. Invites Member States to communicate to the Secretary-General their views on the subject of his report;
7. Jn vites the specialized agencies and other competent
bodies of the United Nations system to communicate to
the Secretary-General their views on the subject of his report;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to report his findings, through the Economic and Social Council, to the
General Assembly at its forty-third session;
9. Also requests that a preliminary, oral report on this
question be made to the General Assembly at its fortysecond session;
10. Invites the Commission on Human Rights at its
forty-third session to resume consideration of the right of
everyone to own property alone as well as in association
with others;
11. Decides to consider this question at its forty-second
session under the item entitled "Alternative approaches
and ways and means within the United Nations system for
improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and
fundamental freedoms".
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986

41/133.

Right to development

The General Assembly
Declares that:
The achievement of the right to development requires a
concerted international and national effort to eliminate
economic deprivation, hunger and disease in ali parts of
the world without discrimination in accordance with the
Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 66 the
lnternational Development Strategy for the Third United
Nations Development Decade 116 and the Charter ofEconomic Rights and Duties of States; 65
To this end, international co-operation should aim at the
maintenance of stable and sustained economic growth
with simultaneous action to increase concessional assistance to developing countries, build world food security,
resolve the debt burden, eliminate trade barriers, promote
monetary stability and enhance scientific and technological co-operation.
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986
41/134.

Status of the Convention against Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment
or Punishment

The General Assembly,
Reca/ling article 5 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 2 and article 7 of the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights, 22 both of which provide that
no one shall be subjected to torture orto cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment,
Recalling also the Declaration on the Protection of All
Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,
adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution
3452 (XXX) of 9 December 1975,
Recalling further its resolution 39/46 of 10 December
1984, by which it adopted and opened for signature, ratification and accession the Convention against Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and called upon ali Governments to consider
signing and ratifying the Convention as a matter of priority, as well as its resolution 40/128 of 13 December
1985,
Mindful of the relevance, for the eradication of torture
and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, of the Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials 117 and of the Principies of Medica! Ethics, 118
Convinced of the desirability of early finalization and
subsequent adoption ofthe draft Body of Principies for the
Protection of Ali Persons under Any Form of Detention
or lmprisonment, 11 9
Seriously concerned about the alarming number of reported cases of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment taking place in various
parts of the world,
Determined to promote the full implementation of the
prohibition, under international and national law, of the

11 6 Rc,olu1ion JS/56, annex.
117 Re,olulion 34/169, annex.

IIB Resolution 37/194, annex.
119 A/.14/146, annex.
