S/PV.7643

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7643rd meeting

Friday, 11 March 2016, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Gaspar Martins. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Angola)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Yoshikawa
Mr. Ibrahim
Mrs. Schwalger
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Power
Mr. Bermúdez
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
United Nations peacekeeping operations

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-06801 (E)
*1606801*

S/PV.7643

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
United Nations peacekeeping operations
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2016/235, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the United States of America.
Members of the Council also have before them
document S/2016/239, which contains a proposed
amendment submitted by Egypt to the draft resolution
contained in document S/2016/235.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution contained in document S/2016/235 and
on the proposed amendment contained in document
S/2016/239.
Members of the Council have before them the
proposed amendment submitted by Egypt contained
in document S/2016/239. Rule 36 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure stipulates, inter alia,
the following:
“when an amendment adds to or deletes from the
text of a motion or draft resolution, that amendment
shall be voted on first.”
Accordingly, I intend to put the proposed amendment
to the vote now.
I shall first call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements before the voting on the
proposed amendment.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Egypt
is proposing an amendment to paragraph 2 of the
draft resolution (S/2016/235) that has been submitted
to the Security Council. This is the paragraph that
details the conditions under which a contingent would
be repatriated in the case of an allegation of sexual
exploitation and abuse. The amendment consists of a
slight modification to the language in the paragraph,
to be put to a separate vote. The original language
proposed by the United States delegation would allow
taking arbitrary and unobjective decisions amounting to
collective punishment against hundreds of peacekeeping
personnel. That would undoubtedly have severe and
2/11

11/03/2016

negative impacts on the morale of personnel and tarnish
the reputation of troop-contributing countries.
Our proposed amendment is aimed at addressing
that loophole in the draft resolution by specifying the
conditions that would have to be met in order to take
action with regard to an entire contingent. Those three
conditions are: a failure by the troop-contributing
country to investigate allegations of sexual exploitation
and abuse; a failure by the troop-contributing country
to punish those guilty of sexual exploitation and abuse;
and a failure by the troop-contributing country to
inform the Secretary-General of the measures taken
against those who commit acts of sexual exploitation
and abuse.
Ms. Power (United States of America): The United
States will vote against the proposed amendment put
forward by Egypt for a simple, stark reason, that is,
the amendment would undermine the purpose of the
draft resolution (S/2016/235). Our draft resolution
does not dictate how any Member State should go
about investigating allegations or punishing those
perpetrators found within their own systems to be
guilty. But it does clearly state — finally — that there
would be real consequences if the concerned troop- or
police-contributing country failed to credibly respond
to the allegations against its personnel. Under the draft
resolution, a non-response is simply not an option. Our
draft resolution outlines broad, objective criteria for
troop- and police-contributing countries to satisfy, as
appropriate, in the event that their personnel are the
subject of an allegation or allegations. Those criteria
relate to countries not taking any of the following steps,
namely, not investigating an allegation or allegations,
not holding accountable somebody who has been found
to be a perpetrator, or not informing the SecretaryGeneral of the actions that the State has undertaken.
In the draft resolution, which will come up for a vote
shortly, the failure to do any one of those things should
trigger the replacement provision set out in paragraph 2
of the draft resolution owing to non-response.
Please hear me out on this issue: by merely inserting
a very simple word — one of the most often-used words
in the English language, “and” — the amendment
proposed by Egypt stipulates that all three conditions
must be met prior to triggering that provision. For
example, under the Egyptian provision, if a country
merely sends a letter to the Secretary-General, after
receiving an allegation or allegations, that it has chosen
not to investigate, giving no reason, but informing the
16-06801

11/03/2016

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV.7643

Secretary-General according to that provision, and if it
does nothing else, it would be in compliance with the
draft resolution as amended by Egypt. That would be
enough. If a Member State investigated and determined
that an individual committed an act of sexual abuse
and exploitation but does not hold the perpetrator
accountable, it would actually be in compliance with
the draft resolution as Egypt would have it amended.

The President: I shall now put to the vote
the proposed amendment contained in document
S/2016/239.

With the proposed Egyptian amendment, there would
be no cost either for non-response or for uninvestigated,
unaccountable criminal behaviour. That undermines
the purpose of today’s draft resolution, which is to get
countries to respond to credible allegations against
their personnel and to change a system that is not
working. It is to move away from talking about zero
tolerance to actually having a provision that puts in
place consequences that incentivize the kinds of actions
that every member of the Security Council, including
Egypt, has said it supports.

Against:
France, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Spain,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay

For that reason, we will vote against the proposed
Egyptian amendment. As a Council, we often demand
that perpetrators be held accountable, and no one has
said before that the Council is acting in contravention of
the presumption of innocence. That is not what we are
doing. In that regard, again, Member States will have
the authority within their own systems to determine
how to pursue an investigation, whether a guilty
finding is appropriate and what will be the means of
accountability that they put in place. But it cannot be
the case that simply sending a note to the SecretaryGeneral after allegations of such gravity are brought is
enough to dispense with a State’s obligations under the
draft resolution.

The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.

My last point is that we in the United States are
vehemently opposed to collective punishment. I think
that everyone on the Council is totally united on
that. We oppose the stigma that is placed on whole
units serving honourably when single individuals are
alleged to have committed crimes of the magnitude
we are talking about. But what is causing collective
punishment, collective guilt and stigmas — not just
for a unit, but for the United Nations as a whole and
for its missions — is the failure to establish individual
responsibility. The collective gets the blame when
the individual is not held accountable, and Egypt’s
proposed amendment would make it less likely that we
would see individual responsibility.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Angola, China, Egypt, Russian
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)

Federation,

Abstaining:
Senegal
The President: The result of the voting is as
follows: 5 votes in favour, 9 against and 1 abstention.
The amendment has not been adopted, it having failed
to obtain the required number of votes.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Angola, China, France, Japan, Malaysia, New
Zealand, Russian Federation, Senegal, Spain,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
Abstaining:
Egypt
The President: The result of the voting is as follows:
14 votes in favour, none against and 1 abstention. The
draft resolution has been adopted as resolution 2272
(2016).
I shall now give the floor to those members of
the Council who wish to make statements following
the voting.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to express my unequivocal
condemnation of all crimes of sexual exploitation
and abuse and to emphasize that States must take all
the measures necessary to combat and eradicate such
crimes as a deterrent to potential offenders. I would
also like to stress how important it is that every effort

16-068013/11

S/PV.7643

United Nations peacekeeping operations

be made to assist the victims of such crimes, in line with
the compliance of Egypt and every other State Member
of the United Nations with our zero-tolerance policy.
The Egyptian delegation chose not to vote against
today’s resolution 2272 (2016) out of our sincere belief
in the importance of many of its provisions, which
are designed to deal with repeated cases of sexual
exploitation and abuse in peacekeeping operations.
Despite the unilateral approach to the negotiations on
the draft resolution, we have chosen not to vote against
it. Throughout the negotiations and during yesterday’s
briefing on the subject (see S/PV.7642), my delegation
has consistently pointed to the need to differentiate
between, on the one hand, condemning and combating
sexual exploitation and abuse and, on the other, tarring
entire States and the troops they contribute with
the same brush. The way that peacekeeping troops
and troop-contributing countries (TCCs) have been
libelled is completely unacceptable. It has a drastic and
negative effect on the troops’ morale and demonstrates
contempt for the sacrifices of tens of thousands of
peacekeeping personnel operating under extremely
difficult conditions.
The Security Council has chosen to act on an
issue outside its purview, since conduct and discipline,
including in relation to sexual exploitation and abuse,
are matters that are at the very core of the competence
of the General Assembly. All States Members of
the United Nations are represented in the General
Assembly, including the TCCs. Therefore, taking action
on this matter in the Security Council rather than in the
General Assembly illustrates ulterior motives aimed at
capitalizing on the fact the major troop-contributing
countries are absent from this organ, in order to adopt
a resolution that never would have been adopted in
the organ designated with responsibility to confront
sexual abuse and exploitation. It would have been more
appropriate if United Nations bodies had focused on
addressing the root causes of the problem by providing
sufficient predeployment training to peacekeeping
forces, ensuring the separation of United Nations
camps from the local population, avoiding prolonged
rotation and providing adequate living conditions,
among other things.
The Security Council resolution could give some
the impression that sexual exploitation and abuse are
being used to bring pressure to bear on TCCs in response
to their legitimate demands regarding improving the

4/11

11/03/2016

conditions of troops and their efforts to contribute more
effectively to establishing peacekeeping operations and
drafting the mandates of operations in partnership with
the Security Council.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the adoption of resolution
2272 (2016) today. I pay tribute to Samantha for her
determination and courage in bringing this difficult
issue to the Security Council.
Like so many in the chamber yesterday, I was
appalled by the sickening crimes detailed in our meeting
(see S/PV.7642) on the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2016/729). Alhough I was shocked, sadly I cannot
say that I was surprised. Horrific allegations against
peacekeepers have surfaced almost every year for over
two decades — in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in Côte
d’Ivoire, in Haiti, in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and now in the Central African Republic. The most
harrowing abuse demands the most steadfast response.
Each and every victim could tell us that for too long
our response has fallen short. Today I hope that finally
we have turned the page and begun to make amends.
We cannot be having this discussion again — not in 20
years’ time, not in one year’s time. What we need now is
swift and systematic implementation of this resolution,
implementation that brings justice for the victims and
ends the sickening cycle of impunity. This is not about
collective punishment, nor about penalizing the many
for the sick acts of the few. This is about taking serious
action in the face of serious allegations, about acting
decisively against any pattern of abuse in any part of
the world.
It is deeply regrettable that there was no unanimity
and that there was an attempt to weaken the resolution
through a draft amendment. What does that say to
the victims, the women and girls whom we heard so
poignantly about yesterday, that some members of this
Council would seek to weaken our response, rather
than endorse meaningful action? The United Kingdom
voted against the draft amendment because not holding
perpetrators accountable is unacceptable. Had the draft
amendment succeeded, the Secretary-General would
not have had a lever to apply pressure for accountability.
I want to conclude with the words of a teenage girl
from Bangui. Speaking to a journalist earlier this year,
she said:

16-06801

11/03/2016

United Nations peacekeeping operations

“Sometimes when I am alone with my baby
I think about killing him. He reminds me of the
man who raped me.” (The Washington Post,
27 February 2016)
Those are difficult words to read in the Council, but
this is the reality of sexual exploitation and abuse. It is
a reality created by a peacekeeper who was entrusted
to help, not harm, that teenage girl. It is a reality that
we simply cannot shy away from. We must confront it
and we must end it. This resolution today is a vital step
towards doing so.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Russia backed the adoption of resolution
2272 (2016), on sexual exploitation and abuse in
peacekeeping operations. We approached with
understanding the initiative of the United States and
other States’ delegations to send a signal through the
Security Council regarding the unacceptability of such
actions. We decisively condemn such crimes and deem
it necessary to strengthen peacekeepers’ responsibility
for sexual exploitation and abuse.
During the course of intensive negotiations, we were
able to craft a text that expanded preventive measures
and the fight against this phenomenon, not only to the
United Nations but also other missions deployed with
Security Council consent. However, we believe it is
important to underscore once again that we cannot
accept attempts to exclude national peacekeeping
contingents enjoying the Security Council’s mandate
from responsibility for the commission of sexual
exploitation and abuse. This is all the more true as
recently there has been a significant number of cases
that clearly point to the fact that such crimes were
committed by just such contingents of foreign missions.
At a time when the majority of United Nations
contingents that are focused on in this resolution are
represented by countries of Asia and Africa, it seems the
military personnel of Western countries would like to
enjoy immunity from prosecution for such actions. This
is fraught with the risk of undermining the effectiveness
of actions undertaken to fight this evil and could also
have an impact on the standing of the international
Organization. It could also become a time bomb for
the peacekeeping work of the United Nations. Russia
hopes that the Secretary-General will use the authority
he possesses pursuant to this resolution to ensure that
there is transparent and objective investigation of
existing cases and the punishment of the guilty in all

S/PV.7643

cases, without exception, regardless of the country of
nationality of the perpetrator.
We view the adoption by the Security Council of
the resolution today as an exception to the rule. We
continue to believe that the issue of the discipline of
peacekeepers is not related to the maintenance of
international peace and security. For many years these
problems have been discussed in various bodies of
the General Assembly — for example, the SecretaryGeneral submits his relevant reports to the General
Assembly. We strongly support the continuation of this
established practice, which has proven to be effective.
We would like to underscore that we are concerned
by the fact that the sponsors of the resolution ignored
the logical and wise amendments that were proposed by
Egypt and were backed by troop-contributing countries
(TCCs). This is a case in which the view of the troopcontributing countries must be heard and must be
included in the work on Security Council resolutions.
We believe it is wrong to pit the Council up against the
General Assembly and, even worse, against TCCs.
Mr. Shen Bo (China) (spoke in Chinese): United
Nations peacekeeping operations have made great
contributions to the maintenance of international peace
and security, but a very small number of peacekeepers
are suspected of acts of sexual exploitation and abuse,
acts that undermine the image and the reputation of
United Nations peacekeeping operations and the United
Nations as a whole. China supports Secretary-General
Ban ki-Moon and the Secretariat in adopting the zerotolerance policy, supports the international community
in taking comprehensive response measures and
supports the Council in playing a proper role in this
regard, including stepping up coordination with the
General Assembly and other United Nations bodies.
China therefore voted in favour of resolution 2272
(2016). The sexual exploitation and abuse problem
involves troop-contributing countries. The Council
should fully hear and heed the views of the troopcontributing countries. We believe that the Security
Council should have had ample time for further
consultation to maximize our efforts to seek agreement
and forge consensus to the largest extent possible.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
voted in favour of resolution 2272 (2016), prepared by the
United States Mission, a resolution that strengthens the
fight against sexual abuse in peacekeeping operations.

16-068015/11

S/PV.7643

United Nations peacekeeping operations

We believe that the fight against sexual abuse is
an absolute imperative, both moral and political, and
deserves the Council’s full attention as an interlinked
complement to the work undertaken by the General
Assembly on these issues. At stake are not only our
most fundamental values but also the reputation and
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations personnel.
Sexual abuse cannot and should no longer be treated
as a simple disciplinary or behavioural problem and
tackled at the administrative level. The United Nations
had to provide a political and operational response to
the allegations made and confirmed cases by providing
clear guidelines to commanders and troops deployed on
the ground. The goal is to strengthen the fight against
sexual abuse not only within peacekeeping operations
but also when committed by forces that are not under
the command of the United Nations but contribute to
such operations.
Unfortunately, today peacekeeping operations
account for 70 per cent of the allegations of sexual abuse
within the United Nations system. At a time when the
Secretary-General is undertaking determined action,
the Council’s support is indispensable.
Let us recall once again that sexual abuse is
unacceptable, regardless of the perpetrator or source
of these actions — military, police, civilian personnel,
United Nations or non-United Nations. The colour
of the helmet or uniform means little to the victims.
The resolution allows us to send a clear message to all
actors: Blue Helmets, police, civilian personnel and
international forces. We must do our utmost to translate
into reality the zero-tolerance objective, which must
serve more than ever before as our compass and our
shared obligation.
France, which contributes to peacekeeping
operations, has consistently during the negotiation
process supported this broad-based approach, which
sends a strong message to all players. I should note,
however, that we do not intend here to collectively
stigmatize the soldiers who bravely fight for our
Organization’s ideals; that is not, and will never be, our
intention. This issue is too important for us not to all
mobilize in a collective spirit of goodwill. Everyone
must feel heeded. This is why an in-depth, inclusive
dialogue with the troop-contributing countries is so
important, for the sake of efficiency, in order to achieve
the result that we all wish to see. It is vital for everyone
to take ownership of the zero-tolerance objective to
which I have just referred.
6/11

11/03/2016

We must meet this challenge. Our collective action
will serve as the best possible reply to the SecretaryGeneral’s call and, of course, to the victims. Rest assured
that France’s determination in this respect is absolute,
both nationally and in the framework of the United
Nations. France will spare no effort in supporting the
Secretary-General’s efforts aimed at strengthening our
policy of zero tolerance for sexual abuse.
I should like to conclude by once again paying
heartfelt tribute to all of the soldiers who are
working for the maintenance of peace and to their
invaluable contribution.
Ms. Power (United States of America): On
behalf of the United States, I should like sincerely
to thank those countries that voted in favour of
resolution 2272 (2016), which was adopted today.
The resolution underscores the Security Council’s
responsibility — our responsibility — to address the
scourge of sexual exploitation and abuse in United
Nations peacekeeping, which has been allowed to
persist for far too long. Impunity for such abuses clearly
undermines our efforts to promote international peace
and security. The resolution makes clear that it is our
job to ensure that there is accountability when men,
women and children are abused by the Blue Helmets
whom the Council has sent to protect them.
The resolution signals the Security Council’s strong
support for the zero-tolerance policy of the United
Nations and for the ongoing efforts by the SecretaryGeneral to strengthen this institution’s response,
reporting and remedial measures to prevent and combat
sexual exploitation and abuse among United Nations
peacekeepers. The resolution underscores the fact that
peacekeepers found guilty — not those accused, those
found guilty — of committing sexual exploitation
and abuse do not deserve to serve in United Nations
peacekeeping missions, and sends a clear message to
troop- and police-contributing countries that fail to
take action to prevent or punish credible allegations of
sexual abuse and exploitation, as well as to all States
Members of the United Nations and to United Nations
bodies, to ensure that these investigations are carried
out thoroughly, promptly and impartially.
I should also like to echo my French colleague’s
comment that the colour of the helmet means little to
the victim. All of us, wherever we serve, whether we
wear a blue or a green or some other colour helmet,
have a responsibility to live up to the standards that
16-06801

11/03/2016

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV.7643

this resolution tries to enshrine. All of us have a
responsibility with respect to individuals who serve us
overseas, in the same way that we have a responsibility
within our own borders to ensure that these kinds of
crimes are never carried out and that when they are
carried out the perpetrators are held accountable.

in the General Assembly and then complain when
the body that sends peacekeepers out to try to protect
people actually takes responsibility for the fact that
some of those who were supposed to do the protecting
are committing sexual abuse. We cannot have it both
ways.

The resolution adopted today endorses the decision
of the Secretary-General to repatriate United Nations
peacekeeping units that demonstrate widespread or
systemic sexual abuse and exploitation, and it requests
that the Secretary-General repatriate all uniformed
personnel from a contributing country in a given
mission if that country fails to take appropriate steps
to address credible allegations of sexual exploitation
and abuse, fails to hold the perpetrators accountable or
fails to inform the Secretary-General of the status of
such efforts.

If the General Assembly had been able to actually
put in place methods for accountability, if the system
were working for girls like the ones Matthew just
quoted, who are now left with the children of the people
who have come and raped them and then gone back to
their countries never having been held accountable — if
the system had prevented these kinds of acts, or least
had some kind of accountability, we would not be
having this conversation. We are here only because it
just keeps happening.

I should like, if I could, to respond to Egypt’s
intervention. We were accused, implicitly, politely, of
having an ulterior motive. I confess that I do have an
ulterior motive. My ulterior motive is actually, finally,
to do something about a cancer: the cancer of sexual
exploitation and abuse against people who trust the
United Nations flag. They see a peacekeeper coming
their way and they think, this is someone who is going
to help me; they do not think, I have to run, this is
someone who is going to rape me. That is not what they
think. That is not what they should ever think; but that
is what they are going to think, and that is with some of
them do think, because there is not accountability for
the crimes committed that is in any way commensurate
with what appears to be the scale of this problem.

So I think that it is very, very strange to hear
Member States call on the one hand for more aggressive
action or more accountability and then try to punt the
issue to a body that for years has been unable to come to
a consensus; and with several countries, again including
countries on the Council, trying to water down what
happens in the General Assembly, no reasonable person
could expect a different result.

So that is my ulterior motive, I confess. Sue me.
I also take note of the very important comment that
Egypt made, of the admission that the measures
contained in the resolution — measures requiring
accountability — would not have been passed by the
General Assembly. We agree; the General Assembly
has been totally paralysed. There are countries within
the negotiations that are going on as we speak that
have tried to water down the recommendations that
the Secretary-General has made. It would be one thing
if we were succeeding, if the system was working.
We come in here every day; we lament, we condemn.
We condemn the abuse and we condemn the lack of
accountability, and then we go to the General Assembly
and some of us try to water down provisions to try
to strengthen the system. What is up with that? One
cannot simultaneously try to water something down

Let me conclude with two messages. To the tens of
thousands of troops and police who serve honourably
in United Nations peacekeeping operations, we salute
them unequivocally for putting their lives on the line,
with little fanfare or recognition, for people who live in
countries far from their own. We and the civilians that
they protect with their bravery are completely indebted
to them for their service. As I did yesterday (see
S/PV.7642), I would single out those members of the
Council that have contributed so many peacekeepers,
including Egypt, Senegal, China, Uruguay and, of
course, the United Kingdom, which is becoming
involved again. As a country that does not contribute
a lot of troops, we are in awe of their service. To the
victims of sexual exploitation and abuse by United
Nations peacekeepers, we pledge that we will do better.
We will do better to ensure that the Blue Helmets we
send as their protectors will not become perpetrators.
That is what we are striving for. But if they do, this
resolution demands that we, the Council, ensure that
the people who commit such violations, who violate the
good name of the United Nations and the good names of
their countries, be held accountable.

16-068017/11

S/PV.7643

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Venezuela) (spoke in
Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
voted in favour of resolution 2272 (2016), for we are
convinced that acts of sexual exploitation and abuse
committed by any foreign force or military, police
or civilian personnel participating in United Nations
peacekeeping operations or special political missions
must be categorically rejected. No one can justify such
cowardly and absolutely reprehensible crimes. All
those responsible should be punished. In that regard,
we reiterate our support for the Secretary-General’s
zero-tolerance policy.
As we stated during the briefing yesterday (see
S/PV.7642), this is not an issue of an exclusively
disciplinary nature; these are reprehensible acts that
contradict and undermine the purposes and principles
of the United Nations for which peacekeeping missions
are established. In situations of armed conflict, such
acts could constitute violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
The United Nations should be an example of consistency,
firmness and high moral and ethical commitment with
regard to the importance of preventing these acts and,
above all, with regard to the accountability of any such
personnel authorized by the Security Council that
commits this type of crime.
Most of the interventions made yesterday stressed
how important it was that the discussion and actions
to be taken within the Council on this sensitive issue
entaild close and organic coordination with other
bodies with competence in the matter, namely, the
General Assembly, in particular through its Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations. We want to
insist on that point. The spirit of cooperation should
prevail among the various organs of the United Nations.
It is very dangerous for the Security Council to assume
the powers of other bodies on the grounds of the latter’s
inaction. There should be mutual support since, by that
same reasoning, other organs of the United Nations
could take into their own hands the matters that fall
within the competence of the Security Council, but
which it has not been able to resolve in 25 or 60 years,
and for which the inhabitants in the territories affected,
for example, have been calling for more direct action by
some organ of the Organization.
We also recognize that the scope of the resolution
adopted today was improved by the incorporation
of several proposals — for instance, in addition to
peacekeeping missions, including also forces outside
8/11

11/03/2016

the Organization, which seems to us very important in
order to be consistent with the idea of zero tolerance.
However, as always, we would have wished for a more
comprehensive and inclusive process in the discussion of
this important resolution. This has become a recurring
problem in the Security Council. In this spirit, we voted
in favour of the proposed amendment submitted by the
delegation of Egypt to paragraph 2, because we believe
that it gives a sense of balance to the provisions therein
and would preclude any arbitrary actions that could
be committed against troop-contributing countries.
We would have wished as well that all members of the
Council could have agreed on it without it having to be
put to a vote. We recall that the unity of the Council
demands that the views of its members be duly taken
into account to the extent possible in the formulation
of proposals.
To avoid deficiencies, fragmented and bureaucratic
responses to these cases, which the Organization
has suffered from in the past, it is essential that the
Council’s decisions be guided by the principles of
objectivity, non-selectivity and impartiality, and
that the mechanisms and frequency of dialogue and
coordination with countries that contribute military,
police and civilian personnel be improved with a
view to examining and discussing this issue, and to
advancing concerted actions that have greater impact
on prevention and the fight against impunity. With this
resolution, the Security Council has taken up the flag
in the fight against this type of act and is obliged to
coordinate with troop-contributing countries.
Finally, we believe that it is not a question of
stigmatizing countries, but rather a question of
delivering justice. We therefore insist on the need to
fully implement Article 44 of the Charter of the United
Nations, which establishes the requirement to invite
troop-contributing countries to participate, in an active
and binding manner, in the decision-making process
with regard to the deployment of troops in peacekeeping
missions. That has never really been operational. That
single action could help enormously to prevent and
punish this type of reprehensible and despicable crime.
In conclusion, having adopted this resolution, we
hope that we will never again have to discuss abuses
against women, children and the most vulnerable
groups in armed conflict.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): Ukraine welcomes the
adoption of resolution 2272 (2016), which we consider
16-06801

11/03/2016

United Nations peacekeeping operations

to be a milestone document. We commend the United
States delegation for its leadership in that regard.
During yesterday’s debate (see S/PV.7642),
the lack of sufficient progress in the fight against
sexual exploitation and abuse in the past decade was
acknowledged by almost all delegations. Unfortunately,
the number of allegations has not diminished. The crimes
committed today are as appalling as they were years
ago. We believe that the Security Council is uniquely
positioned to send a strong message to confront this
problem. That is why we fully supported the adoption
of today’s resolution. We hope that the document we
have adopted will serve as a clear signal to all parties
concerned that the Security Council stands for the
pressing need to implement a more assertive approach
in order to address the scourge of sexual exploitation
and abuse promptly.
As an active troop- and police-contributing country,
Ukraine reaffirms its determination to effectively
contribute to the fight against sexual exploitation and
abuse, to engage with all stakeholders and to implement
the necessary steps and mechanisms, including those
envisaged in today’s resolution.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): Malaysia supports
resolution 2272 (2016), which the Council just adopted.
It sends an unambiguous message that the Security
Council, the United Nations and the international
community will not tolerate sexual exploitation and
abuse by peacekeepers. We have repeatedly called
for zero tolerance in that regard, and today we have
strengthened our resolve on the matter. We support
many of the strong measures initiated by the SecretaryGeneral to strengthen accountability for perpetrators of
abuse, as set out in resolution 2272 (2016). Malaysia
firmly believes that peacekeepers must uphold the
highest standards of professionalism and moral values,
as they are mandated to protect civilians, and to uphold
international humanitarian law and human rights law
while serving in areas of conflict.
In our view, the provisions on the repatriation
of
contingents
that
demonstrate
widespread
and systematic sexual exploitation and abuse or
non-response to allegations of misconduct are wholly
justified. In that regard, we note that the route leading
towards a decision on possible repatriation must come
with clear and transparent criteria and guidelines,
developed in full consultation and engagement with the
concerned troop-contributing countries throughout the

S/PV.7643

process. In the spirit of renewing and re-energizing the
United Nations peacekeeping institutions, we would
also stress the importance of trilateral consultations
among the Council, troop-contributing countries and
the Secretariat.
We regret the missed opportunity to rally consensus
around such an important resolution. We believe that
the rationale to address sensitivities surrounding this
issue warrant, at this time, engaging the concerned
stakeholders, namely, the troop-contributing countries.
As mentioned by many delegations yesterday (see
S/PV.7642), combatting sexual exploitation and abuse
requires the collective efforts of all members of the
United Nations and the international community. We
hope that resolution 2272 (2016) creates the intended
momentum to end impunity for sexual exploitation and
abuse by peacekeepers.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Spain thanks the United States for this important
initiative.
We have just adopted resolution 2272 (2016), the
first to address exclusively conduct deemed completely
unacceptable. With this resolution, the Security
Council is sending a strong message to all who have
the responsibility to eliminate this scourge, and that
responsibility is collective. My delegation supported the
text put forward in its entirety and without amendment,
because quite simply we cannot address the issue of
accountability in a partial manner. The reason for that
is obvious. Our aim is not to repatriate contingents,
but to protect the victims and prevent the repetition of
aggressive acts. It is therefore necessary to investigate
such matters as soon as possible or inform the SecretaryGeneral of the measures taken. The perpetrators must
be brought to justice and serve their sentences. All of
that is first and foremost the responsibility of the troopand police contributing countries, precisely because we
do not want the work of a contingent to be tarnished by
the actions of some of its members. Let us ensure that
we all assume our responsibility.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): I thank the
United States delegation for having taken the initiative
of submitting to the Security Council the text of
resolution 2272 (2016), which we have just adopted,
concerning cases of sexual exploitation and abuse
committed by United Nations peacekeeping personnel
and external forces authorized by the Council.

16-068019/11

S/PV.7643

United Nations peacekeeping operations

As a troop- and police-contributing country and
in accordance with its international commitments
to peacekeeping and respect for international
humanitarian law and international human rights law,
Senegal naturally voted in favour of the resolution.
The delegation of Senegal participated actively in the
negotiations in a constructive spirit and accordingly
proposed amendments aimed at making the text clearer
with a view to ensuring that innocent parties do not
fall victim to collective punishment for crimes that are
a matter of individual responsibility. The delegation
of Senegal would have therefore liked the resolution
to take into account the sometimes difficult situations
faced by States concerned with regard to carrying out
investigations and enquiries.
My delegation regrets that several of the concerns
we voiced with a view to making the text more balanced
were not reflected in the resolution. However, Senegal’s
commitment to the zero-zolerance policy called for by
the Secretary-General remains absolute, given that the
fight against impunity must remain a collective and
universal exigency.
Mrs. Schwalger (New Zealand): New Zealand
voted in favour of resolution 2272 (2016) because of
the clear and pressing need for more robust action to
combat sexual exploitation and abuse. New Zealand
respects the sacrifice and commends the meaningful
contribution of the vast majority of United Nations
peacekeepers. The measures in this resolution support
the Secretary-General’s efforts with respect to sexual
exploitation and abuse, in particular to address the
systemic failure represented by the ongoing allegations.
The past 10 years, and especially this past year, have
demonstrated that the status quo is neither working nor
acceptable. The Security Council has a responsibility
to act on sexual exploitation and abuse and address the
negative consequences of the peacekeeping operations
that we members of the Council mandate, including
to implement the standards we have all agreed. We
encourage all partners to work together going forward.
Only our close cooperation to implement zero tolerance
and build capacity, with a real investment of political
will, can make the difference that is so desperately
needed for the victims, United Nations peacekeeping,
and the credibility of the Organization.
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): Japan voted in favour of
resolution 2272 (2016), proposed by the United States.
Since we spoke on our views on sexual exploitation and
10/11

11/03/2016

abuse in the Chamber yesterday (see S/PV.7642), I wish
to emphasize only one point, which is why we think
that this resolution is important and necessary.
Japan supports the Secretary-General’s decision
to repatriate contingents when there is a demonstrated
pattern of misconduct. That measure is aimed not at
pointing a finger at contingents, but at protecting
civilians where peacekeepers are deployed. Its purpose
is also to urge troop- and police-contributing countries
to take action. We need to realize that investigating
allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse is the
primary responsibility of troop- and police-contributing
countries, and they have to take appropriate actions
against the allegations and hold personnel accountable
for sexual exploitation and abuse.
In doing so, the United Nations will ensure that
its peacekeepers, who are sometimes the last hope for
people suffering in conflicts, are deployed to protect
people. By taking the appropriate actions, they can also
preserve the honour of the vast majority of peacekeepers
from Africa, the Asia-Pacific, Latin America and the
Caribbean, and Europe, including my own country,
Japan, which are fulfilling their tasks seriously in
difficult circumstances. It is our belief that resolution
2272 (2016) will send a clear message that the Security
Council fully supports the zero-tolerance policy called
for by the Secretary-General.
Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay wishes to express its satisfaction for the
adoption earlier in this meeting of resolution 2272
(2016). At the outset, we want to thank the United States
for its timely initiative. Uruguay is very pleased to join
the rest of the Council in their agreement that dealing
with this problem can no longer be postponed.
With regard to the content of the resolution, which
is in line with the concept of zero tolerance, in our dual
capacity as a member of the Security Council and a
troop-contributing country, we believe that, although
the text could be further improved, given the sensitivity
of the issue, it nonetheless has important provisions for
combating such reprehensible acts, which, as was said
in yesterday’s meeting on the subject (see S/PV.7642),
affect not only the image and credibility of United
Nations peacekeeping operations but, above all, have
an impact on the dignity of the victims who suffer,
often irreversibly, from their consequences. For all of
those reasons, therefore, Uruguay voted in favour of
the resolution.
16-06801

11/03/2016

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Lastly, we would like to reiterate that all staff who
are part of United Nations peacekeeping operations,
whether military, police or civilian components, just
like all personnel in other operations authorized by

S/PV.7643

the Security Council, must be held accountable for
their actions.
The meeting rose at 4.10 p.m.

16-0680111/11
