56

General AHembly-Twentieth Se&Sion

3. Recommends the Security Council to consider
this situation as a matter of urgency.
1375th plenary meeting,
11 November 1965.

2063 (XX). Question of Basutoland, B~huanaland and Swaziland
The General Assembly,
Having examined the chapters of the reports of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to the Territories of Basutoland, I3echuanaland and
Swaziland, 8
Having examined further the report submitted by
the Secretary-Gencral9 pursuant to the request made
by the Special Committee in its resolution of 2 November 1964,10
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling further its resolutions 1654 (XVI) of
27 November 1961, 1817 (XVII) of 18 December
1962 and 1954 ( XVIII) of 11 December 1963,
Noting the resolutions adopted by the Assembly of
Heads of State and Government of the Organization
of African Unity at its first regular session in July
1964, and the Declaration adopted by the Second Conference of Heads of State or Government of NonAligned Countries in October 1%411 to the effect that
the United Nations should guarantee the territorial
integrity of Basutoland, Bechuanaland and Swaziland
and should take measures for their speedy accession
to independence and for the subsequent safeguarding
of their sovereignty,
Noting with deep concern the economic and social
situation prevailing in the three Territories and their
imperative and urgent need for United Nations
assistance,
Having regard to the grave threat to the territorial
integrity and economic stability of these Territories
constituted by the policies of the present regime in the
Republic of South Africa,
Regretting that the administering Power of these
Territories has not taken effective and complete steps
to implement General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV),
1817 (XVII) and 1954 (XVIII),
1. Approves the chapters of the reports of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Territories of Basutoland, Bechuanaland
and Swaziland, and endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained therein;
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of
Basutoland, Bechuanaland and Swaziland to freedom
and independence;
8 /bid., Nineteenth Session, Annexes, annex No. 8 (part I)
(A/5800/Rev.l), chapter VIII; ibid., Twentieth Session Annexes, addendum to agenda item 23 (A/fiOOO/Rev.l) chapter

VII.

9 Jbid.,

'

Twentieth Session, Annexes, agenda item 23, document A/5958.
10 Ibid., Nineteenth Session, Annexes, annex No. 8 (part I)
(A/5800/Rev.l), chapter VIII, para. 365.
11 See A/5763.

3. Once again invites the administering Power to
take urgent steps to implement fully General Assembly
resolutions 1514 (XV), 1817 (XVII) and 1954
(XVIII) in conformity with the freely expressed
wishes of the peoples of the three Territories;
4. Renews its request that the administering Power
should take immediate steps to return to the indigenous
inhabitants all the land taken from them, whatever
the form of or pretext for such alienation;
5. Requests the Special Committee to consider, in
co-operation with the Secretary-General, what measures
are necessary for securing the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of liasntoland, neclmanaland and Swaziland, ;md to report to the General As:,embly at its
twenty-first session;
6. Expresses its satisfaction to the Secretary-General
for his efforts and endorses the recotrnnendations contained in his report ;
7. Decides to establish a Fund for the Economic
Development of Basntoland, Bechuanaland and Swaziland, to be made up of voluntary contributions and
to be administered by the Secretary-General in close
consultation with the Governments of the three Territories and with the co-operation and assistance of the
Special Fund, the Technical Assistance Board, the
Economic Commission for Africa and the specialized
agencies concerned;
8. Considers that the efforts to provide economic,
financial and technical assistance, through United
Nations programmes of technical co-operation and the
specialized agencies, should continue in order to remedv
the deplorable economic and social situation of the thre~
Territories;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to appoint resident representatives in the three Territories, as recommended in paragraph 22 of his report, and to report
to the General Assembly at its twenty-first session on
the. operation of the Fund established under paragraph 7
above.
1398th plenary meeting,
16 December 1965.

2064 (XX). Question of the Cook Islands
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960,
Recalling its resolution 2005 (XIX) of 18 February
1965, authorizing the Secretary-General to appoint a
United Nations representative to supervise the elections
to be held in the Cook Islands under New Zealand
administration and to observe the proceedings concerning the Constitution in the newly elected Legislative Assembly,
Having examined the chapters of the reports of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Cook Islands, 12 including the statements made
in the Special Committee by the Premier of the Cook
Islands,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
Representative for the Supervision of the Elections in
12 Official Rtcord.s of the General Assembly Nineteenth
Session, Anne_x~s, annex. No. 8 _(part I) (AiSSOO/Rev.l).
chapter ?{V; ibid., Twentieth Session, Annexes, addendum to
agen<la item 23 (A/6000/Rev.l), chapter VIII.
