UNITED NATIONS

TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR

nd
MEETING: 18 JUNE 1968
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1432) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoptionoftheagenda

Page

1

.... ........ ..........................

1

Letter dated 26 December 1963 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/5488):
Report by the Secretary-General on the United Nations Operation in Cyprus
(S/8622) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV.1432

NOTE
Symbols’ of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of’ the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appearsor in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, becamefully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN HUNDRED AND THIRTY-SECOND MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 18 June 1968, at 3.30 p.m.
4. Mr. NESTERENKO (Under-Secretary-General for Political and Security Council Affairs): With your permission,
Mr. President, I shall read out the text of the draft
resolution:

President: Mr, Arthur J. GOLDBERG
(United States of America).
&sent: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of *Great
3ritain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.

“The Security Council,

‘Noting from the report of the Secretary-General of 11
June 1968 [S/8622] that in the present circumstances
the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus is still
needed if peace is to be maintained in the island,

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1432)
t

1. Adoption of the agenda.

1

2. Letter dated 26 December 1963 from the Permanent

“Noting that the Government of Cyprus has agreed that
in view of the prevailing conditions in the island it is
necessaryto continue the Force beyond 26 June 1968,

Representative of Cyprus addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/5488):
Report by the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Operation in Cyprus (S/8622).

‘Noting, from the observations in the report, the
encouraging recent developments in the island,
“1. Reaffirms its resolutions 186 (1964) of 4 March,
187(1964) of 13 March, 192(1964) of 20 June,
193 (1964) of 9 August, 194 (1964) of 25 September and
198 (1964) of 18 December 1964, 201(1965) of 19
March, 206 (1965) of 15 June, 207 (1965) of 10 August
and 219 (1965) of 17 December 1965, 220 (1966) of 16
March, 222 (1966) of 16 June and 231 (1966) of 15
December 1966, 238 (1967) of 19 June and 244 (1967)
of 22 December 1967 and 247 (1968) of 1.8Mardh 1968,
and the consensus expressed by the President at the
1143rd meeting on 11 August 1964 and at the 1383rd
meeting on 24 November 1967;

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted,
Letter dated 26 December 1963 from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/5468):
Report by the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Operation in Cyprus (S/8622)

1. The PRESIDENT: Requests have been received from
the representatives of Cyprus, Turkey and Greece to be
invited to participate in the Council’s discussion this
afternoon. Therefore, in accordance with the usual practice
of the Council, I propose now, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those three representatives to take places
at the Council table in order to participate in the discussion
without right of vote.

“2. Urges the parties concerned to act with the utmost
restraint and to continue determined co-operative efforts
to achieve the objectives of the Security Council by
availing themselves in a constructive manner of the
present auspicious climate and opportunities;

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Z. Rossides
(Cyprus], Mr. 0. Eralp (Turkey) and Mr. D. S. Bitsios
(Greece) took places at the Council tabie.

“3. Extends once more the stationing in Cyprus of the
United Nations Peace-keeping Force, established under
Security Council resolution 186 (1964), for a further
period ending 15 December 1968, in the expectation that
by then sufficient progress towards a final solution will
make possible a withdrawal or substantial reduction of
the Force.”

2. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council will now begin
its examination of the question on the agenda, in connexion with which the Secretary-General has submitted a
report (S/8622],
on the United Nations Operation in
Cyprus, for the period from 9 March to 7 June 1968.

5. The PRESIDENT: Before calling on those members of
the Security Council who have asked to speak before the
vote, and with their consent, I shall first call on the
representative of Cyprus, Ambassador Rossides.

3. Pursuant to consultations which have been held among
the members of the Council, and in accordance with the
requests of several of those members, a draft ‘resolution has
been prepared which I shall now ask the UnderSecretary-General to read to the Council.

6. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): Mr. President, may I take this
opportunity to convey to you, on behalf of my delegation,
1

12. It is. therefore, regrettable that there has still been no
measures of the Government
on the part of the Turkish Cypriot leadership. The
restrictions from the side of the Turkish Cypriot enclaves
continue in full force. But the need of abolishing those
restrictions was specially emphasized by the SecretaryGeneral and was given a paramount place in his outline of
initiatives that “should be taken without delay”, report of
March 1968, which added:

a messaee of reeard and esteem on the occasion of Your
relinqui&ing yo;r duties as Permanent Representative of
the United States. The United Nations will long remember
your legal wisdom in your interventions, your cordial
manner and your negotiating abilities and tact, as well a~
your sense of duty to the world community so amply
demonstrated during the three years of your service with
this international Organization. Our best wisheswill follow
you in your new endeavours.

responseto the pacific&on

“(i) Now that the Government of Cyprus has extended
its nonnalization measures to the whole of Cyprus, the
Turkish Cypriot leadership should find it possible to
make those necessary concessions for a full return to
normal conditions and, as a first step, to abandon its
policy of preventing Greek Cypriots from moving freely
in the Turkish-Cypriot-controlled
areas;” [S/8466,

7. The Security Council meets again to renew the mandate
of the United Nations Force in Cyprus on a still more

hopeful tone. Before us is the report of the SecretaryGeneral [S/8622] for the three-month period ending 26
June. The note of optimism that marked the report for the
previous period [S/8446/ 1 is carried forward in the present
renort : it is due to the continuum calm in the Island and the
recent’encouraging developmen; in the establishment of a
direct line of communication and consultation between the
Greek and Turkish leadership.

para. 15.51.

13. Yet, as appears from the Secretary-General’s observations in his present report dated 11 June 1968:

8. During this period also there were no military clashes
whatsoever and incidents that might jeopardize an improving political atmosphere were carefully avoided. It has thus
become possible to arrange the first meaningful exchanges
of views and consultations between the two sides since the
beginning of the troubles in 1963.

“ . . . despite the Government’s normalization measures
and their beneficial effects on the Turkish Cypriot
population, their leadership has not yet found it possible
to respond with measures of its own so as to further a
steady movement
towards normality.”
[S/8622,
para. 95.1

9. Mention should be made in this respect of the commendable role played by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Osorio-Tafall, whose persistent efforts helped considerably towards this result.

It is added, however, that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General was given to understand by the Turkish
Cypriot leadership that the matter is under active consideration and that he is hopeful that positive elements in this
respect will be forthcoming shortly.

10. The report shows-and it is a very lucid and Clear
picture of the situation-that the Government pacification
measures have very greatly contributed to the present
auspicious climate and situation. Their full implementation
wasverified by the UNFICYP, which kept them under close
observation. All these measures, as stated in the report,
were well received and welcomed by the Turkish Cypriots.
Furthermore, the manner in which they have been implemented and the total absence of any incidents have helped
to dispel the phantom of fear created by four years of
self-isolation and hostility, It is encouraging to see the
example given in the report [S/8622, para. 641 of a Sunday
in May when 3,000 Turkish Cypriots came out of the
enclaves to visit their own fields and by-ways and familiar
places.

14. We add our hope and our trust that such necessary
developments will not be further delayed.
15: As to the dangers of military confrontation becauseof
the still continuing close proximity of opposing armed
forces to one another, the report, while referring to a few
instances of withdrawal of the national guard units, points
out that: “. . . it is unlikely that the Government will
significantly extend further its unilateral withdrawals, so
long as the Turkish Cypriot leadership does not take some
pacifying measures of its own.” [Ibid., para. 32.1
16. However, notwithstanding the lack of any such response so far, the Government of Cyprus is determined to
go on in a spirit of goodwill and trust with its pacification
policy. The President, Archbishop Makarios, declared on 19
May that:

11. It is clear from the report that as far as Government
measures are concerned, the freedom of movement of all
Turkish Cypriots in every part of the Island is complete and
in no way restricted. Any continuing restriction would
come from another side. The report states:
“At the present time, the only restrictions on the
freedom of movement of the population in Cyprus are
those which continue to be applied in the areas under
Turkish Cypriot control. . . . no Greek Cypriot is allowed
to enter Turkish-Cypriot-held areas unless authorized to
do so. . . . AS to Turkish Cypriots, they are still required
to observe certain formalities when passing through the
Turkish Cypriot barriers.” [Ibid., para. 65.1

“ . despite the misgivings caused among the Greek
population by the negative way in which the Turkish
Cypriots have so far responded to the pacification
measures, the Government wished to believe that TurcoCypriot leadership will eventually decide ‘to move in our
direction to meet us’;“-and the President said-“. . . we
shall continue our pacification efforts and shah keep the
door open for talks, being ready to attend such talks with
an open mind, sincerity and a spirit of goodwill”.

1 Official Records of the Security Council, Twenty-third year,
Supplement for January, February and March 1968.

Goodwill necessarily engenders goodwill. If it is pursued,it
will give its reward. It is our hope that the Turkish-Cypriot
2

leadership in a response of goodwill and trust will take the
hand stretched out to it in brotherhood.

him personally for the more than kind referencesto myself.
This will be the tenth meeting on Cyprus in which I have
participated during the past three years, and I have always
admired the courtesy with which all the representatives of
the Governments concerned have expressedthemselves in a
most difficult situation,

17. The report expresses the hope that: “. . . the new
atmosphere created will be allowed to evolve into one of
greater trust and confidence, which are essential to the
growth of a spirit of conciliation and understanding.”
/Ibid., para. 51.1

22. The next speaker is the representative of Turkey, to
whom I give the floor.

18. A new spirit of conciliation and understanding must
prevail, leading to a solution of the problem in conformity
with the universally accepted principles of the Charter and
the relevant United Nations resolutions, so that peace and
progress may come to the sorely tried people of Cyprus.
Such development will greatly benefit all sections of the
population of this small island. Their closely knit interdependence, more particularly in the economic field, makes
still more obvious the need for their unity and co-operation
es parts of a single and undivided whole. The second
five-year development plan which deals with all sectors,of
the Island’s economic and social activity, with an investment estimated at 2186 million, as declared by the Minister
of Finance, would bring full benefit to the Turkish
community in a unitary Cyprus.

23. Mr. ER4LP (Turkey): The Security Council has never
met to consider the question of Cyprus in more auspicious
and encouraging circumstances. We, the parties to the
dispute, as well as everyone concerned with the peace of
our area, are beginning to hope that we may at last see the
I&b+ at the end of the tunnel. Two outstanding Greek and
Turkish Cypriot leaders have already had a preliminary
meeting in Beirut and are scheduled to begin a series of
meetings next Monday. These meetings are, of course,
exploratory and intended to lay the groundwork for a final
peaceful and agreed settlement of the problem as envisaged
in the 4 March 1964 resolution of the Security Council,
which will ultimately necessitate a solemn agreement
between alI the parties concerned. Nevertheless they are, if
I may quote a phrase from the present report of the
Secretary-General, “an important step towards a settlement
of the Cyprus problem”.

19. We therefore looks with confidence and reasoned
optimism to the talks which, according to the report, are
scheduled to be held in Cyprus beginning on 24 June
between high level representatives of the two sides, under
the auspices of the Secretary-General through his Special
Representative in Cyprus, and about which the people of
Cyprus have high hopes. The exercise of reason in a senseof
justice and enlightened patriotism towards the achievement
of a just and peaceful solution of the problem not only will
prove to the vital interest of the Cypriot people themselves,
but will also serve as an example of needed adjustment to
the demands of national and international norms in our
present age. It will thus be a factor of peace in our troubled
area and in the world. A peaceful and progressive Cyprus
might thus be enabled to carry forward within its modest
means a philosophic heritage and an historic destiny as a
link of international understanding, unity and peace.

24. It has been a long journey that has brought us to this
encouraging stage. In counting our blessings, we must give
thanks where thanks are due. In the first place, my
Government and delegation are deeply ippreciative of the
wisdom, patience and constant objectivity of the Secretary-General and his immediate advisers.We are grateful to
General Martola, the Commander of UNFICYP, for his
energetic efforts to maintain peace on the troubled Island,
and we wish to extend our sincere thanks to Mr. OsorioTafall, the able Special Representative of the Secretary.
General, for his untiring endeavoursto bring about a return
to normal conditions in the Island and to prepare an
atmosphere in which negotiation may take the place of
brute force for the solution of the dispute. It is not too
much to say that, but for his impartial, delicate and
diplomatic handling of any incidental problems, the intercommunity talks could never have got off the ground.

20. In concluding, I wish to express our profound appreciation and gratitude to the Secretary-General for his
effective United Nations leadership, and, more particularly,
for his sincere and objective concern over the situation in
Cyprus, and for a sound and peaceful solution of the
problem. Our appreciation and thanks are also due to the
Under-Secretaries-General,
Mr. Bunche and Mr. RolzBennett, whose devoted efforts have been invaluable. We
are also grateful to the Secretary-General’s Special Representative, Mr. Osorio-Tafall, a man of great experience and
diplomatic ability, for the constructive work in mediation
he has so persistently carried out in the Island. We should
further like to convey to General Martola the expression of
our esteem and regard for his efficient command of the
United Nations Force in Cyprus, which so fully demonstrates the value and effectiveness of this international
peace force. Lastly, our grateful thanks go to those
countries whose contributions in military contingents and
in funds make possible the United Nations peace-keeping
operations in Cyprus.

25. We must also express our gratitude to those countries
which, by contributing contingents or financial support,
have made it possible for UNFICYP to carry out its
mandate.
26. I should like to add here that the continuing presence
of UNFICYP until a final solution has been reached is of
utmost importance for the peace of the area. In our view,
the presence in full strength and maximum effectiveness of
the peace-keeping force in Cyprus, without any substantial
reduction in numbers or equipment, is essential to bolster
the present efforts towards a negotiated settlement and to
provide the senseof security which the Turkish community
must continue to enjoy in the course of the talks. In that
connexion, while maintaining our optimism, we must not
lose sight of the contingency referred to in paragraph37 of
the Secretary-General’s report as to the possibilities of
increased tension and, possibly, new incidents if all should
not go well with the talks. We are fully in agreement with

21. The PRESIDENT:
I wish to thank Ambassador
Rossides for his contribution to this debate and to thank
3

‘1

31. In the same manner, I should like solemnly to urge ,the
Greek-Cypriot leadership to effect a thoroughgoing investigation of the tragic assassination of two Turks who are
referred to in paragraphs 43 to 45 of the report. Prompt
action on the part of the Administration, including not
only the bringing of the culprits to justice but also the
payment of indemnity to the families of the deceased,just
as if the victims were Greeks and not Turks, would provide
significant testimony to the goodwill of the Administration
and to its statesmanlike approach to the new era that is
now being ushered in.

the Secretary-General’s recommendation to the Council for
the extension of the mandate of the Force for a period of
six months in order to give the negotiators full scope to
tackle in tranquillity the many complex problems they have
to face. Mr. De&as, the President of the Turkish Communal Chamber, who is conducting the inter-communal
negotiations on the Turkish side, said, upon landing in
Nicosia last Thursday: “We must not waste time but we
must not be limited by time”.
,

27. My Government, for its part, has pledged itself to lend
full support to the inter-communal talks in the hope that
they may lead to a final peaceful solution of the problem
taking into account the legitimate rights of all the parties to
the dispute.

32. Finally, I have to refer to a matter which goes to the
very root of the sense of security with which the Turkish
community must be provided if the present atmosphere is
to prevail. I refer to the heavy and light weapons which the
Greek Cypriot Administration imported to the Island in
December 1966. The Council will recall the tangible
increase in tension and worsening of the situation which
wasincurred as a result of that move and the concern which
the Secretary-General expressed in his addendum to the
report of 8 December 1966 [S/7611/Add.l].z

28. Within the present atmosphere of conciliation and
understanding, if I have to make a few observations on
certain questions raised in the Secretary-General’s report, I
hope they will not be taken amiss. They will be intended
not as recriminations but as suggestions and explanations
offered in a constructive spirit with a view to bringing
further improvement to the prevailing conditions.

33. The Council has also been seized of the present
situation with regard to these weapons in paragraphs 26 to
31 of the report now under consideration. I shall not go
into an analysis of those paragraphs inasmuch as they
clearly show that, in spite of the attempts of UNFICYP to
maintain all such weapons, without distinction between
light and heavy, under control and inspection, the Greek
Cypriot Administration has now declared its clear intention
to distribute all of what it considers light arms before the
end of the year. The Turkish Community cannot acquiesce
in that decision. Nor can we consider the mere mention of
it in paragraph 31 of the Secretary-General’s report as
acquiescence on the part of the Secretary-General.

29. In the first place I wish to expressmy Government’s
satisfaction at the measures of normalization recently taken
by the Greek Cypriot Administration. They have gone a
long way towards preparing the ground for the present
inter-communal talks, These measures constitute mainly the
unilateral raising of a wide range of restrictions which had
been unilaterally imposed on the Turkish community. The
Turkish community, for its part, will be prepared to take
counter-measures of normalization as and when a senseof
security is firmly established, It would not be realistic to
expect them to let down their guard overnight after the
harrowing experience of the past four-and-a-half years when
they have been carrying on a struggle for survival. However-and here I find myself inadvertently quoting
Mr. Rossides-goodwill breeds goodwill, and as time heals
the wounds more constructive steps can be taken towards
true normalization.

34. It is our earnest hope that UNFICYP will continue its
representations with the Greek Cypriot Administration in
order to dissuade it from such action, calculated to create
new tensions and suspicions. In the name of my Govemment, as well as in the name of reason, I also call upon the
Greek Cypriot leadership to reconsider such a step. We
maintain the hope that the Greek Cypriot leaders are
sufficiently endowed with sagacity to weigh the advantages
and dangers of such a move. Is it better to distribute a few
hundred new and shiny arms, many of them really heavy
weapons of mass destruction; or is it wiser to exercise
restraint and allow the fresh attempts at reconciliation
which are now afoot to flourish? The answer to that
question will materially affect the course of events in
Cyprus in the months ahead.

30. It will be recalled that the previous report of the
Secretary-General, that of 9 March 1968 [S/8446], in
paragraphs 49 to 51, recounted the claims of the Turkish
community, pursued through UNFICYP, to obtain compensation for the loss of life and property suffered by the
victims of the events of Kophinou and Ayios Theodhoros
last November and reported that the Greek Cypriot
Administration was studying the matter. It is with regret
that we note from the present report [S/8622, para. 561,
that the Administration has now decided not to entertain
those claims, on the ground that much loss of life and
property had been suffered since 1963 and that it would
not now be fair to isolate this particular case. We submit
that it would be unfair not to isolate this particular case
where members of the Turkish community alone were the
sole sufferers of an unprovoked attack. A speedy and
humanitarian approach to this problem would go a long
way towards building the bridges between the two communities in the Island and a tangible preparation for better
days ahead. Therefore I urge the Greek Cypriot Admmistration to reconsider ‘this matter not in the light of the past
but in anticipation of the future and to bring prompt
succour to the victimized Turkish citizens of Cyprus.

3.5. In concluding my remarks, Mr. President, I hope it will
not be presumptuous on my part to say a few words of
appreciation as regards your person, since it appears that we
may no longer enjoy the benefits of your wise guidance and
advice in this Council. Although we are not a member of
the Council, the vicissitudes of the problem of Cyprus have
in effect turned us into a form of semi-permanent attendants of the Council. It is not, however, with semi-sincerity
that I wish to say that for us who have long benefited from
our association with you, your wisdom, experience, objec2 Ibid., Twenty-first
and December 1966.

4

Year, SuppIement for October, November

tivity and courage of conviction will long be remembered,
and we shall cherish the hope that the shining example of
statesmanship which you have set in this Council will
always be followed. Much as I am tempted-as a permanent
member was yesterday-to speak for two hours on this
subject, I shall confine myself to saying this: the Ambassador of France said that you had the mind of a
Frenchman. May I be allowed to add that, as we see it, you
have the will and determination of a Turk.

41. Thus it was that the way was cleared for the
encouraging developments recorded in the report of the
Secretary-General which is now before the Council, The
report in fact records the following findings.
42. First, the Secretary-General’s appeal to the parties
concerned to exercise the greatest prudence and avoid any
disturbing incidents has by and large been heeded.
43. Secondly, the last three months have been marked by
a further relaxation of tension and by a general desire to
avoid incidents which might jeopardize an improving
political atmosphere. The report expressesthe hope that
the new atmosphere created will be allowed to evolve into
one of greater trust and confidence in the future and lead
to the establishment of a spirit of conciliation and
understanding. The Secretary-General adds that:

36. The PRESIDENT: I wish to thank Ambassador Eralp
for his contribution to the debate and for his very kind
references to me. If I really embodied all the virtues. that
are now being attributed to me by members of the Council
and those who are participating in the debate, I think I
would be scarcely recognizable to my family.
37. Mr. BITSIOS (Greece) (translated from French): I
hope I shall not be overtaxing the Council’s forbearance,
Mr. President, if I take this opportunity to say how sorry
the Greek delegation is that you are leaving the office of
Permanent Representative of the United States. You have
won the esteem and the admiration of all your colleagues in
the United Nations, and even those who have sometimes
disagreed with you do not fail to recognize your outstanding qualities-that is the clearest sign of your success.The
wishes of my delegation, as also my own most sincere
wishes, go with you as you leave our Organization. You
leave behind you many friends and great regret at your
departure.

“The Government’s pacification measures, particularly,
the lifting of all restrictions previously imposed on the
movement of Turkish Cypriots and certain goods, have
contributed greatly to the present situation.” [S/8622,
para. 51.1

“At the present time, the only restrictions on the
freedom of movement of the population in Cyprus are
those which continue to be applied in the areas under
Turkish Cypriot control.“[Jbid., pm-a, 65.1
44. The third finding is that, thanks to this relaxation of
tension, it has been possible for the first time since 1963 to
organize between the two parties exchanges of views
worthy of the name. The Secretary-General tells us, in fact,
that as a result of the efforts of his Special Representative,
Mr. Klerldes and Mr, Denktash, after preliminary talks in
Nicosia, met in Beirut from 2 to 5 June. The talks will be
resumed in Nicosia on 24 June, and the first meeting will be
opened by the Special Representative of the Secretary
General. In his report U Thant states that he attaches very
great importance to these talks and that he regards them as
most encouraging since they mark the establishment of a
direct channel of communications between the two communities for the first time in four and a half years.

38. On 18 March 1968, the Security Council unanimously
adopted a resolution [247 (1968)] extending the stationing
in Cyprus of the United Nations Peace-keeping Force for a
further period of three months. At the same time the
Council urged the parties concerned to “act with the
utmost restraint and to continue determined co-operative
efforts to achieve the objectives of the Security
Council. . , .”
39. It must be recognized that we are going through a
period in which the injunctions of the Security Council are
not always heeded; it is therefore reassuring to note that, in
the- case of the latest resolution on the Cyprus question,
events have moved in the direction indicated by the Council
in that resolution, as can be seen from the SecretaryGeneral’s report.

45. It is hardly necessary for me to say with what
satisfaction the Greek Government observesthese developments, for Greece has always tried to work towards a
peaceful settlement. The Council has had tangible proof of
the positive action taken by the Greek Government in
furtherance of this policy.

40. To work for pacification and steer towards the
solution of complex and explosive problems requires a
spirit dedicated to the cause of peace, a heightened senseof
responsibility, many sacrifices and a good measure of
imagination. In this respect the Cypriot leadership has been
impressively active in recent months, It has put into effect
far-reaching pacification measures covering the entire territory of the Republic. It has accepted the SecretaryGeneral’s offer of his good offices and has submitted to him
specific proposals on the Cyprus problem, proposals that
constituted the point of departure for a method of
establishing direct contacts between the two parties, as
proposed by U Thant. It has authorized the return to
Cyprus of Mr. Rauf Denktash, so that he might participate
in those contacts. It has shown flexibility regarding the
terms of an agreement on the opening of negotiations. And
on the substance of the problem it has declared itself
willing to support what is feasible.

46. This progress towards a better state of affairs, this
opening up of hope, has been the result of determined
co-operative efforts and of work behind the scenes on a
scale of which few people are aware, calling for great
I
patience and perseverance.
47. A tribute is due to all those who have helped. I should
like, however, to mention the personal contribution of
UThant. Dedicated to the cause of peace, an enemy of
violence and of all kinds of fanaticism, he has not ceased
for one instant to strive for the attainment of the objectives
of the Security Council as set out in resolution 186 of
4 March 1964. Other crises have arisen to engross the
attention of the Secretary-General and his distinguished
5

collaborators, yet their active interest, always accompanied
by a perfect knowledge of the progressof events in Cyprus,
has never lapsed for a single moment.
48. Mr. Bibiano Osorio-Tafall, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General in Cyprus, has shown by his
untiring efforts, his patience and skill, that he is equal to
the delicate task that has been entrusted to him. Without
him the first contacts between the representatives of the
two parties in Cyprus, which are a source of satisfaction to
us today, might not have been possible. We are convinced
that his activities in Cyprus will be more useful and fruitful
than ever h-rthe months to come. It is with the same feeling
that we express our thanks to the Commander of the Force,
General Martola.

55. The PRESIDENT: I wish to thank Ambassador Bitsios
for his contribution to our debate and also for what he has
had to say about me. Although I am leaving the United
Nations, I am not abandoning my interest in it and in
public affairs, if only to heed the famous admonition of
Pericles that “He who takes no interest in public affairs is
not a harmless but rather a uselesscharacter”.
56. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translated ffom Russian): The Soviet Union’s position en

49. All this shows beyond the shadow of a doubt how
necessary and constructive the presence of the United
Nations is at such difficult periods, when a crisishas arisen
and has yet to be overcome.
50. It is obvious that if the talks to be resumed in Cyprus
on 24 June are to have any chance of success,the two
parties facing one another must show an equal spirit of
goodwill and realism. It is in the interests of the objectives
sought by the Security Council that the parties concerned
should know that their attitudes are being watched and
judged at their true value.

the Cyprus question is well known. It has been repeatedly
set forth in statements by the Soviet Government and in
statements by its representatives, including those in the
Security Council. In connexion with the new discussioncf
this question, the Soviet delegation considefs it necessaryto
point out once again that the strength and meaning of its
stand remain unchanged.
57. The Soviet Union has based and continues to baseits
attitude on the premise that the Cyprus question must and
can be settled peacefully in the interests of the Cypriot
people and in the interests of lessening tension in this
important region. The USSR firmly supports the struggleof
the Cypriots for full independence, sovereignty and tenitorial integrity for the Republic of Cyprus, which is a
Member State of the United Nations.
58. The settlement of the domestic issuesof Cyprus is the
busiaess of the Cypriots themselves. They themselvesmust
settle their internal affairs, without intervention from
outside.

51. The road that still lies ahead is long. Time will be
needed, and patience, and above all perseverance, on the
path that has just opened. At this stage we dare not make
any predictions, but it may be taken as an encouraging
omen that the Greek and Turkish Cypriots have begun to
discuss their common future. As Mr. Pipinelis, the Foreign
Minister of Greece, has said, “it is obvious that the setting
up of a new political organization in Cyrpus giving
satisfaction to all its inhabitants, which we trust may be the
result of the present contacts, will free the present situation
of existing frictions on the spot and will in itself constitute
a considerable step towards the final solution.”

59. The legitimate rights of the Greek and Turkish
communities in Cyprus must be fully respected by all.
60. The Soviet Union is firmly opposed to any attempts to
infringe upon the sovereignty of the Republic of Cyprus
and to intentions, not alien to certain States, to solve the
Cyprus question behind the backs of the people of Cyprus,
to the detriment of that people’s fundamental interests and
for th.e selfish ends of certain countries.
61. We are deeply convinced that in order to preservefully
the independence and integrity of the Republic of Cyprus
all foreign troops must be removed from its territory and
that foreign military bases there must be abolished. The
Soviet delegation would also like to stressthe need for all
Member States of the United Nations, in accordancewith
the Security Council resolution 186 of 4 March 1964, to
refrain from actions which might in any way complicate the
situation in Cyprus.

52. In the achievement of this aim, the Security Council
can once again give assistance,specifically by extending the
mandate of the Force for the period indicated by the
Secretary-General and by appealing to the Members of the
United Nations to contribute voluntarily to the cost of
maintaining it.
53. Greece is one of the Members which are contributing
to the expenses of the United Nations Force in Cyprus. Its
contribution has now totalled more than US$6 million, We
therefore know from experience what it costs to maintain
the Force and we deeply appreciate the spirit of international solidarity shown both by the Powers that maintain
contingents there and by those that contribute materially
to the upkeep of the United Nations Force.

62. Today the Security Council is once again considering
the question of Cyprus in connexion with the report of the
United Nations Secretary-General on the United Nations
operation in Cyprus for the period from 9 March to 7 June
1968 [S/8622/. Paragraph 97 of that report contains a
recommendation to extend the presence of the armed
forces in Cyprus for a further six months.

54. Today, when so many lamentable events darken the
international horizon, it is good to know that in that corner
of the Eastern Mediterranean the hope of a return to a
normal and peaceful life is being reborn in the hearts of a
people which, like all others, has a right to the good things
of life.

63. In this connexion we cannot overlook the following
fact. More than four years have passedsince those armed
forces were first stationed in Cyprus; but this emergency
measure has not yet led to a settlement of the Cyprus
problem. This is admitted in the Secretary-General’s report
6

to the Security Council, in which he notes, in particular,
that, although the situation in Cyprus has improved
somewhat and talks have begun between the two national
communities with regard to a settlement of controversial
problems, “the basic issues dividing the two communities
have remained unresolved”. /Ibid., para. 92.1

both in restoring and securing tranquil conditions in the
Island, and in searching for a just and durable settlement
for the future.
72. All of US, I feel sure, are convinced that now is the

time for a further determined and persistent and urgent
endeavour to make progress towards permanent pacification and a final settlement of the problems which have in
the past bred so much bitterness and bloodshed. Uppermost
in our minds is the urgency. The favourable opportunities
which now exist must not be let go. This is no time to drift
or delay. It is the time to set out at once on a new course
and urgently to persist in it.

64. As for the draft resolution submitted to the Security
Council, proposing an extension of the presence of the
United Nations Force in Cyprus for an additional period of
about six months, the Soviet delegation believes it necessary first of all to point out that this draft reaffirms the
Security Council resolution 186 of 4 March 1964 and
subsequent decisions of the Council on the question of
Cyprus.

73. With that overriding and urgent need in mind, we were
inclined to favour a shorter extension of the mandate of the
United Nations Force than has today been decided. But we
also recognize the necessity for showing confidence in the
new moves which are now in train and giving all encouragement to them. We agreed therefore to the longer period of
extension certainly not in a spirit of complacency but as an
act of faith. Before Christmas comes, we trust that the
barriers to a peaceful and permanent settlement will have
been overcome,

65. Although the Soviet Union did not consider and still
does not consider the continued presence of United Nations
Forces in Cyprus to be justified, it will not hinder an
extension of the presence of those Forces for an additional
petiod of approximately six months, in view of the fact
that this is in accordance with the wishes of the Govemment of Cyprus and of other interested parties.
66. The indispensable condition for such an extension
must, of course, be the strict observance of the terms of the
Security Council resolution of 4 March 1964, namely the
strict preservation of the present functions of the United
Nations Force in Cyprus and of the present system of
financing it! that is, through voluntary contributions.

74. The second consideration is the need for immediate
improvement in the local situation to achieve normal
conditions by following up what has already been done.
What we greatly hope to see now are further practical
measures fbr reduction of military confrontation and
restoration of full freedom of movement, with a rapidly
expanding and accelerating series of positive actions to
restore mutual trust and confidence.

67. The PRESIDENT: No further representatives are
inscribed on my list to speak before the Security Council
proceeds to vote on the draft resolution contained in
document S/8639.

7.5. Thirdly, we pay renewed tribute to the work of the
United Nations Force under its able and trusted Commander, General Martola. Both by its presence and its
composition and by its vigilance and persistence the Force
has brought great credit to all who have participated in the
joint international effort, and the Force has brought credit
too to the United Nations.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
The draft resolution was adopted unanimously.3

68. The PRESIDENT: Several representatives have indicated that they would like to address the Council after the
vote. The first speaker inscribed is the representative of the
United Kingdom, Lord Caradon, on whom I now call.

76. My country has made a major contribution to the
Force, both by providing the largest military contingent
and meeting its full costs, and by making a regular
contribution at the rate of $1 million for each three-month
period. My Government is prepared to continue to make its
contribution both by its military contingent and by
financial subvention on the same scale. But we must all
look forward to a reduction and, in the end, to the
termination of this most successful peace-keeping effort,
and our commitments are of course subject to subsequent
developments in that direction. We trust that progress
towards that end may very soon be possible.

69. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I would first
wish to thank the’secretary-General for his report. He has
not failed to recognize the continuing dangers when he
reminds us that “there are still thousands of men under
arms in Cyprus” (S/8622, para. 911. Nor has he engaged in
any easy optimism, for he tells us that “Little progresshas
been made during the last three months in the matter of
military disengagement.” [Ibid., pura. 94.1

77. Let me finally add my words to those to which we
have already listened, in admiration for the efforts of
Ambassador Osorio-Tafall. He has never been discouraged.
He has gained wcl kept the confidence of all. His patience
and perseverancenow begin to show most welcome results.
We pray that his initiative and the good senseand goodwill
of both Greeks and Turks may now lead on, without
interruption and without delay, to final success.

70. He emphasizes that the proximity of the opposing
armed forces constitutes a latent danger both to the
improved atmosphere in Cyprus and to future progress
towards a solution. He tells us that some of the initiatives
he previously advocated have ya t to materialize.
7 1 I It is well that these facts should be faced. But they
should not be a cause for pessimism. On the contrary, they
should be a cause for reinforcing resolve to make progress

78. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): Mr. President, 1968 has been a
year of hope for Cyprus. For the first time in four and a

3 Seeresolution 254 (1968).

7

commensurate with the need. We are gratified to note that
the countries which have contributed troops to UNFICYP
agree to a six-month extension.

half years, a direct channel of communication between the
two communities of the Island has been opened asa result
of the untiring efforts of Ambassador Osorio-Tafall, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General. A few days
ago, two prominent leaders of the Greek and Turkish
Cypriots met in Beirut and agreed to resume their talks in
Nicosia as from the 24th of this month. This is one of the
auspicious indications to which the Secretary-General has
drawn our attention in paragraph 92 of his report
(S/8622/. It is indeed a most welcome development that
the leaders of the two communities have at last begun to
realize that they cannot solve their dispute by force.

86. In regard to the strength of-UNFICYP, the mainte.
nance of its full complement appears to us to be essential, at
least until the inter-communal talks begin to produce
positive results. We would hope that financial considerations will not lead to reductions that might turn out to have
been ill-advised.
87. We have voted for the resolution that has just been
adopted with those considerations in mind.

79. My delegation should like to pay a sincere tribute to
the representatives of Cyprus, Greece and Turkey for their
statesmanlike statements in this debate and for the spirit of
restraint, conciliation and goodwill in which they have
spoken.

88. Before concluding, I should like to express our deep
appreciation of the patient statesmanship of the Secretary
General and the untiring efforts of his Special Representative, Ambassador Osorio-Tafall; the Commander of
UNFICYP, General Martola; and all those who, with such
singular devotion to duty, have contributed to the creation
of an improved atmosphere in the strife-tom Island.

80. The report of the Secretary-General mentions many
measures, including the lifting of various restrictions, that
have contributed to the improvement of the situation. But
this hopeful turn of events is only a beginning. Basic issues
dividing the two communities still remain to be resolved. As
pointed out by the Secretary-General, should favourable
developments in the political sphere fail to materialize, the
resulting disillusionment might-if the close military confrontation in many areasis allowed to continue-give rise to
increased tension and possibly new incidents.

89. Mr. IGNATIEFF (Canada): The Secretary-General’s
latest report on the United Nations Operation in Cyprus
does indeed, as several of my colleagues have pointed out,
offer new grounds for hope that a political settlement of
that island’s problems can be attained before many months
have passed. It is, of course, particularly encouraging that a
dialogue between leading personalities of the two communities in the Island has now begun. This is undoubtedly
the most promising development in the Cyprus dispute
since UNFICYP was established. On behalf of the Canadian
delegation I wish well to the participants in that dialogue
and express the hope that their important efforts in the
direction of a political solution will be completely successful.

81. It is with this concern in mind that my delegation
would like to make some observations on some of the issues
raised by the Secretary-General in his report.
82. In paragraph 26 of his report the Secretary-General
has referred to the consignment of weapons imported by
the Government of Cyprus in December 1966, which has
been a cause of concern for UNFICYP. It is also a matter of
concern to us that the Government of Cyprus has notified
the Force Commander that it intends to distribute gradually, between July and December 1968, all the light arms
now in store.

90. It is obvious that the commencement and productive
continuation of such talks can only be possible against the
background of an improved atmosphere throughout
Cyprus. My delegation welcomes the indications given by
the Secretary-General in his report of a further relaxation in
tension and of a general desire to avoid incidents.

83. In the present circumstances we fear that this decision
might upset the balance of forces in Cyprus and prejudice
the efforts to promote a climate necessaryfor a reduction
of forces and military disengagement.
84. We welcome the efforts of the Government of Cyprus
to restore normal economic conditions. However, we also
note the Secretary-General’s finding that economic conditions in the Turkish Cypriot areas have not as yet
significantly improved, in contrast to the continuing boom
in the rest of the Island. We endorse his observation that
unless some progress is made very soon in this regard, hard
decisions may be taken which would render even more
difficult the solution of political questions and perhaps
even widen the gap between the standard of living in the
Turkish Cypriot enclaves and that in the rest of the
country.

91. We would of course urge the parties concerned to stay
on this path of moderation and reason. Their desire to do
so on the whole seems to be confirmed by the Cyprus
Government’s pacification measures as well as by the
conciliatory public statements made both by Greek and
Turkish Cypriot leaders, In this context it is clear that
gestures towards normalization by one side need in time to
be at least reciprocated by the other side, and that the
effects of especially sensitive actions, such as those relating
to the distribution of arms,-to which the Council’s notice
has been drawn today-must be weighed very carefully. It is
only if the parties remain aware of the constant need for
every effort to be made on their part for the removal of
misunderstanding and the creation of confidence that
progress towards the restoration of normal conditions
throughout the Island can be maintained.

85. Chapter VI of the Secretary-General’s report outlines
the expenses of UNFICYP and calls for pledges totalling
“$19,487,000 for a six-month extension” [S/8622,
para. 901. We hope that, as in the past, the pledges will be

92. The Secretary-General quite rightly attaches great
importance to the inter-communal talks which have just
begun; and he has expressed the considered view that the
mandate of UNFICYP should be extended for another
8

period as, in effect, a moderating influence in favour of
stability in the Island. My delegation supports this judgement, which we know has been based on the most careful
consideration of the situation in the Island and takes into
account the views of his Special Representative,
Mr. Osorio-Tafall, as well as of General Martola, the
Commander of the United Nations Force.

98. The Council has now extended the mandate of
UNFICYP for a period of approximately six months in
accordance with the recommendation made by the Secretary-General. The inter-communal talks which are about to
start will have to deal with a number of very complex
problems which will not be easily solved. Therefore we join
in the earnest hope expressedby the Secretary-General in
his report that, in the interest of the country as a whole,
both communities will find it possible to make those
concessions and accommodations without which no agreement can be attained. We realize that under the circumstances the talks may be protracted. Therefore we havealthough with some hesitation-accepted an extension of
the mandate for six months, a period that should be long
enough to allow the talks to produce some substantial
results by the time we meet again.

93. The length of extension of the mandate is, of course,
not always an easy matter to decide. Despite recent
encouraging developments, the fluture course of events on
the Island remains somewhat uncertain and the Canadian
delegation felt that there was something to be said for the
shorter, three-month period by which UNFICYP was extended on the last occasion; such a period might have
provided a useful opportunity for Council members to keep
the operation of the Force under review in the light of the
evolving situation. In any case we would hope that the
virtual six-month extension now granted will be understood
as a measure to facilitate‘ and not to delay the vigorous
pursuit of the inter-communal talks which have just begun.
For its part the Canadian Government will follow’ with
interest the development of these talks and will review its
own contribution to the Force in the light of the progress
which may be made.

99. In the meantime the Government of Denmark will
maintain the Danish military and police contingents in
UNFICYP at the disposal of the United Nations at the
required strength.
100. Mr. CSATORDAY (Hungary): The Hungarian delegation wishes to explain its vote on the resolution the Council
has just adopted.

94. It is against that background that the Canadian
delegation has been able to accept the resolution just
adopted unanimously.

101. We have read with great interest the report of the
Secrefary-General on the United Nations operations in
Cyprus. We noted that the Secretary-General was in a
position to report: “. . . the relaxation of tension in Cyprus
which set in at the beginning of the year has continued
during the period under review.” [S/8622, para. 91.1 My
delegation welcomes this trend-all the more so as we have
always been of the view that it is the improvement of the
relations between Greek and Turkish Cypriots that the
United Nations should primarily promote.

95. Before concluding, I should like to commend the
Secretary-General and particularly his Special Representative in Cyprus, Mr. Osorio-Tafall, who has been instrumental in making the inter-communal talks possible, as well
as the Commander of UNFICYP, General Martola, for their
patient and continued quest for a peaceful settlement. One
can only hope that their efforts will continue to be
rewarded by further improvement in the situation. Towards
this end I would urge the parties to maintain, and indeed
further improve, their co-operation both with the Secretary-General’s Special Representative and with UNFICYP.

102. In this connexion, we were gratified to see in the
report that certain contacts have been established between
the representatives of the two communities. We share the
view of the Secretary-General that this “establishment of a
direct channel of communication . . , is most encouraging”
and that great importance should be attached to these talks
[ibid., para. 961. We also agree with him that the task
ahead is fraught with difficulties, but there is no doubt in
our minds that there is no other and no better way to solve
the problems confronting the people of Cyprus than to find
solutions through direct contacts between the Cypriots
concerned.

96. Mr. BORCH (Denmark): When I spoke in the Council
on 18 March this year on the occasion of the latest
extension of the mandate of UNFICYP (1398th meeting],
I expressed satisfaction that the period leading up to that
meeting of the Council had been one of the quietest since
December 1963 and that, although no tangible progress
towards discussion between the parties directly concerned
had as yet been made, there was a momentum towards the
restoration of normalcy. It is gratifying to learn from the
Secretary-General’s report for the period from 9 March
through 7 June that this momentum has materialized and
that, along with a further relaxation of tension and the
introd&tion
of further normalization measures, for the
first time in four-and-a-half years a direct channel of
communication between the two communities in the Island
has been established.

103. My delegation has always been convinced that the
principle of self-determination must serveas a basis for such
a solution. It is for that reason that we have had doubts
about the advisability of stationing foreign military personnel in Cyprus and expecting that their presence would
somehow lead to a solution of the problems confron,ting
the people of the Island. Our reservations about an
extension of the mandate of UNFICYP for a further period
of almost six months have not changed. Our positive vote
on the draft resolution, therefore, should in no way be
interpreted as an expression of views favouring the long
term stationing of foreign military personnel in an indeperldent Member State of the United Nations. However, since
the Secretary-General has clearly indicated-and this is
reflected in the resolution-that during the coming period

97. We all owe a debt of gratitude to the SecretaryGeneral and to his Special Representative in Cyprus,
Mr. Osorio-Tafall, as well as to the Commander of
UNFICYP, General Martola, for their untiring efforts and
for the important results achieved so far. I wish to assure
them of our full support in their future endeavours.
9

event the Government of Cyprus were to decide, how.
ever, to issue some of these arms, it would undertake to
maintain under lock and key that part of the recently
imported arms consisting of heavier weapons not
normally issued to police forces.”

of approximately six months sufficient progress towards a
final solution will make possible a withdrawal or substantial
reduction of the United Nations Force, we felt that our
affirmative vote this time would make it possible to help
bring the United Nations operation to an end within a
reasonably short time.

110. In reply to that aide-m&moire, the Government of
Cyprus said that it would not for the time being issue any
such arms, but would inform UNFICYP the moment it
decided to do so.

104. Finally, my delegation has voted for the resolution
with the clear understanding that the financing of the
United Nations operation in Cyprus during this period will
be based on the principles contained in resolution
186 (1964) of March 1964.

111. The Government has now informed UNFICYP that it
will issue-not heavy arms-but light arms, which ate
definitely arms for the police. That is in conformity witi
the understanding with the Secretary-General on this
matter.

105. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of
Cyprus, who wishesto exercise the right of reply.
106. Mr. ROSSIDES (Cyprus): I am sorry to have to take
the floor again, but it has been made necessarybecause of
the remarks made by the representative of Turkey, which I
believe call for a reply and for a statement of the position
of the Government of Cyprus on certain matters.

112. The next point I should like to make on this question
of arms is relevant to something I said in my statement
earlier this afternoon. It is made clear in the SecretaryGeneral’s report that there has been no effort on the part of
the Turkish Cypriot armed enclaves to co-operate towards
pacification. On the contrary, the report states that:
“ . . . the undiminished vigilance and activeness of the
Turkish Cypriot fighters and their frequent appearanceon
their positions have led to a certain increased warinesscu
the part of the National
Guard , . ,” [S/81522,
para. 171 -and this at a time when the other side has been
making withdrawals from inland outposts, which, as is
stated in paragraph 17 of the report, is consistent with the
Government’s normalization measures. Those normalizanen
measures are praised throughout the report.

107. First, I should like to deal with the question of the
arms. It must be made clear that Cyprus is ‘a sovereign
State-it is so recognized in the Security Council resolution
of 4 March 1964~and it has the responsibility for the
maintenance and restoration of law and order. This is an
inherent right of the Government of Cyprus, and it has not
been interfered with by the resolution. On the contrary, it
has been reaffirmed by operative paragraph 2 of the
resolution, which states:
‘Asks the Government of Cyprus, which has the
responsibility for the maintenance and restoration of law
and order, to take all additional measures necessaryto
stop violence and bloodshed in Cyprus;“.

113. I might have been able to understand the suggestions
made by the representative of Turkey if there had been at
least some evidence of willingness on the part of the
Turkish “fighters” to lay down their arms or if they had
demonstrated less activeness at the armed posts. Unfortu
nately, that has not been the case. Hence, I do not think
that it can be suggested for a moment that police arms
should not be replenished. The police has a good record;
that is clear from the report. Throughout this period in
which the normalization measures have been applied, there
have been no searches; there have been no attempts of any
kind to disturb the free movement of the Turkish Cypriots.

This responsibility for the maintenance of law and order
carries with it a responsibility for having a police force. The
police must be armed, and it is for the Government to
decide whether the arms need to be modernized or changed
because they are old and unusable. It is for no one else to
interfere in this internal affair of the ‘Government of
Cyprus. I want to make that very clear. I have stated this
before in the Security Council yhen I rejected any
suggestion for interference with this right of the Government of Cyprus to administer its police force.

114. There was one solitary case of a search, on the basis
of information available. It was made becauseit had been
found that machine-guns, sub-machine guns and rounds of
ammunition hidden under sacks were being conveyed by
the Turkish Cypriots from one part of the Island to
another. It had not been my intention to mention this, but
I have to do so now. The Secretary-General’s report states
that:

108. Secondly, I should like to mention that the Govemment of Cyprus has of its own accord, and in the spirit of
co-operation with the Secretary-General and with
UNFICYP, consented to give information about the
weapons it has imported, but that is not in any sense a
dimunition of its sovereign right as a Government in regard
to the administration of its police force.

“A further incident that undeniably caused alarm
occurred on 15 May and, were it not for the prudence
displayed by the Government and by the Turkish Cypriot
leadership, might have had serious consequences,whens
Turkish Cypriot lorry travelling south from Nicosia te
Ktima was stopped by the Cyprus police on the basisef
information received and, upon being searched, Was
found to contain two light machine-guns, five sub*
machine guns, and more than 3,000 rounds of ammuni*
tion hidden under sacks.” /Ibid., para. 35.1

109. My third point is the following. In the aide-m&moire
of the Secretary-General dated 10 January 1967 on this
matter it is stated that:
‘I . . . measures taken by the Government of Cyprus now
in effect whereby the recently imported arms have been
kept uncrated be maintained as long as possible, and
General Martola, Commander UNFICYP, will continue to
effect periodic inspections of the uncrated arms. In the
10

expressed in the name of the international community. We
cannot hide behind the exercise of sovereignty in flouting
the concerns and misgivings of the international community. It was in that spirit that I urged the Greek Cypriot
Administration to refrain from these acts at such a time.

11s. That was a matter of great concern to us, but in our
sfforts to continue the pacification measures, we did not
;ay that this was an abuse of the freedom of movement
underthose measures.
116. Another point raised by the representative of Turkey
,vssthat two Turks were killed by members of the National
zuard-one on 26 May and the other on 6 June. As is clear
Tram the report, both those men were armed and were
ising their arms for an illegal purpose. The matter is sub
u&e. I agree that every effort should be made to
letermine the circumstances. The person or persons who
lid the shooting, in one case and the other, should be
prosecuted and punished, irrespective of whether their
:tk& origin is Greek or Turkish. That is the essenceof
Iroper government. I am glad to say that this matter is
leing thoroughly and urgently investigated at the special
lirection of the Minister of the Interior. The case of the
ransportation of arms is also under investigation.

123. It is very well to say that the police have to maintain
law and order. But we wonder to what extent the
performance of. that function covers the shooting in the
back of defenceless people. For in both these cases
paragraph 44 of the report makes it clear that the victims
had been shot from behind while running to safety.
124. Perhaps a little more clarification as to the nature of
these weapons is due, They are not mere police weapons
used for the maintenance of law and order in criminal cases,
but they are largely machine guns and even grenadelaunchers, which can only be used in intercommunal strife.
125. This is a matter of grave concern and it was in the
spirit of conciliation that I suggested that such distribution
should not take place at such a time. I have noticed that
members of the Council, in their statements, have also
taken up that question.

!17. I understand that the Turkish Cypriot leadership
offeredto conduct its own investigation to determine who
vss responsible for the transportation of arms, already
nentioned.
.18. All these aspects have to be dealt with in a spirit of
goodwill and sincerity. I trust and hope that the sincerity
hat the Government has shown in this respect will also be
hown by the Turkish Cypriot leadership, so that we can
nove forward to a solution of the problem in a spirit of
:o-operation and understanding, brushing aside all the large
)r small misgivings that may arise from various incidents
luring this time.

126. Ambassador Rossides also referred loosely to the
laying down of their arms by the .Turkish fighters. We
maintain the hope that the time will come when all arms
illegally carried by all personnel in Cyprus will be laid
down. But if that is to take place, I think the lead should be
taken by the National Guard.
127. The PRESIDENT:
I have no further speakers
inscribed, and therefore our debate is concluded. I am sure,
from our unanimous vote in support of the resolution, that
all members of the Council are gratified with the encouraging recent developments in the Island. We earnestly hope
that all concerned, as the resolution clearly contemplates,
will continue their efforts to resolve their differences in a
spirit of goodwill, conciliation, moderation and magnanimity.

.19. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Turkey in exercise of his right of reply.
.20. Mr. ERALP (Turkey): It is with great regret that I
tave asked to speak once again, but I feel it necessaryto
eply very briefly to the remarks just made by Ambassador
tossides.
.21. I am dismayed to see that the appeal I made in my
opening remarks for reason, moderation and conciliation
rave fallen upon deaf ears, at least so far as Ambassador
tossidesis concerned.

128. This spirit will make possible a solution of the
Cyprus problem, a solution which will reflect great credit
upon the two communities in Cyprus, upon the Govemments which have participated in our debate, and upon the
United Nations which since 1964, under the leadership of
our distinguished Secretary-General, has played such an
important and indispensable role in seeking to resolve this
problem.

.22. With regard to the question I raised, I do hope that
his will not be the final word of the Greek Cypriot
ldministration and that its actions in the coming months
vi11be more conciliatory than the remarks we have just
reard. I refer, of course, to the arms that it is now intended
o distribute to the Cypriot police. It is not a question of
nere exercise of sovereignty that is at stake here. When the
lecretary-General expressed concern in the addendum
‘S/761I/Add.l]
to his report of December 1966, the
natter was an international issue. His concern was

129. On the optimistic note that a final solution may be
near at hand, if there is no objection, I will declare the
meeting adjourned.
The meeting rose at 5.25 p.m.

11

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publications
the world.
Consult
your
or Gsneva.

may be obtained
bookstore
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Notions,
Soles Section,

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

SE PROCURER

throughout
New York

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unier
rant en vente
dons
les librairies
et les ogences
d&positoires
du monde entier.
Informer-vous
ovprbr
de votre libroirie
ov odressez-vow
b:
Nations
Unier,
Section der ventes, New York ou Genivc.
HAK

flOnY’fb(Tb

tl3AAHMR

06bEAUHEHHblX

OPTAHM3AuHH

HAlltin

Il:l~tlllllrt
0pratiit:tnqnn
OGse~nitctmt~rs IIaryt”t JtOitilto tiylIllTh n Iillllililll~lS
atarawiiax
It
:II’CIITI’TIIIS I10 IWCS ~KI~OllKi 3lllp.
hlo,SplTC
cIlpzlnl;lt
06 ll:l$llllltlS
ll ll8lUPP IillllilillOY
wPra:IIlIIc
11.1ll UlllllllTC
110 aqwy
: Opraimsaqwt
Oi)‘be~nttctttttds
Ilat(tti.
CClillltti
U0
UpO~aKc
n:l~aunfi, IIbm-llopli
a.in JKciicna.
COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLlCACfONES

DE LAS NACIONES

10s publicociones
de 10s Naciones
Unidos
ertbn
en todas parter
del mundo.
Consulte
(I su librero
Ventos, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

UNIDAS

en vento en librcrlar
y cosos dirtribuidorot
o dirijase
a: Naciones
Unidas,
Seccibn

$U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

in other currencies)

de

35631-September

1972-2,100
