A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/52/91
4 February 1998

Fifty-second session
Agenda item 103
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/52/635)]
52/91.

Preparations for the Tenth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of
Crime and the Treatment of Offenders

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 50/145 of 21 December 1995 on the Ninth United Nations Congress on the
Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders,
Considering that, pursuant to its resolutions 415 (V) of 1 December 1950 and 46/152 of 18 December
1991, the Tenth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders is to
be convened in the year 2000,
Recognizing the significant contributions of the United Nations congresses on the prevention of crime
and the treatment of offenders to the promotion and strengthening of international cooperation in crime
prevention and criminal justice,
Bearing in mind the new role of the congresses, as stipulated in paragraph 29 of the Statement of
Principles and Programme of Action of the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Programme
contained in the annex to resolution 46/152,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 1993/32 of 27 July 1993 and the draft rules of
procedure for United Nations congresses on the prevention of crime and the treatment of offenders annexed
to that resolution,
Recalling resolution 5/1 of 30 May 1996 of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice,
in which the Commission requested the Secretary-General to summarize the views received from
Governments, relevant agencies and programmes of the United Nations system and intergovernmental and

98-76507

/...

A/RES/52/91
Page 2

non-governmental organizations concerning the proposals for the theme, format, agenda items, workshop
topics and possible venue of the Tenth Congress for consideration by the Commission at its sixth session,1
1. Takes note of the report of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice on its sixth
session2 and of the its discussion on the preparations for the Tenth United Nations Congress on the Prevention
of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders;3
2. Decides that the Tenth Congress should be held in the year 2000 and that the following topics
should be included in its provisional agenda, as recommended by the Commission on Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice at its sixth session:4
(a) Promoting the rule of law and strengthening the criminal justice system;
(b) International cooperation in combating transnational crime: new challenges in the twenty-first
century;
(c) Effective crime prevention: keeping pace with new developments;
(d) Offenders and victims: accountability and fairness in the justice process;
3. Also decides that four workshops on the following issues should be held within the framework of
the Tenth Congress:
(a) Combating corruption;
(b) Crimes related to the computer network;
(c) Community involvement in crime prevention;
(d) Women in the criminal justice system;
4. Welcomes the offer by the Government of South Africa to host the Tenth Congress, and requests
the Secretary-General to initiate consultations with the Government and to report to the Commission at its
seventh session;
5. Takes note with appreciation of the statement made on behalf of the Government of Austria that,
if consensus could be reached and questions of timing could be resolved, that Government would be
honoured to host the Tenth Congress at Vienna;
6. Requests the Commission, at its seventh session, to finalize the programme for the Tenth Congress
and to make its final recommendations, through the Economic and Social Council, to the General Assembly,
taking into account the fact that the Tenth Congress should deal with a limited number of precisely defined
substantive topics reflecting the urgent needs of the world community and should include practical technical
workshops on well-focused issues related to the substantive agenda items;

1

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1996, Supplement No. 10 and corrigenda
(E/1996/30 and Corr.1-3), chap. I, sect. D.
2

Ibid., 1997, Supplement No. 10 and corrigendum (E/1997/30 and Corr.1).

3

Ibid., chap. II.

4

Ibid., para. 15.
/...

A/RES/52/91
Page 3

7. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a discussion guide for the consideration of the
Commission, in cooperation with the institutes for the prevention of crime and the treatment of offenders
affiliated with the United Nations, and invites Member States to be actively involved in that process;
8. Invites the regional commissions, the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice
Programme network, government-appointed national correspondents in the field of crime prevention and
criminal justice, the specialized agencies and other entities within the United Nations system, the
intergovernmental organizations concerned and relevant non-governmental organizations in consultative status
with the Economic and Social Council to become actively involved in the preparations for the Tenth
Congress;
9. Invites Member States to be represented at the Tenth Congress at a high political level, for example
by heads of State, government ministers and attorneys-general;
10. Decides to reserve the first two days of the plenary session at the Tenth Congress following its
opening primarily for statements by such representatives at a high political level on the main themes of the
Congress;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare an overview of the state of crime and criminal justice
worldwide for presentation at the opening of the Tenth Congress;
12. Also requests the Secretary-General to facilitate the organization of ancillary meetings of
non-governmental and professional organizations participating in the Tenth Congress, in accordance with past
practice, as well as meetings of professional and geographical interest groups, and to take appropriate
measures to encourage the participation of the academic and research community at the Tenth Congress;
13. Further requests the Secretary-General to provide the Centre for International Crime Prevention of
the Secretariat, serving as the secretariat of the Tenth Congress, with the resources necessary to undertake,
in an effective and timely manner, within the overall appropriations of the programme budget for the
biennium 1998-1999, the preparatory activities for the Tenth Congress, as directed by the Commission,
including the organization of regional preparatory meetings, and to ensure adequate resources for the
biennium 2000-2001 for other requirements and the conduct of the Tenth Congress itself;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to provide resources, as required, in accordance with established
United Nations budgetary practice and within the overall appropriations of the programme budget for the
biennium 1998-1999, and adequate resources for the biennium 2000-2001, in order to ensure an appropriate
programme of public information relating to the preparations for the Tenth Congress;
15. Also requests the Secretary-General to make available the necessary resources for the participation
of the least developed countries in the regional preparatory meetings for the Tenth Congress and in the
Congress itself, in accordance with past practice;
16. Invites the Commission, as the preparatory body for the United Nations congresses, to finalize all
organizational arrangements for the Tenth Congress at its seventh session, including its dates, duration,
documentation and venue;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure proper follow-up action to the present resolution and to
report thereon to the General Assembly, through the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice
at its seventh session.
70th plenary meeting
12 December 1997
