S/2021/174

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 March 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 24 February 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by
Ms. Helen Meagher La Lime, Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Haiti and Head of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti; and Ms. Vivianne
Roc, Director of Plurielles Haiti, as well as the statements delivered by the
representatives of China, Estonia, France, India, Ireland, Mexico, Norway, the
Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines — on behalf of the three
African members of the Security Council, namely, Kenya, the Niger and Tunisia, as
well as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines — the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, the United States of America and Viet Nam, in connection
with the video-teleconference on “The question concerning Haiti” convened on
Monday, 22 February 2021. A statement was also delivered by His Excellency
Mr. Jovenel Moïse, President of Haiti.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of
the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of
the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, these
briefings and statements will be issued as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Barbara Woodward
President of the Security Council

21-02812 (E) 010321 290321

*2102812*

S/2021/174

Annex I
Briefing by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Haiti and Head of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti,
Helen Meagher La Lime
It is an honour to once more have an opportunity to address you and provide
an update on the situation in Haiti. Despite the precarious calm that currently
pervades the country, the efforts of part of the opposition to unseat President Moïse
by 7 February, as well as the actions taken by the executive in reacting to an alleged
coup attempt and to the announcement by a senior judge of his appointment as Haiti’s
interim Head of State, have further hardened the positions of the principal actors in
the political crisis that have for too long affected the lives of the Haitian population.
As the country prepares to enter a tense pre-electoral period, the polarization that
has defined most of President Moïse’s term in office has become even more acute,
as signs of a shrinking civic space abound and an already alarming humanitarian
situation continues to deteriorate.
The institutional crisis in which the country is plunged since Parliament
ceased to function in January 2020, following the expiration of the terms of all
Lower Chamber parliamentarians and a majority of senators, without legislative
elections having been held, risks growing deeper as relations between the executive
and the judicial branches of power appear increasingly fraught, and President Moïse
continues to govern by decree.
Whereas, in recent months, the opposition had been unsuccessful in mobilizing
much popular support for its campaign to oust the President, the latter’s recent issuing
of decrees effectively retiring three Court of Cassation judges and appointing their
replacements prompted several magistrates’ associations to launch an open-ended
strike that further threatens to paralyse an already dysfunctional judicial system.
In addition, on 14 February, some 3,000 demonstrators marched peacefully in the
streets of Port-au-Prince to denounce what they deem to be a looming risk of return
to authoritarian rule.
I mentioned that there are mounting concerns over the shrinking of civic space
in the country. The overly broad definition of terrorism articulated in a 26 November
decree on public security — to include lesser offenses such as vandalism and
obstructing roads — along with an increase in both the threats directed at, and
attacks on, journalists, lawyers, judges and human rights defenders, all risk chilling
the public debate and curtailing such inalienable rights as those of freedom of speech,
freedom of the press and peaceful assembly.
Similarly, the humanitarian situation in the country is increasingly dire.
The latest estimates indicate that some 4.4 million people will need humanitarian
assistance in 2021, overwhelmingly as a result of an increase in acute food insecurity.
While factors such as the coronavirus disease pandemic, its economic impact,
gang violence and the passage of tropical storm Laura contributed to exacerbating
humanitarian needs in 2020, underlying drivers are closely correlated with persistent
sociopolitical tensions and chronic development deficits.
It is against this complex and potentially volatile backdrop that progress
continues to be made in preparing for the various electoral events scheduled to
take place this year. The Provisional Electoral Council has now set up its offices
in Haiti’s 10 regions, thus enabling logistics and operational planning to start in
earnest. Furthermore, the Haitian Government has contributed $20 million to the
United Nations-managed electoral basket fund to finance both the purchase of voting
materials and the training of electoral personnel, as well as to cover the operational

2/31

21-02812

S/2021/174

and logistics costs for the holding of a referendum on a new constitution, the draft
text of which was made public on 1 February.
Yet much remains to be done. The pace and scope of consultations on the
constitutional project need to be greatly enhanced. Indeed, while there exists a
general consensus among Haitian stakeholders and the general population on the need
to change the country’s current charter — viewed by many as one of the root causes
of Haiti’s chronic instability, amid the polarized climate — the process chosen by the
Government to enact such change is still perceived by some as lacking legitimacy.
All sectors of Haitian society, including political parties, the private sector, civil
society, churches, women groups and the diaspora, should be provided with ample
opportunity to debate and contribute to the draft text. Moreover, if Haitian voices
are to be heard well, additional efforts need to be expended to ensure that more of
Haiti’s citizens are registered and issued with the new national identification card
that will allow them to vote. The Government must provide the Office of National
Identification with the support it needs to rapidly scale up its registration drive.
Finally, despite the Government’s initial contribution, the entire electoral process
remains starkly underfunded. This situation requires the urgent attention of Haiti’s
international partners, lest the legislative, presidential and local polls be delayed.
Above all else, a minimal consensus among relevant political stakeholders
would greatly contribute to creating an environment conducive to the holding of the
constitutional referendum and subsequent elections. The United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti stands ready, in accordance with its mandate, to support all genuine
endeavours to foster such an outcome. The Haitian people deserve the opportunity
to express themselves through the ballot box in an appeased climate and to actively
decide on the direction their country will take, free from the fear of intimidation and
political violence.
In this respect, it can count on an increasingly professional police force, whose
close to 15,000 men and women deployed across the country strive to improve public
safety. To be sure, meeting the security challenges associated with the holding of the
referendum and the elections will represent a crucial test for the Haitian National
Police, just as the threats posed by some of its disgruntled officers’ association with
criminal groups, such as “Fantom 509”, continue to detract from its performance.
However, with strategic advice from the United Nations and appropriate support
from both national authorities and international partners, I am confident that this
institution, which lies at the heart of the rule of law and stability in Haiti, will
continue to develop its capacity in accordance with international human rights and
policing standards.
Conversely, I am deeply concerned with the recent resurgence in kidnappings
as well as the persistent impunity and lack of accountability for serious crimes
in Haiti. To address these scourges, which greatly contribute to the country’s
instability, authorities must demonstrate their commitment and capacity to arrest
and prosecute both criminals and perpetrators of human rights violations, as well as
to take concrete actions to protect citizens.
Despite the large sums and indefatigable efforts invested in Haiti’s development
over the past 25 years, the country’s progress towards achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals appears to have stalled, and in some cases even backslid. It is
evident that development effectiveness and impact in Haiti remain very low. Moving
forward, improved collaboration and trust between the Government and international
partners on Haiti’s structural problems will be essential to better prioritize areas of
intervention and develop effective integrated solutions to Haiti’s challenges.
Nevertheless, even as the Economic Commission for Latin America and the
Caribbean forecasts that Haiti’s economy will contract by 3 per cent in 2021 and that
21-028123/31

S/2021/174

the worst economic crisis to affect the region in 100 years will adversely impact the
country’s post-coronavirus disease recovery, only a democratic renewal, resulting
from the prompt holding of credible, transparent and participatory elections, can
provide Haiti with the opportunity to overcome its protracted political crisis and
allow its society and leaders to focus their attention on undertaking the governance
and economic reforms necessary to set the country back on the path towards
sustainable development.

4/31

21-02812

S/2021/174

Annex II
Briefing by the Director of Plurielles Haiti, Ms. Vivianne Roc
[Original: French]
Insecurity is a word I know all too well; I have dealt with it since childhood.
I was 6 years old when I had to witness a man’s death. All I remember are the shots
fired and the man lying on the ground, soaked in his own blood. I was terrified that
day. I did not understand what had just happened, and neither did anyone bother to
explain it to me.
That was my very first scene of violence but, lamentably, would not be my
last. A few months after that incident, my family moved, and, unfortunately, nothing
changed; indeed, things got worse. Later, in 2006, we had to abandon our home as
quickly as possible because of fighting among gangs. We had to flee, or else we
could have become part of the collateral damage. I was just a child at the time, so did
not understand why I could no longer go home; all I knew was that I had to accept
it and not talk about it, to avoid being singled out at school as a child who lived in a
ghetto. For that was my life, and I was terribly ashamed of it.
Day by day, banditry and gang violence became ever-larger features of my
life, until they became almost normal. Clashes between gangs are frequent, much
more so than those between gangs and law enforcement. The area where I live has
become a so-called zone of lawlessness. Everyone knew what was happening there
but no one dared speak about it, much less intervene.
There have been more than a few deaths in front of my home. The blood
always eventually disappears from the asphalt but never from my memory. Many
people have died, including some friends, some neighbours or just someone familiar
at a distance.
But, despite all of this, we have stayed, in the hope that the area could change
— that, despite all this violence it was a good place to live. That was until last year,
when everything got worse and I had to flee my home yet again. Last year I had to
live through things I would never wish upon anyone.
The young woman before you today is outraged by the winds of insecurity
that batter her country. She is part of no political movement, makes no public
appearances and certainly seeks no notoriety. She is simply tired of living in fear.
The little girl inside her is simply fed up of living in fear of getting hit by a bullet,
of getting attacked or of being kidnapped. Today I am no longer ashamed of where I
come from. I want to be the voice of the young people of the ghetto. I am taking on
the realities of my life, and I want to fight and show the way to other young people
who share them. My name is Vivianne Roc. I am 23 years old. And I live in Haiti.
Thus I introduce you to Plurielles, an ecofeminist organization of young people
that recently joined the United Network of Young Peacebuilders to help improve the
climate of peace and security in Haiti. As an organization, Plurielles is devoted
to helping women become independent, to gender equity, to youth equality and to
promoting peace and volunteer work in Haiti.
Plurielles, believing in youth as an important and essential resource for
development, dedicates itself to developing strategies to engage young people
and facilitate their participation in the development process. Established in 2010
following the devastating earthquake, the organization focuses its resources on
helping young people and their communities build independence with a view to
developing plans and activities to solve socioeconomic and environmental problems.
Our programming includes large awareness-raising campaigns, skills development
21-028125/31

S/2021/174

for young people on conflict management, training for community leaders on
violence, conflict and the causes of violence.
Plurielles seeks to contribute what it can to this society and to these young
people who, like me, have experienced horrific things, to these young people who
have things to say, or are even looking for answers and want to emerge from the
darkness. A message to young people from disadvantaged neighbourhoods: “You
are no longer alone: Plurielles, with the help of the United Network of Young
Peacebuilders, is there to support you”. There are many young people like me in
Haiti who, despite their experiences, obstacles, risks, poverty and the gang culture,
are working to uphold the values of peace, equality and social justice. Some do so
through organizations such as the Youth Advisory Council, another member of the
United Network of Young Peacebuilders.
We face numerous challenges in our work and in everyday lives in Haiti.
Allow me therefore to put forward the following several recommendations, which
I hope will be given serious consideration by the Haitian Government and the
international community.
Rehabilitation centres for young prisoners should be established, to help them
learn skills so they can find work, have a place to live after having served their
sentences and reintegrate into society.
Social and educational programmes should be developed to allow young
people to socialize and learn about subjects such as peacebuilding, human rights and
conflict transformation.
Controls should be strengthened against trafficking in illicit arms and
substances in Haiti.
Support centres for the victims of gang persecution and violence, also
providing psycho-emotional support for those close to them, should be set up.
A call centre for women suffering domestic violence should be set up to
provide assistance to them in the fastest way possible.
Funds should be made available to women who have suffered domestic
violence to put distance between them and perpetrators and to help them
become independent.
Funding should be provided to organizations like mine that work towards
more sustainable peace.
Protection networks for young people building peace at the local level should
be established so they may continue their important work without fear on a daily
basis. Without them, we truly have nothing.
It is thanks to my journey that I have come to be here before you to share my
message. I hope my statement touches you and does not put me in danger. While I
feel a little of that fear I described earlier, I also feel hopeful, as you can hear in the
message of my voice — hopeful that among the powerful are those brave enough to
push for the changes needed for lasting peace in Haiti. It is time to speak up for Haiti.
You can help us. You must help us. “Nou Bouke”.

6/31

21-02812

S/2021/174

Annex III
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Geng Shuang
[Original: Chinese]
China thanks Special Representative of the Secretary-General Meagher La
Lime for her briefing. I listened carefully to the presentations by the representatives
of Haitian civil society, and as I will to that of the President of Haiti.
Political gridlock continues in Haiti. The security situation is deteriorating.
The coronavirus disease pandemic is complicated by economic and social difficulties.
Rising violent crime is intertwined with social unrest. This has brought tremendous
suffering to the people. Haiti is still trapped in multiple political, economic social
and humanitarian crises. The Haitian people seem to have lost hope for the future.
The Haitian Government and leaders should be held primarily responsible for such
hopelessness and even despair. For a long time, Haitian political parties have engaged
in endless feuds. Politicians have done nothing at all. Corruption and abuse of power
persist in defiance of their prohibition, and national governance has almost failed.
This year is a crucial one for Haiti. The Secretary-General describes it in his
report (S/2021/133) as a watershed moment for Haiti. The constitutional referendum
to be held in April and the subsequent parliamentary presidential and local elections
will, to a large extent, shape the development of the Haitian political situation in the
future and fate of the Haitian people.
China supports the call of the Secretary-General and strongly urges all
political parties in Haiti to put the interests of the country and the people first,
abandon self-interest, take up their responsibilities, listen carefully to the views of
people of all walks of life and promote the constitutional referendum and elections
based on broad political consensus and through dialogue and consultations, so as to
create the conditions for the swift restoration of the country’s political stability and
the achievement of security and development. They should not once again let the
Haitians down or fail the expectation and help of the international community.
China appreciates the dedication and contributions of the United Nations to
helping the Haitian people and supports the United Nations Integrated Office in
Haiti (BINUH) in its continued mediation efforts to promote political dialogue in
Haiti and the successful holding of elections. At the same time, years of experience
and lessons have shown that, unless all political parties in Haiti assume their
responsibilities, demonstrate political will and work together for national stability
and development, any external efforts and help will be of no avail.
Since the 1990s, the United Nations has invested huge resources in helping
Haiti out of crisis. Over the past 30 years, the Security Council successfully deployed
the United Nations Mission in Haiti, the United Nations Support Mission in Haiti,
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti, the United Nations Mission for
Justice Support in Haiti, and now BINUH. The total cost of those operations has
reached nearly $8 billion. In addition, various agencies of the United Nations system
and international donors and partners have throughout devoted enormous effort to
helping Haiti restore stability, achieve development and protect human rights. The
accumulated investment is a staggering amount. It pains us to see that all those
investments seem not to have been cherished and used wisely, and neither have they
yielded the desired results.
I would like to stress again that there is no external solution to the Haitian
problem. We should learn the lessons, comprehensively assess the situation in the
light of what is happening, ponder seriously the future presence of the United Nations
in Haiti and avoid endless and fruitless investment.
21-028127/31

S/2021/174

Annex IV
Statement by the
United Nations

Permanent

Mission

of

Estonia

to

the

I thank Special Representative of the Secretary General Helen Meagher La
Lime and Ms. Vivianne Roc for their informative briefings today and for their
valuable work. I also welcome the presence of His Excellency President Jovenel
Moïse.
Estonia is concerned about the lack of political stability in Haiti. At this critical
time, more effort and responsibility are required from all parties to demonstrate
their political will. We call on all political actors to resolve their differences through
peaceful dialogue.
The elections process and announcement of the electoral calendar provide
an opportunity that should be used wisely to overcome long lasting political crisis
and restore democracy and stability in Haiti. It is crucial that the referendum on
the constitutional amendments in April as well as the legislative and presidential
elections later this year be conducted peacefully. The success of the elections requires
good technical preparation. It is especially critical to ensure a smooth process of
citizen registration.
At the same time, it is important to improve the security situation. Recent
reports about the rising level of violence, killings, kidnappings and gang-related
criminality are extremely worrisome. We welcome the appointment of the new
Director-General ad interim of the Haitian National Police. We urge that efforts be
redoubled in order to stop gang-related criminal activities. It is important to protect
an already-shrinking civic space by ensuring that people engaging in the public
debate can do so without endangering their lives and security.
We recognize the efforts of the General Inspectorate of the Haitian National
Police to investigate the allegations. However, while some law-enforcement officials
have received administrative sanctions as a result of misconduct, the judiciary has
yet to hold Haitian National Police officers accountable, despite the several criminal
investigations opened in recent years. We remain concerned by the lack of progress
in judicial investigations of the emblematic Grand-Ravine, La Saline, Bel Air and
other cases. Strikes by judicial staff and prosecutors seriously affected the right
of access to justice. Detention conditions remain dire, despite sustained efforts by
stakeholders to improve them.
We stress the importance of enhancing accountability and call on the
Government of Haiti to improve the justice system and ensure that all cases are
properly investigated and perpetrators brought to justice.
We urge the Government to adopt the national action plan on human rights,
which has been pending since 2019.
To conclude, I would like to thank Special Representative Helen Meagher La
Lime and her team for their tireless work. We remain hopeful that continued effort
by all parties will bring about a better future for Haiti. The Haitian people deserve a
stable State with democracy, the rule of law and sustainable development.

8/31

21-02812

S/2021/174

Annex V
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of France to
the United Nations, Nathalie Broadhurst
[Original: English and French]
I would like, first of all, to thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Meagher La Lime, for her very enlightening presentation, as well as
Ms. Roc for her moving testimony, and to welcome the presence among us of President
Jovenel Moïse.
France notes with deep concern the deterioration of the situation in Haiti. As
we have said on numerous occasions, the solution to the current crisis is political. And
as we know, in the absence of elections, the Parliament has not been in session for an
entire year. The Haitian authorities govern by decree and some of those decrees are
a source of concern, notably the one creating the National Intelligence Agency, the
one broadening the charge of terrorism and the one that led to the dismissal of three
judges who, according to the Constitution, cannot be removed. I have no reservation;
in stating that this situation is not sustainable in the long term.
Elections are slated for this fall, which is a step in the right direction. However,
those elections must contribute to a way out of the crisis and not add to the current
confusion. In our view, three conditions must be met in order for Haiti to return to
the path of stability. First, minimum security conditions must allow for the elections
to take place in satisfactory conditions. Secondly, the authorities must speed up
the distribution of identification cards to ensure the broadest possible electoral
participation. Thirdly, there must be an impartial electoral judge so that the results
are accepted by all.
A constitutional revision has also been announced. It is not our place to
speak about that process. We only hope that the country’s stakeholders will have the
opportunity to debate the text, its long-term institutional implications and, above all,
ensure that it will not lead to further delays in the various elections.
In terms of security and respect for human rights, the authorities must do
more. Allow me to ask this straightforward question: How is it possible that Jimmy
Cherizier is still walking free today? Those responsible for the La Saline and Bel
Air massacres must be brought to justice. I also note that the investigation into
the assassination of Monferrier Dorval is not making progress. The fight against
impunity must be the priority of the authorities.
Given the resurgence of violence and, in particular, the increasing number
of gang, the Haitian State must redouble its efforts. The resources of the Haitian
National Police must be further increased and consolidated, and it must be beyond
reproach in ensuring respect for the rule of law.
We must look at the situation with clear eyes. The credibility of State
institutions is severely eroded in Haiti today, particularly because of corruption
cases that are ruining the population’s trust. Almost four million Haitians are living
in extreme poverty and suffering from food insecurity, as several of my colleagues
have pointed out. This situation can only increase social fractures and tensions.
The work of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and of the
United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti team is indispensable, and we pay tribute
to them. Their work, in support of political dialogue and governance, is essential.
In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm that France, in its national capacity, but also
through the action of the European Union and the International Organization of la
Francophonie, stands — more than ever — alongside Haiti and the Haitians.
21-028129/31

S/2021/174

Annex VI
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations, Ravindra Raguttahalli
At the outset, let me welcome the presence of His Excellency Mr. Jovenel
Moïse, President of Haiti, in the meeting. I would like to join others in thanking
Ms. Helen Meagher La Lime, Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
her briefing on recent developments in Haiti. I also thank Ms. Vivianne Roc for
bringing the perspective of civil society to today’s meeting.
Today’s briefings provides us with an opportunity to assess the situation in
Haiti and the activities of the United Nations mission in fulfilling its Chapter VI
mandate, in particular with regard to the six benchmarks concerning the integrated
strategic framework.
My delegation takes positive note of all that Haiti has achieved in the last
decade, following the devastating earthquake of 2010. Haiti’s recovery from the
earthquake and cholera epidemic, the holding of elections in 2010 and 2015, the
peaceful transfer of power and increased policing capabilities reflect the resilience
of the Haitian people. We also acknowledge the significant role played by the
international community and bilateral partners in supporting the Haitian recovery.
Nonetheless, the Haitian people continue to suffer from the effects of a
multidimensional crisis that, unfortunately, has been prolonged for decades. Today
more than ever, they require the unwavering support of the international community.
As reflected in the Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2021/133) and as evident
from recent political developments, Haiti is facing serious political and security
challenges. In addition, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has also
adversely impacted the economic and humanitarian situation. Recent developments
reflect the fragile nature of the political situation and the lack of trust among political
actors. Moreover, the fact that there is no agreed objective interpretation of Haitian
constitutional law has only accentuated political differences, thereby adversely
impacting institutional stability, good governance and the rule of law.
This year will be critical for Haiti, in its efforts to build on the democratic gains
made in the past decade. Political stability is fundamental to effective governance to
stimulate overall socioeconomic development. In order to achieve long-term political
stability, it is crucial that all stakeholders engage in national dialogue and work
towards conducting peaceful and credible legislative and presidential elections.
In that regard, let me make following observations.
First, we have taken note of the appointment of the Independent Consultative
Constitutional Committee. We hope that a consultative process, involving all
stakeholders, will be undertaken to reach decisions that adequately reflect the hopes
and aspirations of the people of Haiti.
Secondly, the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration project being
carried out under the Secretary-General’s Peacebuilding Fund is helping to address
the issue of armed gang violence. We hope for the early implementation of the
national community violence reduction strategy by the Haitian authorities. We also
welcome steps to strengthen the Haitian National Police so as to empower it to deal
with gang violence and improve its community approach.
Thirdly, progress in justice reforms is critical to regain the trust of the people.
In that regard, we note the role played by the General Inspectorate of the Haitian
National Police with regard to police reform. Similar proactive initiatives in other
spheres of public security and criminal justice would also be welcomed.
10/31

21-02812

S/2021/174

Fourthly, on benchmark 5 — unemployment, youth and other vulnerable
groups — and benchmark 6 — basic social service delivery and resilience — we take
note of the activities of the mission to support Government efforts and encourage it
to continue its activities, in line with the mandate.
India stands ready to work with the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti
and the United Nations country team to carry out their mandate, especially in priority
areas such as the delivery of justice, the convening of elections and the reduction
of violence, through capacity-building and institution-building activities, with
full national ownership. We join the call for all stakeholders to engage in national
dialogue to bring political stability, usher in constitutional reforms and conduct
elections peacefully in order to promote democratic institutions in the country with
the support of international community.
India has a long-standing relationship with Haiti and its people. India has been
a major troop-contributing country to United Nations peacekeeping operations in
Haiti and contributed three formed police units to the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti in 2008 and the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
in 2017. The final batch of the Indian contingent of Assam Rifles departed Haiti in
August 2019, and was awarded a medal by the United Nations in recognition of their
valuable work in the country.
India contributed to the efforts of the Haitian authorities to deal with the
devastating earthquake in 2010. In the immediate aftermath of the earthquake, India
contributed $5 million to the Government of Haiti for relief measures, including the
construction of a housing colony known as Mahatma Gandhi Village, as a token of
our solidarity with the people of Haiti. India also provided emergency financial aid
to Haiti in the aftermath of Hurricane Matthew in October 2016.
In July 2020, a project of $1 million was approved under the India-United
Nations Development Programme fund for the installation of solar pumps in Haiti.
India has also been assisting Haiti in its fight against the COVID-19 pandemic,
having provided hydroxychloroquine, essential medicines and protective gear in
July, and is now in the process of sending 10,000 doses of COVID-19 vaccines.
We look forward to continuing our support to the people of Haiti in their efforts to
emerge more resilient from the current challenging times.

21-0281211/31

S/2021/174

Annex VII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ireland to the
United Nations, Geraldine Byrne Nason
[Original: English and French]
I would like to join others in thanking the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Meagher La Lime, for her briefing. I would also like to
acknowledge the presence of His Excellency Mr. Moïse, President of the Republic of
Haiti. I also welcome Ms. Roc to the Council this afternoon.
That today’s meeting has a sense of urgency is undeniable. The situation
in Haiti, as described in the latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2021/133),
deserves — and I would say, demands — the attention of the Council. For too long,
the Haitian people have suffered from a series of intertwined and interconnected
crises. They are political, constitutional, security, economic and, of course,
humanitarian crises.
Given the time constraints, I will focus on three points.
First, there is an unavoidable need for genuine, inclusive dialogue. We are
all too aware today that the climate in Haiti remains extremely fraught. For any
of us, confidence in the rule of law, in a system of governance, is the bedrock of a
functioning democracy. The cancellation of legislative elections, the dissolution of
the Parliament and the frequent and wide-reaching use of presidential decrees risk
deepening mistrust in the political system and widening gaps among political actors.
The year ahead offers Haiti an opportunity to restore and revitalize its
democracy. It is essential that the citizen registration process is conducted
transparently and effectively, ensuring that all Haitians eligible to vote are given the
opportunity to do so. It is particularly critical that the voices of women and youth
be heard.
To be clear, we believe that the Government’s ambitious electoral calendar can
be successful only if trust and engagement are built across the political spectrum.
We urgently call on all parties to engage in an inclusive dialogue. The process of
constitutional reform must be sensitively and carefully managed, including through
appropriate public consultation. Once again, that consultation should include the
voices of women and youth.
We recognize the protection of civil society space, including the right to
peaceful protest, as fundamental to a flourishing democracy. We regret the recent
arrest of political and community leaders, and call for the protection of journalists and
of peaceful protesters. We are particularly concerned about the recent redefinition of
terrorism to encompass acts of legitimate protest.
Secondly, as a result of the deteriorating security situation, Haiti’s most
vulnerable citizens are suffering the most. The reported scale of homicide, rape,
abductions and kidnappings is, quite frankly, shocking. Those responsible for
such crimes must be held accountable. The impact of the violence and subsequent
impunity on women, youth and children are of deep concern. The 95.9 per cent
increase in human rights abuses registered by the United Nations mission itself is
particularly stark. No community should live — or be expected to live — with that
level of violence and fear. We urge the Government to prioritize the adoption of the
national action plan on human rights and the endorsement of the national community
violence reduction strategy.

12/31

21-02812

S/2021/174

Ireland welcomes the reported policing reform gains, but remains concerned
about ongoing challenges faced by the judicial and penal systems. An end to impunity
and unimpeded access to justice are a prerequisite if there is to be any chance of
building trust among the people of Haiti. The removal from office of three Supreme
Court judges this month is worrying, and we strongly oppose attempts to undermine
the role and independence of the judiciary.
On a more positive note, I want to recognize and welcome the important
role of the Peacebuilding Fund in Haiti. The invaluable projects supporting access
to legal and judicial aid services for women and youth facilitate their engagement
in peacebuilding initiatives. That is really how durable and sustainable peace is
achieved — not through all our high-minded statements here, but from the grass
roots up and with the full, equal and meaningful participation of women and active
involvement of young people. The people of Haiti deserve nothing less than a
peaceful life, free from violence and intimidation.
My third point relates to the difficulties in the delivery of basic services and
the chronic humanitarian needs of more than 4.4 million Haitians, as indicated in the
Secretary-General’s report. We commend the work of the World Food Programme in
helping to keep Haitians from starvation.
The real tragedy, of course, is that we know this suffering is not inevitable.
International non-governmental organizations, such as the Irish organization GOAL,
report that humanitarian need is driven by violence, insecurity, climate vulnerability
and the instability we have discussed here today. Once again, the most vulnerable in
society are again forced to carry the heaviest burden.
Education, particularly that of girls, is the catalyst to deliver on peacebuilding,
security, and the advancement of gender equality. The approximately one in three
girls and boys who are still out of school following the lost school year simply
cannot be allowed to fall through the cracks. In her poignant remarks today, Ms. Roc
has clearly demonstrated the dynamic at play in Haiti’s youth. The international
community simply must rise up and meet their impact and promise with our action.
In conclusion, we agree with the Special Representative that 2021 could be a
turning point in Haiti. It is crucial that the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti
lend its full support to resolve the constitutional and political crisis and fully realize
its mandate. Once again, I would like to reiterate our deep support for the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the United Nations family of agencies
and all the actors working with the Haitian people to build a new future based on a
peaceful transition of power, a stable political and economic system and, hopefully,
a society free of intimidation and violence.

21-0281213/31

S/2021/174

Annex VIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Mexico to the
United Nations, Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramirez
[Original: Spanish]
I welcome His Excellency President Moïse to the Security Council, and I
thank Special Representative Helen Meagher La Lime and Vivianne Roc for their
briefings. Listening to the voices of civil society is of the utmost importance to the
work of this organ.
Today we address the situation in a sister country of Mexico with which we
have deep ties of friendship — the first nation in Latin America and the Caribbean
to gain its independence. For my country, the situation in Haiti is a priority issue. Its
prosperity and stability are a major issue for the Americas.
The recent political tensions and violence in Haiti are of great concern, and
our collective efforts must be directed towards strengthening democracy, leading to
political, economic and social stability.
The year 2021 is crucial for Haiti’s democratic transition, and we urge the
authorities and all national actors, with the support of the international community,
to work together to ensure peaceful, transparent, participatory and inclusive electoral
processes. We take note of the proposal to hold a constitutional referendum. We hope
that the necessary conditions will be guaranteed to allow for the broad participation
of Haitian society in a peaceful atmosphere. We urge the authorities to spare no
effort or resources to ensure that the referendum is a truly democratic exercise, the
outcome of which reflects the popular will of Haitian society.
Given the importance of the electoral processes to be held this year and in
order to ensure good governance, democratic transition and stability, in response
to the request to the United Nations to provide support to Haiti Mexico can offer,
if appropriate, technical training to the Haitian electoral authorities in view of the
holding of the upcoming elections.
We value and support the activities of the United Nations Integrated Office
in Haiti (BINUH) in support of the institutional strengthening, stability and
development of the country. The report of the Secretary-General (S/2021/133)
reflects the delicate task that the Haitian people are experiencing. We take note
of the actions to be taken to bring about meaningful governance reforms in order
to overcome structural obstacles to the development and electoral processes. We
welcome the One United Nations plan, in which cooperation and close coordination
with and within the country team are essential to strengthening Haiti’s institutional
capacity and promoting sustainable development.
For Mexico, it is very important that BINUH have smooth communication
and support the Haitian authorities in their efforts to establish a strategy to address
in depth the causes that have led to divisive social protests. The violence that
characterizes the gangs is of particular concern. We look forward to the early adoption
of the national community violence reduction strategy and urge the establishment
of a comprehensive national weapons and ammunition management framework, in
accordance with international arms control guidelines.
We welcome the decision of the Government of Haiti to align its national
development strategy with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
support provided by United Nations agencies to the priorities defined by the country
itself. Given the challenges posed by the coronavirus disease pandemic, Mexico
supports the social development component for sustainable recovery, as outlined
14/31

21-02812

S/2021/174

in the mandate of BINUH, and the need to successfully balance the development,
human rights and security pillars. The work of the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti
of the Economic and Social Council, in which Mexico is an active participant, has
helped to clearly identify the severe needs of the Haitian nation.
As part of the technical and scientific cooperation projects promoted by
Mexico in Latin America and the Caribbean, we will continue with scholarship
programmes to support Haitian student mobility and strengthen our cooperation on
civil protection against national disasters.
We are concerned about the human rights situation reflected in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, as well as the conclusions presented in the joint report of BINUH
and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, in
particular with regard to accountability and the excessive use of force. The instances
of threats to and attacks on human rights defenders and members of civil society
are unacceptable, and we underline the need to fully respect freedom of expression.
The strength and independence of the judiciary are another key element in
achieving stability in Haiti. The path to consolidating democracy requires judges
and courts that speak freely and whose judgments strengthen the rule of law.
The Security Council should spare no effort in ensuring the success of the
transition paradigm from a peacekeeping operation to a special political mission. To
that end, the coordinated work of the United Nations agencies, funds and programmes
present on the ground is essential. In that regard, the opening of an office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights in Haiti should be considered. That would also
help to promote and better coordinate efforts among the Council, the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Economic and Social Council.
Finally, we would like to emphasize that it is up to the Haitians alone to
decide on the future of Haiti. We reiterate our willingness to help them to overcome
the complex situation in which they are embroiled through a democratic process
in which the interests of the majority prevail, with full respect for human rights,
which will lay the foundations for a future of prosperity, as aspired to by the Haitian
liberators 230 years ago.

21-0281215/31

S/2021/174

Annex IX
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Norway to
the United Nations, Trine Skarboevik Heimerback
I would like to thank the Secretary-General and Special Representative
Meagher La Lime for the report (S/2021/133) and for the concrete recommendations
therein, which we support.
Haiti’s turbulent political situation, which is evolving as we speak, is indeed
troubling and a stark reminder of the country’s fragile and precarious situation.
Haiti’s current instability stems from an overly complex political system. There is
an urgent need for a nationally owned governance reform to overcome the structural
obstacles to stability and development. A genuine commitment to democratic
principles must be a prerequisite.
We urge the political actors to commit to dialogue towards a common
agenda. The proposed electoral calendar for a constitutional referendum, as well as
legislative, municipal, local and presidential elections, is an ambitious plan. Yet, if
implemented in an orderly and peaceful manner, it could represent a first step out of
the current crisis.
Norway is deeply concerned about Haiti’s vulnerability to natural disasters due
to climate change and environmental degradation. It impacts livelihoods and leads
to poverty and internal displacement, which consequently fuels crime, unrest and
further instability. In addition, according to the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations, Haiti is currently among the most food-insecure countries
in the world. A total of 4.4 million Haitians are in need of humanitarian assistance.
That is a staggering figure, with far-reaching consequences.
Evidence of low crop yield due to below normal rainfall will likely further
contribute to increasing food insecurity. In order to sustain livelihoods and prevent
further instability, the Government needs to invest more in food production
without delay.
The growing levels of violence, the human rights violations and the abuses
are shocking. Norway calls for a comprehensive Government response to address
community violence.
Impunity for killings, arson and kidnappings have led to a cycle of injustice
and instability. That must stop. We urge the authorities to bring the perpetrators to
justice, be they gang members or representatives of the security forces. We also note
with concern that grievances and strikes by key judicial actors have exacerbated the
challenges to the Haitian prison service, contributing to unacceptable overcrowding.
Judicial reform, along with systematic human rights monitoring and reporting, must
be prioritized. The situation of women and children also remains alarming. In that
respect, protection against sexual and gender-based violence and access to sexual
and reproductive health services must be strengthened.
While we welcome the fact that such issues are being brought to the Security
Council’s attention by the thorough reporting on human rights violations and abuses
conducted by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights and the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH), whose work
we support, we would encourage an even stronger focus on gender in the reporting.
Norway firmly believes that an inclusive political process, with respect for human
rights, including women’s rights, is a prerequisite for overcoming the current crisis
and paving the way for a more just and stable society.
It is evident that exclusion, neglect and deprivation of rights set the stage for
the current conflict. We urge the Haitian Government to endorse the national action
16/31

21-02812

S/2021/174

plan on human rights and ensure its implementation, without delay. That entails the
full, equal and meaningful participation of women in all aspects of life, including in
political processes.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate that Norway fully supports BINUH and
its ongoing work towards consolidating and strengthening the capacity of Haitian
institutions. That said, the means for a durable solution remain in the hands of the
Haitians themselves.

21-0281217/31

S/2021/174

Annex X
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Vassily Nebenzia
[Original: Russian]
We thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Meagher La Lime
for her briefing on a very complex situation in Haiti and the work of the United
Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH). We also thank Ms. Vivianne Roc for
her briefing and welcome the participation of His Excellency Mr. Jovenel Moïse in
today’s video-teleconference.
The political turmoil that has persisted in Haiti for several months has been
a catalyst for the increased activity of criminal groups, whose victims are from
all sectors of society. That particularly affects the ordinary people, who badly
need a stable State that is capable of responding to the numerous problems, from
natural disasters to epidemiological risks. Foreign nationals also face risks in
Haiti. Today we learned the alarming news of the kidnapping of two citizens of the
Dominican Republic.
We understand the concern of the protesters for the safety of the civilian
population, which is the primary responsibility of the Government. We are convinced
that the situation deteriorated primarily due to the lack of consensus among the
political circles. That polarization has already led to Parliament suspending its work
and has prevented a move towards the practical resolution of the country’s current
problems, particularly those related to security, to say nothing of humanitarian
issues, as well as economic recovery and development.
Let us recall that the situation in Haiti is not unique, in that the key to a
settlement is always in a political solution, which is possible only once there is
broad internal dialogue among the political forces and society. In that regard, the
Security Council has entrusted a special role to BINUH, whose mandate is based on
promoting an internal Haitian dialogue.
We anticipate that the work on that track will be intensified in the run-up to this
year’s major political events, namely, the presidential and parliamentary elections, as
well as public discussion of the constitutional reform. During this crucial phase of
Haitian history, we need to ensure that all views are duly taken into account.
We welcome the readiness of the Secretary-General to provide electoral
support to Haiti at the request of the Government. We know that other countries of
the region submitted similar requests. However, the response has not always been the
same. We call for uniformity in the criteria for such support.
The last time that the Council discussed the situation in Haiti (see S/2020/979),
we warned that, if the practice of unilateral decision-making persisted, it would
increase the risk of escalation. The past four months have only confirmed those
fears. Increased protest activity and complaints against the executive branch have
been fuelled by a vacuum in the legislature and concerns over the independence of
the judiciary.
Clearly, a reasonable balance is needed, and it is only through mutually
respectful dialogue on the basis of existing legislation that common agreement on
that can be reached.
Port-au-Prince needs responsible international assistance in order to avoid
further social division and prevent the situation from evolving into a humanitarian
crisis on a regional scale. As a member of the Security Council, Russia will continue
working to ensure that United Nations assistance results in the genuine normalization
of the situation in Haiti, strengthening its sovereignty and self-sufficiency.
18/31

21-02812

S/2021/174

Annex XI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines to the United Nations, Inga Rhonda King
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the three African
members of the Security Council — Kenya, the Niger and Tunisia — and Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines (A3+1). We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Helen Meagher La Lime, for her briefing, and we appreciate
the efforts of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH) in the country’s
stabilization process. We also express our appreciation to Ms. Vivianne Roc, Director
of Plurielles Haiti, for her briefing and welcome His Excellency Mr. Jovenel Moïse,
President of the Republic of Haiti.
In a month’s time, the world will commemorate the International Day of
Remembrance of the Victims of Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave Trade. We will
also celebrate the legacy of the people of Haiti as the first black nation to gain
independence by overcoming colonialism and slavery.
However, the present situation in Haiti is extremely disquieting. Since our last
meeting (see S/2020/979), the status quo in our sister Caribbean nation persists, the
political gridlock lingers, the security situation is volatile and the socioeconomic
and humanitarian situation continues to deteriorate. Unpredictability looms large,
and we are greatly concerned that the deepening political impasse has placed the
country on a precipice.
In that regard, we echo the call of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM)
encouraging all parties to engage in meaningful dialogue in the interest of peace
and stability and strongly urging that action be taken to foster a safe environment, a
return to normal life and the building of sustainable democratic institutions.
The A3+1 continues to follow very closely the highly polarized situation
and is concerned about the non-existence of a Parliament since January 2020 as a
result of the failure to convene overdue legislative elections. However, we appreciate
the development of an electoral timetable and encourage Haitian political actors
to undertake measures, including finalizing logistical arrangements, to ensure the
convocation of free, fair, inclusive, transparent and credible elections.
We further underscore the need to uphold the rule of law and electoral processes,
and stress the importance of being guided by the letter and spirit of the constitutional
order, while placing the needs and interests of the people at the forefront.
It is our contention that any solution to the current crisis must be Haitian-led
and Haitian-owned. We understand that there are strongly held divergent views and
tensions are high. As such, it is critical that the parties set aside their differences,
build consensus and chart a viable way forward. We also call on the political leaders
to convene a national dialogue and commence a period of national reconciliation.
As it relates to security, we are dismayed by the upsurge in violence, in
particular the scourge of gang-related criminal activities, including kidnappings. We
are further perturbed by reports of rogue police officers’ involvement in coordinating
violent gangs, and we call for full investigation and accountability for those found
culpable. We repeat our support for the National Disarmament, Demobilization and
Reintegration Commission in reducing community violence, and we encourage the
Government to swiftly undertake measures to adopt the draft national strategy on
community violence reduction. This strategy would enhance the State’s security
machinery to combat criminal activities.
In addition, we welcome the allocation of resources to the Haitian National
Police. Strengthening this critical institution to ensure that it executes its mandate,
21-0281219/31

S/2021/174

including the disruption of criminal networks and syndicates, such as the G9,
is pivotal.
The nexus between peace, security and sustainable development is interwoven
into Haiti’s human rights situation. The A3+1 deplores the persistent human rights
violations, including against those groups made most vulnerable, and calls for
accountability and an end to impunity. It remains imperative that justice be brought
to all victims of atrocities, including the late Monferrier Dorval. In this regard, we
underscore the importance of respecting international human rights law.
More specifically, we regret the lack of progress in the judicial investigations
into the Livalois, Grand Ravine, La Saline, Bel-Air and Pont-Rouge-Cité Soleil cases,
as well as the inability to enforce pending warrants for prominent gang members,
such as Jimmy Cherizier.
Indeed, the lack of accountability facilitates the continuation of gang-related
violence. We therefore urge the authorities to spare no effort to ensure that justice
prevails for the victims. Adopting the national action plan on human rights, endorsed
in December 2019 by the Inter-Ministerial Committee on Human Rights, would
assist in this regard.
The socioeconomic and humanitarian realities require the urgent assistance
of the international community, with the operationalization of the humanitariandevelopment-peace nexus. Accordingly, it is essential that donor countries continue
contributing to Haiti’s 2021-2022 humanitarian response plan.
The international community has a critical task in providing comprehensive
support to assist Haiti in alleviating its complex challenges and legacy of
underdevelopment. It is past time that we began the dialogue process on reparations
for the legacies of underdevelopment in Haiti.
We know from the lessons of history, ancient and recent, that peace and
development are inseparable. The people of Haiti have already suffered enough.
They deserve to live in peace. They deserve a future that offers prosperity. We urge
all stakeholders, difficult and complex although it may be, to enter into constructive
dialogue and work together to build a better Haiti.
The A3+1 reiterates its support to BINUH, CARICOM and the Organization
of American States, and renews its call for these organizations and the wider
international community to continue accompanying Haiti in its pursuit of political
and socioeconomic stability.
Kenya, the Niger, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and Tunisia stand in
solidarity with the people of Haiti.

20/31

21-02812

S/2021/174

Annex XII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the
United Nations, Jonathan Allen
The United Kingdom welcomes the work of the United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti (BINUH) and of Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Meagher La Lime, not least her efforts to ensure a more integrated United Nations
response to Haiti’s multifaceted challenges.
At the same time, we remain deeply concerned by the political, social
and humanitarian landscape and the entrenchment of the problems facing the
Haitian population.
The persistent political gridlock is deeply troubling. In what should be a year
of democratic renewal for the Haitian people, we call upon all political actors to
work together to find common ground in order to build the right conditions for the
successful conduct of democratic processes.
In this context, we welcome the commitment of BINUH to supporting
and facilitating democratic processes in 2021, working closely with key Haitian
institutions. We echo the calls made in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2021/133)
encouraging the national authorities to spare no effort in surmounting the logistical
challenges to elections, particularly the registration of citizens.
We share the Secretary-General’s concern about the deteriorating human
rights situation, particularly the worrisome increase in kidnappings and gang-related
violence. I echo the concerns of my colleagues over recent reports of kidnappings of
citizens of the Dominican Republic. Any impunity for perpetrators of human rights
abuses risks undermining the stability of the country and puts Haitian lives at risk.
We remain worried by the humanitarian situation, particularly the acute
vulnerability of women and children, compounded by the economic and health
threats presented by the coronavirus disease. We encourage all actors to work in
cooperation with the international community and the United Nations to tackle these
challenges for the benefit of the Haitian people.

21-0281221/31

S/2021/174

Annex XIII
Statement by the Acting Alternate Representative for Special Political
Affairs of the Permanent Mission of the United States of America to the
United Nations, Jeffrey DeLaurentis
I thank Special Representative Meagher La Lime for her updates on the
situation in Haiti and for the extensive efforts by her and her entire team. I thank
Ms. Roc for her briefing and for reminding us of the urgent need to focus on the
challenges faced by Haiti’s young people. We welcome President Moïse to the
Security Council and appreciate his participation today.
Let me begin with something we all know — legislative elections were due
in Haiti in October 2019. Both before and after that date, members of the Council
repeatedly called on Haiti’s political stakeholders to come together, to set aside their
differences and to find a way forward to address Haiti’s most pressing challenges.
They chose not to do so. However, the ultimate responsibility for creating an
atmosphere conducive to free and fair elections, and then conducting those elections,
must rest with the Government.
The United States is disturbed that Haiti’s prolonged period of rule by decree
continues. We believe decrees should be limited to actions necessary for essential
functions, safety and the conduct of elections. However, recent actions unilaterally
removing and appointing three Supreme Court judges, creating a national intelligence
agency and actions constraining the role of Haiti’s independent audit agency risk
damaging Haiti’s core democratic institutions.
Once again, we urge the Government of Haiti to hold overdue legislative
elections as soon as possible in order to restore the Parliament’s constitutional role.
The Haitian people deserve the opportunity to elect their leaders and to restore
Haiti’s democratic institutions. While we recognize that an enormous amount of
work remains to be done, the year 2021 must be the year of both legislative and
presidential elections in Haiti.
At the same time, we applaud the Government of Haiti for its decision in
September to increase the budget of the Haitian National Police, which has long
suffered from a lack of resources. Despite this increased focus on law enforcement,
however, as we have heard, gang violence continues to be a serious problem, as
kidnappings rose by over 200 per cent in 2020, and homicides are also on the rise.
We urge Haitian authorities to redouble their efforts to investigate and
prosecute violent crime, including sexual and gender-based violence, to strengthen
community policing practices and to safeguard the human rights of residents of
gang-controlled neighbourhoods.
We are also troubled by an ongoing lack of accountability for human rights
violations and abuses. In December, the United States sanctioned three former
Haitian officials under the Global Magnitsky Human Rights Accountability Act for
their role in the 2018 La Saline attack, in which at least 71 people were killed.
But La Saline, Bel-Air and the assassination of Monferrier Dorval in August
all highlight the urgent need to end impunity, beginning with concrete actions to
protect citizens from violence through effective policing and timely adjudication of
criminal cases. The development and implementation of a national strategy for the
investigation, prosecution and adjudication of cases of serious crimes, with support
as appropriate, is also worth considering.
The United States continues to encourage and promote the development of an
independent, credible and effective judicial sector in Haiti. We are concerned about
22/31

21-02812

S/2021/174

executive orders undermining the judiciary and intermittent strikes by key judicial
actors, which continue to negatively affect the functioning of the judiciary and limit
the numbers of hearings and judicial proceedings held. A fully functioning judicial
sector is essential to the tasks of taking on impunity and corruption and to reducing
endemically high levels of prolonged pretrial detention.
All of this takes place against the backdrop of an economic downturn in Haiti,
further exacerbated by the coronavirus disease pandemic. Economic instability,
recurring fuel shortages and acute food insecurity have combined to undermine
progress towards development and worsened an already grave humanitarian situation.
On 11 January, the United States announced an additional $75.5 million in
development assistance to Haiti. This new funding will be used to implement United
States Agency for International Development programmes in Haiti in a wide range
of areas, including health, education, food security, agricultural development, water
and sanitation and governance. Together with the Government of Haiti, civil society
and our partners, we will continue working towards sustainable development and to
help keep Haiti on the path to self-reliance.
Let me conclude by reiterating the need to bring the current period of rule by
decree to a swift conclusion. It is only through the presence of a stable, democratic
and fully representative Government that issues such as violence, corruption and
civil and human rights abuses can be meaningfully addressed.
The United States will continue to stand with Haiti as it builds a better future.

21-0281223/31

S/2021/174

Annex XIV
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to
the United Nations, Nguyen Phuong Tra
At the outset, we warmly welcome His Excellency Mr. Jovenel Moïse,
President of Haiti, to this meeting.
I would like to the Special Representative, Ms. Helen Meagher La Lime,
for her insightful briefing and all United Nations personnel for their dedication at
this very challenging time. I would also like to thank Ms. Vivianne Roc for her
information on the latest social developments in Haiti.
We are worried about the lack of progress in various areas in Haiti, as
reflected in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2021/133). The continued violence
and a growing wave of kidnapping, especially gang-related criminality, over parts
of the country have exacerbated the existing instability. The divisions within its
polity and the failure of dialogue aimed at political agreement have further deepened
the current political impasse and continue to be huge impediments for the people
of Haiti.
Against this backdrop, I would like to stress the following three points.
First, on security situation, we are concerned about a number of long-standing
threats and challenges, especially the recent increase in the level of gang-related
violence and kidnappings over parts of Haiti. Women, children and other vulnerable
groups remain at risk of violence and continue to be marginalized in the political
life of the country. In this connection, we are deeply concerned about a report that
a film crew was attacked last weekend in Haiti and two Dominican citizens of the
crew were held hostage.
We strongly condemn such ongoing violence and attacks. We urge the Haitian
Government and local authorities, while their ongoing efforts to address criminality
are commendable, to uphold their responsibilities to dismantle gang groups and
criminal organizations. Other measures should also be taken to stop violence and to
better protect vulnerable groups, particularly women and children, from the negative
impact of both the political impasse and socioeconomic hardship.
For further progress to be attained, we echo the Secretary-General’s call on
Haitian authorities to establish a comprehensive national weapons and ammunition
management framework, in accordance with relevant international arms control
instruments, standards and guidelines.
Secondly, on political progress, the polarization among political actors and
the unscheduled electoral framework agenda have remained the biggest challenges
hindering the constitutional reforms, representing one of the root causes of Haiti’s
instability and fuelling anti-Government protests.
In this context, the year 2021 is a milestone for Haiti, especially in terms of
holding elections. We therefore urge all parties involved to make further efforts
to reach a political agreement on the modalities for and timing of the elections
acceptable to all Haitian stakeholders, including the political representation of
women and youth.
We reiterate our previously stated position in calling on the United Nations and
the international community to urgently prioritize resources, without preconditions,
for supporting the organization of these elections in a peaceful environment and to
increase assistance needed to protect Haitian citizens on the road ahead.
Thirdly, on reconciliation, we would like to stress the importance of national
unity for Haiti on the way forward. We call on Haitian authorities and all other parties
24/31

21-02812

S/2021/174

concerned to give the highest priority to the interests of the people and demonstrate a
spirit of mutual understanding and trust to overcome current differences. We believe
that this is the viable path towards finding common ground and a peaceful way out
of the political impasse in Haiti.
Last but not least, we commend the tireless efforts of the United Nations
Integrated Office in Haiti and the United Nations country team in Haiti, and we
would like to reiterate our support for the Haitian people in the pursuit of peace,
security, unity and development in the country.

21-0281225/31

S/2021/174

Annex XV
Statement by the President of Haiti, Jovenel Moïse
[Original: French]
I am delighted to have been given this opportunity to address the Security
Council, this august and important body of the United Nations entrusted with the
lofty responsibility of maintaining international peace and security. The many
meetings held by the Council on the situation in Haiti reflect the great attention
devoted to Haiti by the United Nations. We warmly thank the Security Council and
its members for this close attention.
I would like to welcome in particular Ambassador Barbara Woodward of
the United Kingdom, which holds the presidency of the Council for the month of
February 2021, and to commend the excellent manner in which she is conducting the
work of the Council. I also wish her every success in this role.
I would next like to reiterate my profound gratitude to our Organization
for the continuous and unfailing support provided to my country in its quest for
political stability and sustainable socioeconomic development. In that regard, I
enthusiastically welcome the personal commitment of the Secretary-General and
reiterate the profound gratitude of the Haitian people to him.
I am equally grateful to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Haiti for her many helpful pieces of advice and her close collaboration with
my Administration. I also pay a well-deserved tribute to the United Nations staff
deployed in Haiti for the invaluable support provided to the country in all areas.
I extend my sincere thanks to the friendly nations and other partners from
the international community that have shown their active solidarity with Haiti and
its people in the difficult moments that the country has experienced throughout its
recent history and which it continues to experience.
I commend the Secretary-General for the comprehensive and balanced report
that he has submitted to the Security Council on the situation in Haiti (S/2021/133),
which gives a full picture of the political crisis that continues to hamper the proper
functioning of institutions and undermine the stability of the country. The data
presented in the report reflect the current reality of the country, and the report’s
observations seem to me to be very pertinent. My Government has examined them
with the utmost interest and taken due note of the recommendations made.
I particularly welcome the fact that the report highlights the various actions
taken by my Administration to redress the situation in the country. My statement
today will enable me to better clarify the facts contained in the report and share the
views of the Government of the Republic on the observations contained therein.
The year 2020 has been one of challenges for my Administration, which had
to take extraordinary measures to protect our population against the coronavirus
pandemic that began on 19 March 2020. A comprehensive strategy was developed.
Very early on, my Government closed the ports and airports and strengthened border
control.
Social and economic measures enabled many citizens to comply with the
containment and health provisions to stop the spread of the virus. Among these
measures were the payment of the salaries of 100,000 schoolteachers, 10,000
university professors and 65,000 assembly workers; the distribution of 23 million
masks made in Haiti and food products to more than a million vulnerable families;
and direct electronic cash transfers to 300,000 vulnerable families.
26/31

21-02812

S/2021/174

In order to strengthen its health system and better support hospitals,
dispensaries and health centres, the Government ordered more than 473 tons
of medical equipment. Special centres were set up to receive the first cases of
coronavirus. The national mobilization to educate the population on the coronavirus
and prevention measures to be adopted was a total success.
Today, our country has 12,039 confirmed cases and 9,529 cases have been
treated. Unfortunately, 247 Haitians have died from the pandemic. We take this
opportunity to express our sincere condolences to the grieving families.
Today, we are one of the three most successful Caribbean countries in
managing a pandemic that has increased State social spending and created
considerable economic losses. In this regard, we support the proposal by the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development to cancel $1 trillion in debt for
64 countries, including our own. We need this relief if there is to be any possibility
of economic recovery.
The United Nations and the Organization of American States (OAS) assisted
in the 2016-2017 Haitian elections, which were transparent and met international
standards. The Haitian people are grateful for this support, which allowed for a
peaceful transfer of power.
While the greatest threat to democracy in the twentieth century was the
military coup d’état, in the early twenty-first century election losers, corrupt
oligarchs and a pandemic pose the greatest dangers to democratic gains. Although in
the last century OAS General Assembly Resolution 1080, adopted in Chile in 1991,
and the Inter-American Democratic Charter, established on 11 September 2001 in
Peru, put a stop to military coups in Latin America and the Caribbean, today there
is a need for reflection and recommendations to confront those who challenge the
results of free, honest and transparent elections and the powerful oligarchs who take
themselves for God.
Since I was sworn in on 7 February 2017, the refusal of some political actors
to accept the results of the free, fair and transparent elections and the repeated
violent attempts to interrupt the constitutional order by corrupt oligarchs opposed to
economic reforms that favour the people have made the situation of the population
and the political environment difficult. The rights of citizens have often been violated
by the violence imposed on them — this in a context where a pandemic is raging.
The Democracy Index 2020 has just been published. It marks a record decline
in the state of democracy throughout the world, due in large part to the pandemic.
Haiti falls from 4.57 to 4.22 but drops only one place (from one-hundred-fifth to
one-hundred-sixth) in the ranking, suggesting relative stability for Haiti, whose
score remains the third highest since 2006 and the first publication of the Index. The
same is true for the World Press Freedom Index, which ranks Haiti 83 out of 189.
Despite the difficulties we face, democracy is doing well in Haiti.
My Administration has to deal with an economic system that allows the
systematic plundering of the State by powerful oligarchs and the impoverishment of
the population. To correct this state of affairs, we have proposed dialogue with the
sectors concerned to find an operational consensus. They did not want the system
to change. We nevertheless carried out reforms in the energy sector, particularly in
electricity and the acquisition of petroleum products, and in the management and
construction of road infrastructure. We put an end to currency manipulation and
changed agricultural policy. We terminated corrupt contracts. These cases have
involved more than $6 billion in interest. We are therefore facing a powerful lobby
with great resources.

21-0281227/31

S/2021/174

In response, for almost three years, corrupt oligarchs, in association with
the sore losers, have blocked the regular functioning of the Senate of the Republic
through violence, preventing the ratification of Governments, a vote on the budget
and a vote on the electoral law designed to facilitate the holding of elections for the
renewal of political personnel. In addition, the radical and violent opposition’s peyi
lòk operation attacked the fundamental rights of citizens by preventing them from
carrying out their activities. Peyi lòk also caused serious economic damage, with the
loss of almost $2.4 billion and nearly 80,000 jobs. Moreover, in 2020, the pandemic
had serious consequences for the country.
In four years, my Administration has had to face seven attempts to interrupt
the constitutional order through violence. The violent attack on our country’s
Senate on 11 September 2019 by radical opposition gangs, to stop it from fulfilling
its constitutional obligations, was outrageous. The creation of numerous gangs by
numerous police officers dismissed from service for drug trafficking and other
crimes — including the formation of a shadowy terrorist group, Fantom 509, which
has attacked the national police, the Office of the Prime Minister, several other
Ministries and other State institutions — is among the many dangers that our
democracy has had to face in recent months.
The most recent threat we have had to face was the attempted coup d’état
on 7 February 2021. Once the police investigation and the judicial procedure are
completed, we will share the report with the Organization. At the root of all this was
the rejection of the democratic regime and elections as the only way to take over
the management of State affairs. That is why the efforts of my Administration to
work tirelessly to calm the sociopolitical climate and facilitate a consensus solution
through dialogue have been rejected by some who have preferred to opt for political
violence, paralysis and chaos, hoping that this strategy would lead to a successful
coup d’état to install a transitional Government without a mandate from the people.
In response to this political chaos, the Government implemented a strategy
of dismantling the gangs, the primary component of which was the National
Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Commission, which has had
limited success. The second component was the strengthening of police capacity
and the aggressive dismantling of gangs. Out of 102 existing gangs, the Government
has dismantled 64, and work to restore security has been accelerated. The number of
kidnappings has fallen considerably, and the population is supporting the work of the
National Police. Most of these gangs are supported by corrupt oligarchs.
I understand very well the concerns expressed in the report about insecurity
in the country over the past 12 months. It must be acknowledged that the Haitian
National Police, with its recently implemented new governance, is working hard
to restore order throughout the country. Important changes have been made at the
command level of the police. Several gang networks have already been dismantled.
Action is being taken throughout the country to neutralize the armed groups and
restore security throughout the country. The police have been able to resist corrupt
propositions by oligarchs seeking to bring about the institutional implosion of
the police, which would profoundly affect the future of our democracy. The
remobilization of the army is making progress. It has given its support to police
operations against gangs.
As stated in the report,
“The share of the overall national budget for the national police rose to 6.59 per
cent. The reinforced police budget ... represents an increase of 53 per cent
from the 2019-2020 fiscal year” (S/2021/133, para. 25).

28/31

21-02812

S/2021/174

Improving the living conditions of police officers has been at the centre of the
decisions taken.
We welcome the fact that some friendly countries, such as the United States
of America, France and Colombia, are supporting the strengthening of the country’s
capacity in the fight against kidnapping. With the support of United Nations
agencies, we have established a national mechanism for the management of arms and
ammunition in accordance with existing national legislation and the international
instruments to which Haiti is a party.
We recognize that strengthening the judicial system is an essential part of the
fight against insecurity and organized crime. It is in this spirit that the Government
recently provided the actors in the system with more binding legal tools to combat
this phenomenon. In the absence of a functional parliament, in order to strengthen
the rule of law and consolidate the security apparatus, I have had to adopt certain
decrees that are part of the fight against organized crime, rampant insecurity and
kidnapping. I am the fifth President of Haiti since 1987 to use this tool to meet the
needs of our people. I will continue to make limited use of it until the election of
a new parliament and the swearing in of the fifty-ninth President of the Republic
on 7 February 2022. As an additional part of the efforts aimed at strengthening the
judicial system, we have increased the 2020-2021 budget of the Superior Council of
the Judiciary by 35 per cent, as compared to the budget of the previous fiscal year.
The serious consequences of this climate of violence on Haitian society,
the functioning of institutions and the country’s economy have been emphatically
highlighted in the joint report of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights (OHCHR) and the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti
(BINUH). The report, entitled “Unrest in Haiti: Their impact on Human Rights
and the State’s obligation to protect all citizens” and published on 18 January 2021,
documents
“human rights violations and abuses that have taken place throughout the
Haitian territory in connection with the demonstrations that took place
between 6 July 2018 and 10 December 2019”.
Within the next two weeks and after the Council of Ministers, my Government
will publish the national report on the human rights situation in Haiti. All the cases
mentioned have been investigated by the Central Directorate of the Judicial Police.
Once the facts were established, these cases were referred to the Government
Commissioner who, after his request for information, transferred the file to the
Investigating Office which will appoint a judge. Once the case is properly taken up
by the judiciary, the Executive has no authority to intervene.
Thanks to the training that Haitian police officers receive from the United
Nations, they demonstrate professionalism in the exercise of their duties. Their
interventions are always carried out in accordance with the rules of engagement.
When there are any deviations, they are referred to the General Inspectorate for the
necessary follow-up. It should also be mentioned that gangs often disguise themselves
as demonstrators and journalists to attack our police officers on duty. This is
dangerous for police officers and peaceful demonstrators alike. My Administration
wants to improve its score of 83 out of 189 in the next World Press Freedom Index.
That is why we remain open to journalists.
Council members have noted that the report mentions the calls by a part of the
political opposition for the resignation of the President of the Republic before the end
of my constitutional term on 7 February 2022. This request was formulated during
the dialogue at the Apostolic Nunciature of Haiti in January 2020 with the intent of
forcing a coup d’état. The fear of elections and popular voting explains these coup
21-0281229/31

S/2021/174

attempts to install a transition unsupported by the popular will. The results of the
last six elections held in Haiti show that the vast majority of these political actors
never manage to exceed the 1 per cent mark. The great challenge for all is how to
build a democracy with political actors who are afraid of elections and the results of
a popular vote, or how to build a democracy with actors unable to build a coalition
so as to become an alternative to the existing options. I won presidential elections
against an opposition by soliciting the vote of the people.
This systematic rejection of the transfer of political power through the
ballot box is a source of permanent tension in the country and seriously threatens
the democracy chosen by the Haitian people after the dictatorship in 1987. We are
facing a political opposition that is devoid of both democratic alternatives and of any
credible social project for the urban and rural populations. This opposition rejects
the electoral path to power. Since we have turned our backs on dictatorship and
embraced democracy as a political regime, we owe it to ourselves to submit to all its
requirements. Elections are one of the fundamental rules of democracy. An elected
representative must be replaced by another elected representative. We want to and
must work to safeguard democratic achievements. Transition is always beneficial
to a political and economic oligarchy that likes to “swim in troubled waters”, as I
often say.
In strict compliance with the five-year constitutional mandate granted to me
by the people of Haiti and since my swearing in on 7 February 2017, I have remained
committed to ensuring political stability, bringing about lasting change in the living
conditions of the population and paving the way for the sustainable socioeconomic
development of the nation. It is in that context that I am pursuing the structural and
institutional reforms that are essential for consolidating democratic gains, preserving
the rule of law and in-depth reform of the State so that it may finally serve the entire
population and not just a small group. The ongoing constitutional reform process
and the holding of elections at all levels in 2021, with a view to renewing political
representation and ensuring that democratic changes in government take place on
7 February 2022, are part of that process.
The elections in April and September will indeed be opportunities to make
decisive progress in the democratization process under way in the country. The
establishment of the new Provisional Electoral Council, in accordance with the
criteria established in the Constitution, has been an important step towards the
realization of those elections. According to the electoral calendar proposed by the
Provisional Electoral Council, the referendum will take place next June and the first
round of elections will be held on 19 September.
I have duly noted the concerns expressed by the Secretary-General in his report
regarding the fragile political environment, the security situation and logistical and
financial difficulties. Previous administrations have faced similar situations and
have nevertheless delivered. My Administration and the Government intend to make
every effort to improve the sociopolitical climate so as to ensure that the deadlines
are met and that the elections can be held under optimal conditions and with the
broadest possible participation of candidates and voters. The Government of Haiti
has already contributed $20 million to the basket fund. By April, another $20 million
will be contributed by the Haitian State.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the international community, in
particular the United Nations, through the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti
(BINUH), for its support for the electoral process under way in the country, reflected
in the signing on 21 January of a protocol on technical and financial support for the
electoral process.

30/31

21-02812

S/2021/174

Similarly, the constitutional reform that the whole country is calling for is
becoming a reality with the creation of the five-member Independent Consultative
Committee, responsible for overseeing the drafting of a new constitution, which
is the subject of consultations at the grassroots level before being submitted to a
referendum in June.
The people of Haiti are writing a new page in their history. The need for a new
constitution has been felt for a very long time. As pointed out in the BINUH report,
the 1987 Constitution, amended in 2012 and currently in force, is a source of political
instability and a major obstacle to the country’s development. That is a fact and
remains a constant in the discourse of all actors in national life. It is a project of the
Haitian people, who aspire to real change. According to the most recent two opinion
polls conducted in the country in late 2020, more than 86 per cent of the population
aspires to a new constitution.
I am already inviting the population to vote overwhelmingly in favour of the
new constitution in the referendum to be held in June. The Independent Consultative
Committee, set up on 15 October to oversee the preparation of the draft of the new
constitution, has already presented its preliminary draft.
At the beginning of my mandate, I stated unequivocally that my objective was
to lay the foundation for Haiti’s socioeconomic development and to put a definitive
end to the long period of transition that the country has been going through since
the end of the dictatorship in 1986, 35 years ago. Therefore, my Government has
launched major projects designed to bring substantial and lasting change to the
country and the quality of life of our population: roads, electricity, agriculture, the
environment, administrative reform, all with the citizens’ limited resources and
taxes. In that regard, I am asking for the technical and financial support of our
partners to make progress more quickly.
The results of that policy were beginning to materialize. However, political
instability, especially the violent demonstrations and the lockdowns, have had
disastrous consequences for the country’s economy. In addition, climate hazards,
such as droughts and floods, have had a negative impact on crops and created a food
crisis affecting more than 4 million people.
The United Nations and my Government have jointly launched a $235-million
drought response assistance plan. I call on Member States to show solidarity by
helping to finance that emergency plan.
With regard to respect for and the protection of human rights, the Government
has taken a number of proactive measures to ensure that rights and freedoms in
all areas are guaranteed. Freedom of the press is thus respected in all its forms,
cases of abuse and human rights violations are investigated and those responsible are
prosecuted by the police and judicial authorities.
It will take time and patience to establish lasting peace and security following
decades of trauma and shock. With the continued support of the Security Council
and the entire international community, we are confident that we can move forward
towards a peaceful and prosperous future for all.

21-0281231/31
