asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6933

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

6933rd meeting
Wednesday, 13 March 2013, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Churkin/Mr. Iliichev . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Oyarzábal
Ms. King
Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Briens
Mr. Briz Gutiérrez
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Bouchaara
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Shin Dong Ik
Mr. Gasana
Mr. Menan
Mr. Parham
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Sierra Leone
Tenth report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (S/2013/118)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

13-25736 (E)

*1325736*

S/PV.6933

Leone is determined to consolidate its hard-won peace.
The country has made significant progress since the end
of the war more than a decade ago. During that period,
Sierra Leone was able to restore and consolidate State
authority, implement national recovery programmes,
including the extension of public services, and undertake
reforms in the governance and security sectors.

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Sierra Leone
Tenth report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Sierra Leone (S/2013/118)
The President (spoke in Russian): Under rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of Sierra Leone to participate in this
meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm welcome
to His Excellency Mr. Samura M.W. Kamara, Minister
for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of
Sierra Leone.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Jens Anders Toyberg-Frandzen,
Executive Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Sierra Leone, to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Ambassador
Guillermo Rishchynski, Permanent Representative
of Canada, in his capacity as Chairperson of the
Sierra Leone country-specific configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2013/118, which contains the tenth report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone.
I now give the floor to Mr. Toyberg-Frandzen.
Mr. Toyberg-Frandzen: I thank the Council
for the opportunity to present the tenth report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (S/2013/118),
which is before it.
As members are aware, Sierra Leone held national
presidential and parliamentary and local council
elections on 17 November 2012. The successful
conclusion of those elections demonstrates that Sierra

2

The capacity of vital State institutions that underpin
the country’s democratic process, such as the National
Electoral Commission, the Sierra Leone Police and
the Political Parties Registration Commission, has
also grown. Adequate law and order is being ensured
by the police and security sector agencies throughout
the country. The Sierra Leone Police and the Republic
of Sierra Leone Armed Forces, both of which were
restructured after the conflict, now participate in
United Nations and regional peacekeeping operations.
Sierra Leone also implemented a successful transitional
justice and reconciliation process through the Truth
and Reconciliation Commission and the Special Court
for Sierra Leone.
With the Government’s national development
strategy, the Agenda for Change, about to come to an
end, a successor strategy for the next five years, the
Agenda for Prosperity, will soon be finalized. With the
implementation of the Agenda for Change, Sierra Leone
made tangible progress, particularly in the mining and
health-care sectors and in infrastructure development.
With the beginning of exports of iron ore and the
potential for the exploitation of oil and gas, Sierra
Leone’s economy is expected to expand and to provide
the necessary resources in order to address some of its
crucial challenges in ensuring improved delivery of
services and better standards of living for the citizenry.
In that respect, it is vital that the Government continue
its efforts to ensure the proper management of the
country’s mineral wealth and in combating corruption.
Notwithstanding the progress that Sierra Leone
has made over the past decade, challenges still remain,
particularly in tackling the root causes of the conflict.
The political divide and the polarization of the country
along regional ethnic lines that manifested themselves
in successive elections need to be addressed in order
to strengthen national unity and cohesion. Such
polarization is further aggravated by the country’s
winner–takes–all electoral system.
In that respect, I welcome President Koroma’s
commitment to holding a review of the 1991 Constitution

13-25736

S/PV.6933

of Sierra Leone so as to ensure an inclusive system of
Government. Such a review will not only provide an
opportunity to address the country’s regional divide and
the many other complex challenges that contributed to
the conflict, but also guarantee its continued progress in
consolidating the democratic process and in achieving
sustainable development. In that regard, it is essential
that the planned constitutional review be an inclusive
process that ensures the buy-in of all key stakeholders.
The Government of Sierra Leone has expressed its
desire for international support, in particular from the
United Nations, for the constitutional review process
both in terms of facilitating political dialogue and
mobilizing the necessary financial resources.
Sierra Leone’s national institutions, including
the justice and security sectors, the Anti-Corruption
Commission, the Political Parties Registration
Commission and other entities, need to be strengthened
in order for them to continue to effectively discharge
their respective responsibilities and to win the trust
and confidence of the population whom they serve.
Further entrenching the rule of law and institutions
of democratic governance is the best guarantee for
sustaining peace and achieving development and
economic prosperity.
Progress in addressing poverty and unemployment,
in particular youth unemployment, and in providing
essential public services to the population remain
serious challenges. The priorities articulated in the
Government’s Agenda for Prosperity aim to achieve
those and other key objectives. In that regard, while
the Government takes the lead in attracting private
investment and in expanding the country’s revenue
base to finance those priorities, international assistance
and development cooperation will also remain essential
to complement national efforts.
As requested by the Council in resolution 2065
(2012), a United Nations inter-agency technical
assessment mission visited Sierra Leone in January to
develop proposals for the transition, drawdown and exit
strategy of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL) after holding a wide
range of discussions with all representatives of Sierra
Leone society.
Sierra Leone’s progress is proof of what can be
accomplished through concerted multilateral and
national efforts in the post–conflict period. With the
progress made by Sierra Leone and by UNIPSIL in the

13-25736

implementation of its mandate, it is now appropriate to
begin a reconfiguration of the mission and to gradually
transfer responsibilities to the United Nations country
team, the Government of Sierra Leone, national
institutions and civil society organizations, as well as
bilateral and international partners. Ultimately, that
process will end with the termination of the mission.
As recommended by the Secretary-General in
his report, UNIPSIL, in close coordination with the
United Nations country team and other partners, should
continue to perform three key residual tasks, namely,
first, conflict prevention and mediation support for
the constitutional review process; secondly, support
for security sector reform; and thirdly, support the
strengthening of human rights institutions
With respect to the first task, it is critical that
UNIPSIL continue to provide support to local
stakeholders in stabilizing the post-election political
environment. Notwithstanding the outcome of the case
filed by the main opposition, the Sierra Leone People’s
Party, challenging the presidential election results, both
opposition and ruling parties must continue to work
together in the national interest and for the advancement
of the country. In that connection, UNIPSIL intends
to engage in political facilitation, mediation and
consensus-building around the constitutional review
process. The mission will also continue to provide
support to the vital national institutions engaged in
conflict prevention and mediation, such as the Political
Parties Registration Commission.
In the area of support for security sector reform,
in order to ensure a smooth and seamless transition
from UNIPSIL to the United Nations country team,
in collaboration with bilateral partners and the
Government, UNIPSIL’s tasks will focus on providing
overall strategic policy advice and on strengthening the
coordination mechanisms for international assistance
in the security sector. Furthermore, UNIPSIL will
provide support in strengthening the governance and
the command and control mechanisms of the Sierra
Leone police, as well as in improving efforts to address
cross-border threats and transnational and organized
crime, in particular drug trafficking.
Finally, as directed by the Secretary-General,
UNIPSIL will continue to support the strengthening of
national human rights and rule-of-law institutions. That
will continue to be a critical priority for the country.

3

S/PV.6933

Under the planned transitional arrangements there
will be a gradual reduction of the tasks performed by
the mission as of 1 April until the end of its mandate. In
anticipation of a refocused mandate, UNIPSIL and the
United Nations country team are developing drawdown
proposals that will be completed by the end of March.
Those proposals envisage staffing reductions, the
transfer of the mission’s archives to United Nations
Headquarters and the liquidation of its assets. UNIPSIL
and the United Nations country team will further
prepare a timeline and benchmarks for the transition of
all outstanding tasks. Technical and financial resources
will be critical to guaranteeing a smooth transition
to the United Nations country team. In that regard, I
call on the United Nations Peacebuilding Commission
and international partners to assist in providing such
resources.
The transition of UNIPSIL to the United Nations
country team represents a moment that Sierra Leone
and the international community can take pride
in. The strong commitment of the people of Sierra
Leone and its successive post-conflict Governments
has been indispensable to the achievements made by
the country and to the successful work of the United
Nations over the last 15 years. However, I must caution
that challenges remain which call for greater efforts by
national stakeholders and the international community’s
continued engagement. It is therefore incumbent on all
of us to get the transition right.
This involves not only the planned phasing out
of UNIPSIL, but equally the scaling up of the United
Nations and other international partners’ support for
the continued development of Sierra Leone. That will
require the timely mobilization of resources. With
a successful transition and UNIPSIL’s exit, it is also
important to make it clear that the United Nations will
remain in Sierra Leone and continue to support Sierra
Leone through the United Nations country team and
with the assistance of its international partners.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Toyberg-Frandzen for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Rishchynski.
Mr. Rishchynski (spoke in French): On behalf
of all the members of the Sierra Leone configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), I should
like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to speak.

4

(spoke in English)
The Peacebuilding Commission recently conducted
a joint delegation visit to Sierra Leone and Liberia, in
late February. We are deeply grateful for the warm
welcome we received from the Government of Sierra
Leone, the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL) and the entire
United Nations family. We would also like to thank
the representatives of Australia, Bangladesh, Egypt,
Kuwait, Japan, Sweden and the United Kingdom for
their participation. We believe that the composition
of this delegation demonstrates the PBC’s continued
determination to sustain international support for Sierra
Leone. The timing of the visit was also opportune. The
Government of Sierra Leone in the midst of articulating
its priorities for the next five years. The arrival of our
mission soon after the recent United Nations technical
assessment mission also allowed for an informed
consideration of the forthcoming transition process.
We would like to offer five observations based on the
deliberations undertaken in the country.
First, Sierra Leone should be commended for the
very successful conduct of its elections in November
2012. The process was exceptionally peaceful,
technically well organized and characterized by a high
voter turnout. It demonstrated the growing capacity
of Sierra Leone’s national institutions and marked
the crossing of a significant peacebuilding threshold.
In this respect, the Government’s emerging priorities
for the Agenda for Prosperity also reflect a welcome
shift in emphasis towards fostering economic growth,
improving social services and building human capital.
Sierra Leone is developing a strategy to address its next
priority development challenges and can look to the
future with optimism.
Secondly,
notwithstanding
those
positive
developments, several challenges remain. During our
visit, His Excellency President Koroma, all major
political parties, the relevant national authorities and
civil society actors raised with us concerns about the
winner-take-all nature of Sierra Leone’s political
system and the clear regional divide produced by the
recent election. For this reason, President Koroma has
indicated his intention to undertake a much-delayed
review of the Constitution, as originally proposed by
the Truth and Reconciliation Commission. While this
politically sensitive process must be fully inclusive
and national in character, it also offers an important

13-25736

S/PV.6933

opportunity to modernize a range of human rights and
civil provisions in that document.
(spoke in French)
Thirdly, several outstanding issues will require
effort over the longer term. Youth unemployment is a
major challenge, but generating economic opportunities
and rebuilding an effective educational system can only
come from sustained Government investment. Likewise,
the growth of Sierra Leone’s extractive and agricultural
sectors offers great promise. At the same time, a wide
range of interlocutors expressed growing concern
about the potential for conflict at the community level
if large-scale investments are not managed carefully.
Like its neighbours in the subregion, Sierra Leone is
vulnerable to the destabilizing aspects of transnational
organized crime and drug trafficking. This leads us
to the evident conclusion that now is not the time for
the international community to turn away from Sierra
Leone. Our continued assistance will be required to
build on the gains achieved to date.
Fourthly, the United Nations is viewed in a positive
light in Sierra Leone. That is a testament to the central
role played by successive missions in the peacebuilding
process. It also speaks to the need for a measured
transition. Our visit corroborated the technical
assessment mission’s findings that many of UNIPSIL’s
current activities could be transferred to other actors,
but it also highlighted the need for continued dialogue
and political cooperation in a few specific areas.
Specifically, many stakeholders stressed the
importance of UNIPSIL’s assistance to the constitutional
review process and the need to continue providing
technical support to the security sector. Above all, the
pace of transition should match the needs on the ground,
especially given the potential for small investments at
this late stage to make a substantial contribution to
consolidating the hard-won peace. Without advocating
for any undue delay, the international community must
resist the temptation to prematurely declare victory.
Equally important, the nature of the United Nations
transition in Sierra Leone must be communicated
clearly to all national stakeholders.
(spoke in English)
Fifthly, there is a regional dimension to many of the
challenges facing Sierra Leone. The Governments of
the Mano River Union have invested new resources in
the institution, leading to a corresponding increase in

13-25736

international cooperation and cross-border activities.
The relevant configurations of the PBC intend to
assess how they can further encourage those efforts.
This situation also points to the need for United
Nations political engagement at the regional level after
UNIPSIL has completed its mandate.
Finally, allow me to conclude with a few remarks
on the Peacebuilding Commission itself. In the near
term, the configuration for Sierra Leone will turn its
attention to supporting the transition process, including
by advocating for any necessary resources to fill gaps
created by UNIPSIL’s drawdown. In the longer term,
the PBC will need to align its engagement with the
Government of Sierra Leone’s new priorities in the
Agenda for Prosperity. As ever, those efforts will move
forward in close partnership with the Government of
Sierra Leone and the United Nations.
Rest assured that I intend to keep the Security
Council fully informed of the configuration’s work. We
look forward to further opportunities for cooperation
with the Council.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Rishchynski for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Sierra
Leone.
Mr. Kamara (Sierra Leone): Let me start by
thanking all present for having agreed to reschedule
this meeting, at our request. We apologize for any
inconvenience this may have caused.
I bring you greetings, Mr. President, with profound
appreciation, from His Excellency President Ernest Bai
Koroma on behalf of the Government and people of
Sierra Leone for the continued support and unfailing
interest of the Council, the wider membership of the
United Nations and our international partners towards
consolidating peace and security in Sierra Leone and
supporting our socioeconomic development aspirations.
I also apologize for the unavoidable absence of my
colleague, the Attorney General and Minister of
Justice. Please also accept our hearty congratulations
to you, Sir, for assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of March 2013. We thank you for
giving our delegation the opportunity to contribute to
this briefing on the situation in Sierra Leone.
We were privileged to hear a while ago the presentation
by Executive Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Jens Anders Toyberg-Frandzen, of the tenth report

5

S/PV.6933

of the Secretary-General (S/2013/118) on the activities
of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL), for the period 1 September
2012 to 28 February 2013, including key findings by
the technical assessment mission, which visited Sierra
Leone from 14 to 25 January 2013. The report clearly
outlines key achievements and remaining challenges.
We wish to thank the Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General and to also express our appreciation
for the excellent manner in which UNIPSIL continues to
partner and cooperate with the Government and people
of Sierra Leone in the delivery of its mandate. The
United Nations in Sierra Leone, under his leadership
as Resident Coordinator, continues to provide immense
technical support while allowing us to take the lead in
project selection, approval and monitoring.
Equally important is the very instructive briefing
we have just heard from the Chair of the Sierra Leone
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission,
Ambassador Guillermo Rishchynski of Canada, on his
recent visit to Sierra Leone in February. He underscores
the progress made in addressing key peacebuilding
priorities and the need for enduring support, particularly
in the areas of youth unemployment and empowerment;
building human capital; improving the justice system,
including the security sector; energy, management of
natural resources, agriculture and food security; the
constitutional review process; and the need for strong,
private-sector-led growth that could translate into more
tangible peace dividends.
We also wish to convey our sincere thanks and
appreciation to the members of the Sierra Leone
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission
through Ambassador Guillermo Rishchynski, as Chair,
for the relentless commitment and strong support they
continue to demonstrate in the pursuit of peace and
security in Sierra Leone. In particular, we note with
appreciation his interest, together with members of the
configuration, in the post-election political outlook
of Sierra Leone, including the support required of
the configuration, UNIPSIL and the agencies and
programmes towards a well-planned and equally wellmanaged seamless transition to a more developmentfocused phase of peacebuilding, as well as his views on
future support to Sierra Leone’s political and economic
priorities.
Sierra Leone stands at the crossroads at this
stage of its peacebuilding journey. The decision as to
whether to draw down UNIPSIL or not should take into

6

account the challenges already outlined by the Chair
of the Sierra Leone configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Government of Sierra Leone, the
technical assessment team’s report and the report under
consideration.
In other words, the process should be guided by
factors on the ground. In that regard, the immediate
and future consequences should be weighed, given
the present situation in the country and its immediate
neighbourhood. Furthermore, there is a need to
seriously consider the transition to a strong and wellresourced Resident Coordinator system, in terms of the
much-needed technical expertise and funds, within a
time frame that avoids any gaps or hiccups along the
way.
We do not desire to be on the agenda of the Council
indefinitely, but the existing circumstances are such
that we see the need to prevail upon the Council to be
guided in its decisions on this sensitive and complex
matter by the prevailing circumstances in Sierra Leone
and the subregional dimensions. Of course, we share
the honour and glory of success, but also the blame
and responsibility for decisions that may prove wrong
and untimely. We are entirely in the Council’s hands
and prepared to submit to the collective wisdom of the
Council in taking any crucial decision on the matter.
In taking forward our development aspirations
and addressing residual peacebuilding, security and
democratization issues, we look forward to the support
of UNIPSIL, even if it has to move into a phase of
transition. We therefore urge that any transition process
should be carefully thought out to the extent that due
consideration is given to the short-term and long-term
impact on the gains made thus far. In that regard,
we stand ready to partner with the United Nations,
the Peacebuilding Commission and development
partners in mapping out and implementing a smooth
and seamless transition process from UNIPSIL to the
normal United Nations esident Coordinator system as
and when necessary.
Today, we share the accolades in celebrating another
milestone in the consolidation of peace and security
in Sierra Leone through the conduct of successful,
violence-free, fair, transparent and credible elections,
which are considered to be a critical benchmark
signalling Sierra Leone’s preparedness to move into
a more development-focused phase of peacebuilding.
That means that the democratic process is progressively
gaining firm footing as we position ourselves for a
13-25736

S/PV.6933

smooth and seamless transition from the Agenda for
Change to the Agenda for Prosperity, which is tailored to
the spirit and purpose of the New Deal for Engagement
in Fragile States, agreed in Busan, Republic of Korea, by
the Group of Seven Plus countries. In that connection,
I wish to express thanks and appreciation to all of our
friends and partners for their timely contributions to
the United Nations Development Programme basket
fund. I would like to particularly thank the leadership
of the Peacebuilding Support Office and staff for their
confidence and trust in making a huge investment in
our peacebuilding journey.
This year marks the eleventh year since the
conflict in Sierra Leone was officially declared over.
Since then, with the support of the Security Council,
the Peacebuilding Support Office, the Sierra Leone
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission and
international partners, remarkable progress has been
made in charting the path towards a peaceful, secure,
democratic Sierra Leone and its future prosperity. As
we commend ourselves for the gains made, some of
which are quite irreversible, it is crucial that, together,
we continue to tackle the remaining challenges in order
to further advance and consolidate comprehensively our
peacebuilding priorities aimed at building resilience.
Key among them is the increasing need to address
the economic, social and governance challenges to
match the growing expectations of Sierra Leoneans.
As already stated by the Chair of the configuration,
several of those challenges are long-term in nature and
will require sustained effort over a substantial period
of time, since much will depend on the global economic
scenario and the overall subregional security climate.
I am happy to report that tremendous progress is
being made in setting up the required structures to
address the three risk areas of youth unemployment
and empowerment; good governance and the rule of
law; and drug trafficking and organized crime, which
were identified in our Agenda for Change and endorsed
by the Sierra Leone configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission. Sustained international support is,
however, required to fully address the challenges that
we continue to face at the national and subregional
levels.
On the socioeconomic and development front,
we remain committed to the strong partnership link
that exists between Sierra Leone, the United Nations
and the donor community. It is within that context
that Sierra Leone’s experience is considered a best

13-25736

practice in donor coordination and a success story in
peacebuilding. In that regard, we stress the need for the
international community to continue to invest in our
success by supporting and aligning with our Agenda
for Prosperity, which, as stated earlier, is anchored in
the Busan New Deal on aid effectiveness, as well as
to recognize the need for special attention to be paid
to countries emerging from conflict, Sierra Leone
being one of the pilot countries. The Agenda for
Prosperity, which is currently in the final stages of
completion and which includes broader national and
development partner consultations and buy-in, has as
its main focus taking Sierra Leone beyond the phase
of peacebuilding to being a more secure, peaceful,
developed and responsible member of the community
of nations. It aims to build a sustainable future for
all Siena Leoneans, including the young and the old,
the strong and the frail, the physically challenged, the
marginalized and disempowered, the majority and the
minority.
In his statement at the fourth opening of Parliament,
President Koroma clearly articulated his commitment
to putting Sierra Leone on the path to sustainability
and resilience. To that end, we will continue to engage
all stakeholders, including political parties and civil
society organizations, with a view to encouraging and
promoting national reconciliation, political dialogue
and an all-inclusive governance system, including
a constitutional review to address major political
and social issues, as well as gender equity. In the
constitutional review process, we will anchor in critical
analysis and broad-based national debate on the weak
or negative indicators that characterize such areas
as the rule of law, national unity, cohesion, inclusive
governance and social justice.
However, support from our international partners
to assist the Government in strengthening key national
democratic institutions — such as the Political Parties
Registration Commission, the Independent Media
Commission, the National Commission for Democracy,
the National Electoral Commission, the Human Rights
Commission of Sierra Leone and the Sierra Leone
Broadcasting Corporation — remains of paramount
significance. The high-level steering committee
comprised of elections basket fund partners, elections–
related agencies, the Sierra Leone Police, the justice
sector, civil society and the Ministry of Finance and
Economic Development, which effectively guided and
monitored funding and activities for the 2012 elections,

7

S/PV.6933

will continue its work in the post-elections period
ahead.
In line with the recommendations of the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission aimed at addressing the
root causes of conflict in Sierra Leone, the Government
continues to collaborate with all national stakeholders
and the United Nations in promoting the enactment
of the gender-equality bill to enhance women’s
participation in decision-making processes. Those
were also well articulated in the President’s statement
during the State opening of Parliament, and reiterated
in his address to the women of Sierra Leone during the
celebration of International Women’s Day, when he said
“Women are on the march — the whole country is on
the march to gender equity — there shall be no retreat”.
The President has also declared 8 March every year as
National Women’s Day.
In taking forward our development aspirations
and addressing residual peacebuilding issues, we
look forward to the support of UNIPSIL, even as
it moves into the uncharted course of its transition.
Let me therefore conclude by assuring members of
the Council, the Secretary-General, the PBC and the

8

wider United Nations membership of the Government’s
readiness, willingness and interest in cooperating
with the Council’s decision directed at ensuring a
smooth and seamless transition from UNIPSIL to a
Resident Coordinator system that will eventually mark
a successful outcome of UNIPSIL’s mission and, in
general, United nations intervention in peacekeeping
and peacebuilding in Sierra Leone. We therefore urge
that the transition process should be carefully managed
to the extent that due consideration be given to the
short-term and long-term impact on the gains made so
far.
Finally, I commend the United Nations and our
international partners for the support provided towards
the completion of the work of the Special Court for
Sierra Leone, which has equally contributed immensely
to peacebuilding by sending a strong sign of an end to
impunity.
The President (spoke in Russian): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 3.45 p.m.

13-25736
