General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

256

Geneva, Vienna, Nairobi and the headquarters of regional
commissions 112 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions; 113
2. Adopts, on an interim basis, the recommendations
made by the Advisory Committee in its report;
3. Decides to consider fully the question of the contractual status of language teachers at its thirty-eighth session on the basis of an updated report to be submitted by
the Secretary-General.
114th plenary meeting
21 December l 982

37/238.

Review of the financing of the administrative
costs of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on
the review of the financing of the administrative costs of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees 114 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 115
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;
2. Endorses the opinion of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions that decisions on
the proposals of the Secretary-General concerning the transfer of .posts should be taken on a case-by-case basis in the
context of his proposed programme budgets for the 19841985 and subsequent bienniums;
3. Concurs in the other comments and observations of
the Advisory Committee in its report.
114th plenary meeting
21 December l 982
37/239.

Report of the Committee of Governmental Ex-

perts to Evaluate the Present Structure of the
Secretariat in the Administrative, Finance and
Personnel Areas
The General Assembly
1. Takes note with appreciation of the final report of
the Committee of Governmental Experts to Evaluate the
Present Structure of the Secretariat in the Administrative,
Finance and Personnel Areas; 116
2. Commends the report of the Committee to the Secretary-General;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to take into account
the suggestions highlighted in paragraph 39 of the report of
the Committee, as well as the related views of the Fifth
Committee thereon, in his consideration of the administrative structure of the Secretariat and his present review on
decentralizing the decision-making in administrative matters
referred to in paragraph 25 and in annex I, paragraph 15,
of the report;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly, at its thirty-ninth session, within the context
of the programme budget for the biennium 1984-1985, a

112 A/C.5/37/63.
113

Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-seventh Session.
Supplement No. 7A (A/3711/Add. l-24). document A/3711/Add.24.
11 • AJC.5/37/1 and Corr. l.
115
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-seventh Session,
Supplement No. 7A (A/3711/Add. 1-24), document A/3717/Add.3.
116 lbid., Supplement No. 44 (A/37/44).

report on the major issues identified by the Committee,
including changes in the administrative structure that he
considers appropriate.
114th plenary meeting
21 December 1982

37/240.

Travel and Subsistence Regulations of the International Court of Justice

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 85 (I) of 11 December 1946,
Approves the revised Travel and Subsistence Regulations
of the International Court of Justice as contained in the annex
to the present resolution.
114th plenary meeting
21 December 1982
ANNEX
Travel and Subsistence Regulations of the
International Court of Justice
Article I
TRAVEL EXPENSES

I. The United Nations shall pay, subject to the conditions of these
regulations, the travel expenses of the members of the International Court
of Justice necessarily incurred on duly authorized journeys. The following
shall be deemed to be duly authorized journeys:
(a) For members of the Court and one close relative residing with them
to attend sessions at the seat of the Court;
(b) For members of the Court and one close relative residing with them
to attend a session which is held at a place other than the seat of the Court;
(c) In the case of the President of the Court, who by virtue of Article
22 of the Statute must reside at the seat of the Court:
(i)

(ii)

(iii)

At the time of his election to the Presidency, a journey from his
home to the seat of the Court in connection with any transfer of
residence;
In the calendar year following that of his election to the Presidency,
a return journey from the seat of the Court to his home at the time
of that election;
At the end of his term of office as President, a journey from the
seat of the Court to his home at the time of his election to that
office, or to any other place provided that the cost of the journey
is no greater.

Where the spouse and/or dependent children of the President reside with
him at the seat of the Court, the United Nations shall reimburse their travel
expenses for journeys undertaken in conjunction with (i), (ii) and (iii)
above;
(d) Notwithstanding the provisions of subparagraph (a) above, in the
case of any member of the Court other than the President who takes up
residence at the seat of the Court in compliance with Article 23 of its
Statute, solely:
(i)

A journey from his home, at the time of appointment, to the seat
of the Court, in connection with the transfer of his residence;
(ii) A return journey every second calendar year after the year of
appointment from the seat of the Court to his home at the time
of appointment;
(iii) A journey upon termination of appointment from the seat of the
Court to his home at the time of appointment, or to any other
place provided that the cost of the journey is not greater than the
cost of the journey to his home at the time of appointment.
Where the spouse and/or dependent children of the member of the Court
reside with him at the seat of the Court, the United Nations shall reimburse
the travel expenses for journeys undertaken in conjunction with (i). (ii)
and (iii) of the present subparagraph;
(iv) Any journey within the meaning of subparagraph (b) above;
(e) Journeys of any ad hoe judge chosen under Article 31 of the Statute
of the Court and one close relative residing with him, in accordance with

VIII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

subparagraphs (a) and (b) above, when his presence is certified by the

President as necessary for official business;
(/) Other journeys on official business, undertaken with the authority
of the President.
2. In all cases, payment by the United Nations of travel expenses shall
comprise the cost of journeys actually undertaken, subject to the following
maximum entitlements:
(a) Payment of travel expenses by the United Nations shall comprise
the cost of first-class accommodation and shall include expenses normally
incidental to transportation, e.g., taxi-cab fares from station. The cost of
transportation of baggage in excess of the weight or size carried free by
transportation companies will not be allowable as an expense unless the
excess is necessarily carried for official business reasons;
(b) Travel shall be by air, rail, private car or any other means of
transport authorized by the President of the Court for special reasons;
(c) All travel will be by the most direct route, provided that travel by
other routes may be allowed under written authority of the President when
the official necessity therefor is satisfactorily established, but in other cases
the travel expenses and subsistence allowance payable shall not exceed the
amounts which would have been payable had the journey been by the most
direct route.

257

(b) An amount not exceeding one half of the installation grant provisions applicable to the senior officials of the Secretariat of the United
Nations.

Article 4
SUBMISSION AND PAYMENT OF ACCOUNTS

A detailed expense account must be rendered in support of each claim
for reimbursement of travel expenses or subsistence allowance as soon as
possible after completion of the travel or removal. The claims should show
every item of expense, except where such expenses are to be covered by
a subsistence allowance, and every advance drawn from any United Nations
source, and must, as far as possible, be supported by receipts showing the
service to which the payment is related. All expenses must be shown in
the actual currency in which they were made and must be certified as
having been necessarily and solely incurred in the discharge of the official
business of the Court. No reimbursement shall be made without the written
authorization of the President of the Court, countersigned by the Registrar.

Article 5
TRAVEL AND SUBSISTENCE ALLOWANU: OF
THE REGISTRAR

Article 2
SUBSISTENCE ALLOWANCES

1. A daily subsistence allowance shall be paid to the members of the
Court while in official travel status under article I , paragraph I , subparagraphs (b), (c) (i) and (iii), (d) (i), (iii) and (iv) and (/) of these Regulations. The allowance will be regarded as covering all charges for meals,
lodging and gratuities, and other personal expenses.
2. The allowance will be payable under the conditions and at rates
equivalent to the standard travel subsistence allowance rates applied to
officials of the United Nations Secretariat, plus 40 per cent, provided that
the President of the Court may reduce this rate in the event of the provision
of board and/or lodging by a host Government. The allowance shall normally be payable in local currency.
3. Where the President of the Court or another member of the Court
undertaking an official journey under article I . paragraph I (c) or (d) of
these Regulations is accompanied by a spouse and/or dependent children,
a subsistence allowance of one half of the appropriate rate payable to the
President or member concerned in respect of that journey will be payable
in respect of each dependant; where these dependants are travelling unaccompanied on an authorized journey, the full rate of subsistence allowance will be payable in respect of one adult and one half of that rate in
respect of each other dependant.

Article 3
REMOVAL AND INSTALLATION

I. The President of the Court, who by virtue of Article 22 of its Statute
shall reside at the seat of the Court, and any other member of the Court
who takes up residence at the seat of the Court in compliance with Article 23 of the Statute, shall be entitled:
(a) In conjunction with article I, paragraph I (c) (i) or (d) (i), of these

Regulations:
(i)

(ii)

To full removal costs of household goods and personal effects to
the seat of the Court from his home at the time of appointment (or
any country other than that where the Court has its seat if less
expenditure is entailed);
To an amount corresponding to the installation grant provisions
applicable to the senior officials of the Secretariat of the United
Nations;

(b) In conjunction with article I, paragraph I (c) (iii) or (d) (iii), of
these Regulations:
To full removal costs of household goods and personal effects from the
seat of the Court to his home at the time of appointment (or any other
country where he may choose to have his residence if less expenditure
is entailed).
2. The President may authorize, in the case of other members of the
Court:
(a) The reimbursement of reasonable costs of partial removal of household goods and personal effects between their principal place of residence
and the seat of the Court upon taking up their appointment and upon
separation;

The travel and subsistence provisions applicable to the Registrar of the
Court shall be as set out in the Staff Regulations of the United Nations
for officials of comparable rank, subject to any exceptions authorized by
the President of the Court.

Article 6
APPLICABILITY

These Regulations shall enter into force on I January 1983.

37/241.

Organization and methods for official travel

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3198 (XXVIII) of 18 December
1973 and 32/198 of 21 December 1977 on the standards of
accommodation for official travel of United Nations staff and
members of organs and subsidiary organs of the United
Nations,
I. Takes note of the report of the Joint Inspection Unit
on organization and methods for official travel, 117 the comments of the Secretary-General thereon 118 and the related
report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions; 119
2. Concurs with the recommendation of the Joint Inspection Unit that the United Nations should select a commercial travel agency under an in-plant or other arrangement
through widespread international competitive bidding at appropriate intervals;
3. Concurs with the recommendations of the Joint Inspection Unit that the Secretary-General should undertake
negotiations with air carriers or with the interested Governments which sponsor carriers to obtain discounts in countries
where this is permitted or to relax conditions which are an
obstacle to obtaining the most economical fares;
4. Calls upon the Secretary-General to keep the possibility of establishing a United Nations travel agency under
review and to report accordingly to the General Assembly
at its thirty-eighth session;
5. Calls upon the Secretary-General to study the possibility of in-plant travel arrangements for United Nations
offices at duty stations other than New York;

117

See A/37/357 and Corr. I.
A/371357/Add.1.
Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirtv-seventh S,•.uion,
Supplement No. 7A (A/37/7/Add. l-24), document A/37/7/Add. I 5.
11

•
119
