st
MEETING:

12 NOVEMBER

1982

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2401)

. . . , , . , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . , . ,. , , . . . . . . . . . ,

Tribute to the memory of Mr. Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev, President of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
and General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of
the Soviet Union , . . . . , , . . . , , . . . . . . , , , . . . . . , . . , . . . . , . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . I
Expression of thanks to the retiring President
Expression of congratulations

. , , . 0, , . . . . , , . . . , . . . . . . . . . . I

to the representative

of Zaire,. . . , . . . . . . . . . . .

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . , , , . . , . . . . . . , , . . . , , , , . . , . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . e
The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 5 November 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Morocco to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/15481);
Letter dated 9 November 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Niger
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15483) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..II......
*.*.1

S/PV.240 1

NOTE
Symbols of United Natians documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol SI. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Qfficinl Reco& qf’the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions
of the Scctrity
Cowzcil.
The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2401st MEETING
Weld in New York on Friday, 12 November 1982, at 3.30 p.m.
President:

Mr. Carlos OZORES
(Panama).

TYPALDOS

Prcsmf: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Ireland,
Japan, Jordan,
Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire.
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2401)

I.

Adoption

of the agenda

2.

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 5 November
1982 from the Permanent Representative
of Morocco to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/15481);
Letter dated 9 November
1982 from the Permanent Representative of Niger to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/ 15483)

Tribute to the memory of Mr. Leonid Iiyich Brezhnev,
President of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet
of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union

3. As was stated by a number of speakers during the
commemorative
meeting of the General Assembly
yesterday,’ Leonid Brezhnev was a strong supporter
of the United Nations. As we mourn his death, we
should rededicate ourselves to the noble goals of peace
and co-operation
among nations enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations.
4. I should like, as President of the Security Council
and on behalf of the members of the Council, to convey
to the representative of the Soviet Union and through
him to the Government of the Soviet Union, the Soviet
people and the family of the deceased our sincere
condolences.
5. I now invite the members of the Council to stand
and observe a minute of silence.

Expression of thanks to the retiring

President

6. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
j?om Spunish): I should like, on behalf of the Council, to pay a
tribute to Mr. Hazem Nuseibeh, representative
of
Jordan, for his service as President of the Council
during the month of October. I am sure I speak for
all the members of the Council in expressing to Mr. Nuseibeh deep gratitude for the great diplomatic
skill,
tact and courtesy with which he guided the Council’s
work last month.

I. The PRESIDENT:
(intrrpwtution
jkm
Spanish): It was with deep sorrow that we all learned yesterday of the passing of an outstanding statesman of
OUI' time; Mr. Leonid Ilyich Brehznev, President of the
Presidium
of the Supreme Soviet of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics and General Secretary of
the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the
Soviet U&n.
I should like to reiterate that this is a
great loss, not only to the Soviet people but to the
world community as a whole, because Leonid Brezhnev was one of the great leaders of the world, who,
in our turbulent and dangerous time, exerted unswerving efforts towards the preservation of world
peace and the development of peaceful co-operation
among nations.

7. The PRESIDENT
(intcrpretrrtion jbn
Spanish):
I should like to draw the attention of members of the
Council to the fact that Mr. Kamanda wa Kamanda
was recently appointed Minister for Foreign Affairs
of his country, Zaire. On behalf of the members of the
Council and on my own behalf, I congratulate him most
warmly.

2. President Brezhnev’s name was and will be for
years to come linked with the furtherance of international dCtente, the cause of disarmament,
the prevention of nuclear catastrophe and the promotion of
social progress.

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 5 November 1982 from the Permanent
Representative of Morocco to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15481);
i>

Expression of congratulations to the
representative of Zaire

Adoption of the agenda

Letter dated 9 November 1982 From the Permanent
Representative
of Niger to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council

14. The essential difficulty is not that the Council
should wish to invite the PLO to participate in the
debate. The United States has never opposed extending
an appropriate invitation to a representative of a political group that has a stake in matters before the Council. Our objection is to the political attempt to bestow
upon the PLO some purportedly higher status than
the facts warrant.

(S/15483)

8. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
fionz Spmish):
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received letters from the representatives
of
Morocco, Niger and Senegal in which they request to
be allowed to participate in the discussion of the item
on the agenda. In accordance with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
those representatives to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote, in conformity with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the pro*rVisionaI rules of procedure.

15. The terms of the proposed invitation
seek to
convey the appearance that the Council regards the
PLO as the representative of the Government of a
State. But each of us knows the fact that, whatever
its aspirations, the PLO is, as I have said before, a
collectivity whose members live under various political jurisdictions.
Therefore, we will once again vote
against an invitation that has the appearance of treating
PLO spokesmen as if they represented the Government of a State.
16. The PRESIDENT
(intelp~etationfi’o/n
SpolrzishJ:
If no other member of the Council wishes to speak
at this stage, I shall take it that the Council is ready
to vote on the proposal by Jordan.

9. The PRESIDENT
(intesprctaticm
J?OI~ Spcmish):
I should like to inform the members of the Council
that I have received a letter dated 12 November from
the representative
of Jordan [S/IS&X?] which reads
as follows:

In ~~WOUI.: China, Guyana, Ireland, Japan, Jordan,
Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, Zaire

“I have the honour to request the Security Coun-.
cil to extend an invitation to the representative of
the Palestine Liberation Organization to participate
in the Council’s consideration
of the item entitled
‘The situation in the occupied Arab territories’,
in
accordance with the Council’s usual practice.”

Agcrinst:

United States of America

Abstentions:
France, United
Britain and Northern Ireland

Kingdom

of Great

10. The proposal by Jordan is not made pursuant to
rule 37 or rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure,
but if approved by the Council the invitation to participate in the debate would confer on the Palestine
Liberation
Organization
(PLO) the same rights of
participation
as those conferred on Member States
pursuant to rule 37.

At th.e invitcrtion qf thL>President, Mr. Terzi (PahJstine Liberation Organizntion)
took the plwe wsetwd
fos him clt the Council tuble.

11. Does any member
on this proposal?

17. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
ish): I should like to inform members

12.

of the Council

wish to speak

jiwn

SWl-

of the Council
that I have received a letter dated 12 November from
the Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People which
reads as follows:

Mrs. KIRKPATRICK

(United States of Amerto congratulate you
warmly, Sir, on your accession to the presidency of
the Council and also to express the gratitude of my
Government
to the representative
of Jordan for his
exemplary conduct of the presidency during the previous month.
ica): May I take this opportunity

“I have the honour to request that I be allowed
to participate in the Council’s consideration of the
item entitled ‘The situation in the occupied Arab
in accordance with the provisions of
territories’,
rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure, in mY
capacity as Chairman of the Committee
on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People.”

13. As recently as 18 October, when the Council
considered the renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, I, as representative
of the United States, explained once again in some
detail why the United States has opposed the special
procedure used to invite the PLO to participate in our
debate [240&h mwing,
pmw. 71. Accordingly,
I will
be somewhat briefer this afternoon.

18. On previous occasions, the Council has extended
invitations to representatives of other United Nations
bodies in connection with the consideration of matters
2

on its agenda. In accordance with past practice in this
matter, I propose that the Council extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure
to the Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.

conduct of the Israeli leaders in power in the occupied
Arab territories, in Gaza, in the West Bank, in the
Golan Heights, in Lebanon, in Beirut and in the Holy
City of Jerusalem?
27. How many times have we advanced argument
after argument in this body and offered testimony
after testimony to prove that the objectives of the
Israeli Government
are openly expansionist
and
unashamedly annexationist?

19. The PRESIDENT
(interpretorion
fiorn Spanis/r): The Council is meeting today in response to requests contained in a letter dated 6 November from the
representative of Morocco addressed to the President
of the Council [S//548/] and a letter dated 9 November
from the representative of Niger addressed to the
President of the Council [S/15483].
20. The first speaker is the representative
rocco, on whom I now call.

28. What happened to the Holy City of Jerusalem,
an Arab city and Arab territory occupied by force and
today wrongfully declared to be the eternal capital of
Israel?

of Mo-

29. What happened to the possessions, the properties and the land in the city that were historically preponderantly Arab and Islamic? What was the fate
reserved for the IVCIC/~Muslim possessions, whose
pre-eminently
cultural purpose should have kept
them safe from grasping hands?

21. Mr. MRANI
ZENTAR
(Morocco) (inierpt-etatiun from French): Mr. President, I myself and the
whole Group of Arab States would like to associate
ourselves with your reference to the memory of President Leonid Brezhnev and also with your request to
the representative of the Soviet Union to transmit to
the bereaved family and to the whole Soviet people
our heartfelt condolences and our sympathy.

30. What was the fate reserved for the Hay alMaghariba in Jerusalem, the Maghreb quarter, the
original purpose of which was steeped in faith and
piety but which the Israeli administration
has confiscated for the benefit of its policy of systematic
Judaization of the Holy City?

22. My delegation is particularly grateful to you, Sir,
as well as to the other members of the Council both
for having responded so quickly to the request for a
meeting of the Council-a
request which I addressed
to you on behalf of the Group of Arab States, of which
Morocco is Chairman during November-and
also
for having permitted me to speak in the Council in this
debate on the continuation by Israel of its policy of
illegally establishing settlements in the occupied Arab
territories
and, in particular,
most recently in the
Palestinian territory of the West Bank of the Jordan.

3 1. In other parts of occupied Palestine, the forcible
transfer of Arab lands to public and private Israeli
institutions has reached an alarming level, a fact of
which the international community is not yet sufficiently aware.
32. It is “five minutes to midnight,”
as the author
of a very instructive article recently published in the
well-informed Noo York Tiwws has written. It is five
to twelve as far as the total control by Israel of ageold Arab lands is concerned-control
by enticement,
by iron-bound conviction, by outright acts of force.
It is five minutes to midnight thanks to the implacable
law of the occupier, and the rest of the world looks
on with indifference or in ignorance as crimes are
committed every day to destroy a people and confiscate its riches.

23. Your presence, Sir, in the presidential chair this
month is most gratifying to my delegation, both because of your diplomatic acumen, which is well known
within the United Nations, and because of the international position of your country, Panama, in support
of justice and peace.
24. I should also like to pay a tribute to our brother,
Mr. Hazem Nuseibeh, of the Kingdom of Jordan, for
the brilliant and splendid way he discharged his duties
as President last month,

33. The Islamic holy places have not been spared.
The Israeli troops fire outside mosques and sanctuaries
while pseudo-archaeologists
are undermining
their
foundations in the vain search for vestiges of that
Temple which imagination rather than actual knowledge has so conveniently located.

25. I have also noted, as all members will have, the
presence among us of the Foreign Minister of Zaire,
Mr. Kamanda wa Kamanda, and, on behalf of my
delegation and of the group that I represent, I should
like to convey to him our warm congratulations
and
best wishes for success in the important and delicate
tasks that lie ahead.

34. The pure and simple annexation of the Syrian
Golan Heights has shown the lengths to which arbitrariness and the intoxication of military power can
lead its adepts in violating the elementary rights of
properly constituted States whose international
frontiers are the subject of unanimously recognized and
respected legal protection.

26. How often are we going to have to meet to deplore
without acting and condemn without punishing the
3

35. The Israeli expedition
into Lebanon and the
hideous massacres that accompanied
it provoked
healthy revulsion throughout the world and enormous
compassion for a people so often driven from its
homeland but which continues nevertheless to cling
to whatever vestiges of life are left to it-the
Palestinian people.

which most of the international
nestly desires.

community

so ear-

44. The Council must recall with firmness its unanimous decisions calling for respect for the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
must unambiguously
condemn Israel’s violations of
those principles and of international decisions guaranteeing the fundamental
rights of individuals and
peoples in the still-troubled region of the Middle East.

36. The same compassion was felt for the Lebanese
people, which for so long has been paying the highest
price for its willing and noble action of brotherly solidarity with the struggling, martyred Palestinian people.

45. Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): I wish to take this
opportunity to express, on behalf of the Jordanian
delegation, the deep sorrow of the Government and
people of Jordan and our heartfelt condolences to the
friendly people of the Soviet Union at the passing of
one of the great leaders of our time, President Leonid
Brezhnev. He was a leader deeply dedicated to the
preservation of world peace, security, peaceful coexistence and ditente among nations of varying
ideologies in a world which lives literally in the shadow
of a nuclear holocaust. During the Second World War,
his great country suffered indescribable devastation
and staggering loss of life, amounting to 25 million
of its citizens. I request the representative of the Soviet
Union to convey to the Government and people of the
Soviet Union the most profound condolences of the
Government and people of Jordan.

37. The continued policy of the illegal establishment
of armed settlements in the occupied Arab territories,
in the Syrian Golan Heights and the West Bank of
the Jordan is not only a flagrant violation of the resolutions of the Genera1 Assembly and the Security
Council but also constitutes an intolerable provocation
directed against the feelings, interests and rights of
the legitimate inhabitants of those areas.
38. The continuance of such a policy and its recent
acceleration, at the very moment when the reign of
colonization is drawing to an end on every continent,
is a glaring anachronism that no longer has a place in
the contemporary
world.
39. Efforts have been undertaken
in the United
Nations to ensure respect for the right of peoples to
self-determination
and to safeguard their national
rights over their territories. The Palestinian
people,
fighting under the banner of its sole representative, the
PLO, is no exception.

46. As this is the first time I have spoken at a formal
meeting of the Council this month, I wish at the outset to express the sincere congratulations of my delegation to Mr. Carlos Ozores Typaldos, of friendly
Panama, on his assumption of the presidency for this
month. We are confident that, under his wise, dedicated and most able guidance, the Councii wil1 shoulder
its solemn responsibilities fully and forcefully.

40. The United Nations has continuously
and constantly recognized that the Palestinian people is the
legitimate
possessor of inalienable
rights over its
national territory and that it is entitled to create a sovereign State in that territory,

47. I also wish to express my deep appreciation to
the President for the very kind words he addressed to
me.

41. The creation of Israeli settlements in occupied
Palestine is therefore contrary to international
decisions and illegally creates regrettable conditions of
instability and contention which are a source of danger
for the future. The irresponsible conduct of Israel runs
counter to the praiseworthy and courageous efforts
for peace and justice in the Middle East that are being
undertaken in various quarters by those of good will.

48. I should like to take this opportunity to express
my congratulations
to my colleague, Mr. Kamanda
wa Kamanda, for his well-deserved appointment as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of friendly Zaire.
49. We are meeting today to consider once again
one of the most alarming and explosive issues of which
the Council has been seized since Israel’s occupation
of Palestinian and Arab lands in 1967. A prolonged
IS-year occupation is in itself appalling, brutal and
insufferable. But what is far more alarming is the
systematic, relentless and ill-disguised policy which
the Israeli occupation aggressors have been pursuing
in the process of incarcerating the Palestinian people
by illegal confiscations,
massive colonization
and
blatant devouring of the meagre lands, water and resources of the tiny West Bank, including Jerusalem
and also the Gaza Strip and the Golan Heights. Indeed,
this criminal process of incarceration
has almost
reached a point of no return, with incalculable con-

42. The blindness of the policy of the Israeli Government destroys one after the other any unexpected
opportunity
that may arise to render justice at last to
the martyred Palestinian people by restoring its fundamental rights and by peacefully and legally returning to neighbouring
Arab countries the occupied
parts of their national territories.
43. The reckless and heedless conduct of the Israeli
Government in the occupied Arab territories, including
Jerusalem, is the most negative and devastating obstacle to the just and lasting peace in the Middle East
4

sequences for regional,
security.

as well as world, peace and

never taken into account whenever anyone talks about
Israeli settlements-and
the rest of the West Bank.

50. What initially used to be called creeping annexation-and
we have been discussing this matter since as
long ago as 1967-is now admittedly and openly described as leaping annexation, to which the Israeli
occupation authorities are allocating huge financial, as
well as human, resources in a frantic race against time,
with a view to foreclosing any possibility of achieving
a just and lasting peace in the Middle East in accordance with Council resolutions on the occupied territories and other United Nations resolutions on the
rights of the Palestinian people.

53. Information
available to my Government indicates that, by October 1982, Israel has seized a total
of 2,407,131 square donums-one
donum being equal
to one quarter of an acre. The total area of the occupied
West Bank is just over 5.5 million square donums. The
process is continuing unabated.
54. The Jordanian Government’s
information
is
that the number of settlements already established
and inhabited by August 1982, including those in and
around occupied Arab Jerusalem, was 139 settlements
and townships. This is in addition to 20 new settlements under construction,
which was announced
ofYicial1y four months ago.

51.

By any criteria, the facts are staggering, conclusive and incontrovertible.
In this brief and preliminary presentation, on which I shall have occasion to
elaborate later on, I shall quote from an article published by The Christian Science Monitor on Wednesday, 10 November,
in which, under the heading,
“Israel gobbles up West Bank land with suburbs”, its
correspondent,
Trudy Rubin, stated:

55. We have to add to these figures the conversion
of four military encampments-one
near Hebron
(Al-Khalil), one on Mount Jerzim, overlooking Nablus,
and the other two in the vicinity of the town of Jenininto civilian settlements and the “thickening”
of
19 additional Israeli settlements already in existence.
“Thickening”
usually means converting settlements
into townships and urban centres, all of which are
closely connected by three major belts of highways
and lateral roads criss-crossing the length and breadth
of the entire West Bank and Gaza. This has made any
delineation
between the demarcation lines of 1948
and 1967 blurred and invisible. All these settlements
bring the number of existing Israeli settlements and
townships to over 163, including the four military
encampments which are to be converted into civilian
settlements.

“Large chunks of the occupied West Bank-home
to 800,000 Palestiniansare in the process of becoming suburbs of Israel’s metropolitan areas.
“Israelis are being encouraged by the government and private developers to build their ‘dream
house’ at bargain prices on West Bank sites within
commuting distance of Israel proper.”
The correspondent

added:

“This process of ‘suburbanization’
makes irrelevant United States concern with freezing the number of Jewish settlements within the West Bank.”

56. A high Israeli official announced over Israeli
radio on 6 November that the 20 new settlements to
which I have referred will be completed before the end
of this year.

52. The well-known columnist Anthony Lewis wrote
an article in The New York Times on 1 November
under the ominous and yet totally accurate heading
“5 Minutes to Midnight”,
in which he sounded the
alarm on a basic issue which spells the difference between the possibility of peace, as enunciated on 9 September by the Twelfth Arab Summit Conference, held
at Fez (Morocco),
and perpetual conflict, whose
ultimate
and disastrous consequences would be
inevitable,
Anthony Lewis was commenting
on a
study carried out by Mr. Meron Benvenisti, the former
Deputy Mayor of Jerusalem, a copy of which I have
here with me and which is now being prepared for
publication.
In late October, Mr. Benvenisti gave a
briefing at the American Enterprise Institute on a study
which he and other Israeli social scientists had prepared on the occupied territories. The authors of the
study
ascertained that the Israeli occupation authorities had already seized 55 to 60 per cent of the total
area of the tiny West Bank and will have implanted
100,000 Israeli colonizers by 1987. This is in addition
to the more than 125,000 Israeli colonizers already
settled
in expanded Jerusalem-which
is usually

57. The Israeli colonization has been perpetrated
so massively, not only around heavily populated areas
but also between them and in the deepest hinterland,
to ensure total vivisection of the occupied territories
and to render it well-nigh impossible not only to implement Council resolution 242 (1967) or to establish a
self-governing Palestinian authority, let alone a State,
but even to preclude the possibility of having infamous bantustans of the type which South Africa has
established and is continuing to establish. Indeed,
the plan is to reduce the status of the suffocating
Palestinian population to temporary existence.
58. As a matter of fact, the Israelis refer to that population as temporary guests, pending their passing away.
The Palestinian people will have nothing more than
localized municipal services for the sake of convenience until such time as the lawful inhabitants of the
land, deprived of land, water and other resources, and
through the process of natural attrition, are left with
no alternative but to leave or starve. As Meir Kahane
5

has said-he
was not echoing the views of a small
minority, but was reflecting the official policy of the
Israeli Government,
as we are seeing it implementedif they insist on staying, in spite of all the oppression
and deprivation,
they will be forcibly expelled by
State- and settler-organized
terrorism, including massacres and the kidnapping
of children, which have
been going on throughout the past two years and in
which the Israeli Zionists have been foremost experts
from 1947 to this day.

“In accordance with an Israeli governmental
decision taken in 1980, Israeli military authorities
have begun demolishing houses and stores in the
centre of our town, Hebron, to replace them with
new buildings for Israeli settlers.
“The following
of the demolished

names are owners and occupiers
houses”-

although, of course, adjacent and contiguous houses
have had their foundations very seriously undermined
by the acts of demolition-

59. I have available to me a detailed map which,
though incomplete,
portrays the magnitude of Israeli
colonization
up to July 1982. It was prepared and
printed by the Settlement Department of the Jewish
Agency and the Settlement
Division of the World
Zionist Organization.
I had requested that copies of
the map be distributed urgently to the members of the
Council as an official document of the Council. Unfortunately,
technical
considerations
have prevented
the printing of the map. In the meantime, my colleague,
Mr. Abdulla Hamadneh,
who has just arrived from
Amman especially for this meeting, will, with your
permission, Mr. President, briefly describe the pervasive, overall implications
of what is shown on the map,
copies of which I hope will be distributed to members
of the Council in due course [S//5488, unnex II].

“( 1)
“(2)
“(3)
“(4)
“(5)

Yousef Sharabati
Abdol Sami Sharabati
Salah Eid Zeitoun
Mohammed Amin Bader
Rashad Bashir Sharabati.”

It is signed by the acting Mayor of Hebron, Mustafa
Alnatcha. The Mayor of Hebron, as the Council is well
aware, was expelled from his homeland in the West
Bank and appeared before the Council two years ago.
63. Mr. Harsch acidly comments, and reveals awesome facts. He states that such an act is a direct
challenge to the President of the United States and
his policies. The challenge, Mr. Harsch continues,
comes in double form. There is an announcement of
further plans for more settlements which, in his words,

60. I shall supply a written statement incorporating
what Mr. Hamadneh has said [ibid., ~nmx I].

“avowedly aim at a time when the number of Jews
in the occupied territories will push many Arabs
out of their ancestral homes”,

61. It is now all too clear for all to see that the ZionistIsraeli design is the expulsion of the remnants of the
Palestinian people from the remnants of their Palestinian ancestral homeland. This brings me to a very
forthright article by Joseph Harsch, the well-known
columnist, which appeared in The Christian Scienw
Monitor on Tuesday, 9 November-three
days ago.
The article is under the heading “Begin vs. Reagan,
Nov. 19”, referring to the date when Begin is scheduled to meet President Reagan at the White House.
The columnist writes:

The columnist

continues:

“On the day after Mr. Levi’s announcement, a
spokesman for the World Zionist Organization,
Mr. Zeez Ben Youssef, said the purpose is 400,ooO
Jews in the next five years and 1.4 million Jews in
the area in 30 years.”

“On October 28, Trudy Rubin, this newspaper’s
special correspondent
in Israel, stood in the street
in Hebron and watched Israeli bulldozers smash
down Arab houses to make way for a Jewish settlement in the heart of that ancient city of cities”.

64. The West Bank and Gaza are not big enough to
hold both 1.4 million Jews and the 1.2 million Arabs
who live there now. When President Reagan announced his plan for a new start towards peace in the
Middle East, including an immediate adoption of a
settlement freeze, Begin denounced the entire plan,
including the requested freeze.

Hebron is over 5,000 years old, millennia before any
Israeli ever set foot on that land of the Amorites, who
gave a plot of land to the father of all prophets, Abraham, for burial. It is one of the holiest Islamic cities
and has an urban population
of over 80,000 Palestinians.

65.

Mr. Harsch comments:

“Mr. Begin will come to Washington with more
than defiance of the President. He also wants the
President to add an extra billion dollars to the usual
annual U.S. subsidy to Israel, It has been running
somewhat under $3 billion a year, depending on how
you figure it. Israel’s costs have skyrocketed due
to the invasion of Lebanon-another
act of defiance
of the wishes of President Reagan.

62. I wish to read out a copy of a cablegram from the
Mayor of Hebron. He is referring only to the beginning
of more intensive settlement in the heart of Hebron,
which is already ringed and encircled by Kiryat Arba
and other large settlements. It reads as follows:
6

Mr. Begin comes both in defiance of the
President and with a request for more subsidy.”

70. This represents lawlessness, highway robbery
and the rule of the jungle in their worst forms, The
Palestinian people and the overwhelming majority of
mankind will ensure that this unprecedented act of the
uprooting of an ancient people from their ancestral
homeland will be rejected and that justice, right and
law will prevail. This requires decisive mandatory
action by the Council.

.,

1

*

.

The columnist

concludes:

“The future shape of the Middle East depends
on which way the President plays the hand.”
66. I should have started my statement by expressing
the profound appreciation
of my Government
to
Mr. Mathias, of Portugal, as Chairman, and to Mr. de
Zavala, of Bolivia, and Mr. Mutukwa, of Zambia, as
members of the Security Council Commission established under resolution 446 (1979), for the report prepared by the Commission pursuant to paragraph 9 of
resolution 465 (1980).
67. The report, which is contained in document
S/ 14268, of 25 November 1980, is a most authoritative,
objective and comprehensive
study on the subject
before us today. Regrettably, the report has been lying
in abeyance for reasons beyond our control. Because
of the turnover in the membership of the Council, it
was always difficult to muster more than two of the
three members necessary to reconstitute the Commission. It is most telling that, while the report a mere
two years ago found colonization to be around 33 per
cent of the occupied West Bank, its conclusions,
though superseded by further settlements in the interim, did foresee the trends and policies of Israeli
aggression and occupation, which has today reached
the magnitude of 55 to 60 per cent because of Israeli
Iicence and highway robbery, on the one hand, and
Council inaction, on the other. I wish to express to
the members of the Security Council Commission at
that time and to their Governments our most sincere
appreciation and gratitude. I hope that the Council will
acknowledge,
discuss and adopt the report. At the
same time, my delegation requests that the Commission, composed of three members of the Council, be
reconstituted
and reactivated at the earliest possible
time to keep the Council up to date on developments
-and
they have been enormous, beyond our wildest
nightmares.

7 1. The PRESIDENT
(inter~p,.ptation from Spmish): The next speaker is the representative of Niger,
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement,
72. Mr. OUMAROU
(Niger) (interprrtofion
f,*om
Frcrwh): This meeting of the Council is being held at
a time when one of its permanent and most influential
members is in mourning for a leader who had been
untiringly at the helm for I8 years. I should like, therefore, to begin by conveying my condolences to the
members of the Soviet Mission and to assure them of
the deep sympathy of my own delegation and of the
Group of States members of the Organization
of
the Islamic Conference, which I represent here, on the
death of Mr. Leonid Brezhnev, President of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet. By his action in the
international
arena and his prestige and work inside
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Leonid
Brezhnev has greatly contributed to the building of
the contemporary world.
73. I wish most sincerely to thank you, Mr. President,
and the other members of the Council for allowing me
to take part in this debate. You may rest assured that
the Group of States members of the Organization of
the Islamic Conference will be profoundly grateful
for your very kind and generous invitation. For my
part, having already had the privilege and pleasure of
working closely with you in this prestigious body,
I know that the presidency that you assume for this
month of November will be marked by wisdom and
dedication. I am acquainted, too, with the clear-cut
and courageous positions of your country, Panama,
on the various problems of the Middle East with which
we are dealing at present. I need hardly say that I am
well aware that I am speaking to someone who will
lend an attentive ear and who is an advocate of justice
and law.

68. As far as the Council is concerned, it has repeatedly stated its unalterable position that Israeli settlements in the occupied territories since 1967 are null
and void and have no legal validity whatsoever. It has
resolved that all settlements must be rescinded because they are flagrant violations of international law,
in particular the fourth Geneva Convention of 1949,2
apart from being blatant aggression threatening the
very survival and future of the Palestinian people.

74. I should also like to express my congratulations
to your predecessor, Mr, Nuseibeh, of Jordan, for the
work accomplished during his presidency in the month
of October.
75. Lastly, I should like to express my pleasure at
the well-deserved
promotion
of our brother and
friend, Mr. Kamanda wa Kamanda, of Zaire, who has
been sitting in our midst for a year and has done so
with brilliance, efficiency and dedication. I congratulate him sincerely and feel sure that his appointment
to the post of Minister for Foreign Affairs and International Co-operation of his country will be a great

69.
As I have been repeating, like my predecessors
since i967, the issue of Israeli colonization is one upon
which hinges the fate of peace jr war in the Middle
East and beyond. No matter how manyfirits awmplis
the Israeli expansionists create, all their illegalities
will, as the future will show, be of no avail.
7

contribution
to the defence of the principles
Charter of the United Nations.

of the

this instance, the latter cannot offer any justification
for its action, the only effect of which will be to plunge
the world into disarray and unduly jeopardize efforts
at settling the question.

76. It is not with pleasure that we note that if there
is one constant to which Israel has accustomed us it is
undoubtedly
its policy offrrit ncco/npli, a policy that
it has been following in particular since 1967 in the
West Bank, in the Gaza Strip, on the Golan Heights
and in Jerusalem-to
confine myself to the area of the
unbridled
colonization
in which that notoriously
aggressive and arrogant State is engaged.

80. When I speak of settlement of the Middie East
question, I am sure that representatives understand
full well that I have in mind the settlement of the Palestinian question, because the Organization of the Islamic
Conference has repeatedly stated and reaffirmed that
that problem is at the heart of the conflict in that region
of the world endemically disrupted for the last 30 years.
Israel, by its policy of repeated provocations, unceasing acts of aggression and active colonization,
may attempt to gain time, continue to defy the international community and flout the principles of international law and the Charter. However, it will never,
I am convinced, affect the inevitable triumph of justice
and law, and by that I mean its withdrawa from all
the occupied Palestinian and Arab territories, including
the Holy City of Al-Quds; the right of the Palestinians
to return to their homeland, Palestine: the right of
that people to establish an independent Palestinian
State in Palestine, under the leadership of the PLO:
and, lastly, the right of the Palestinian people thus
rehabilitated to determine its own future without outside interference,

77. This meeting today is, on the Council’s part, no
more than the customary continuation-and
a compulsory one-of
a long series of responses to the
Israeli settlements
policy, which the Council has
always denounced and condemned but which, for their
part, the Israeli occupation authorities do not cease
to pursue, together with a bold programme of strategic
encirclement
of areas where the Palestinians
are
concentrated and of appropriation
by the Zionist settlers of all the agricultural and water resources of the
occupied territories.
78. It is, moreover, symptomatic
that the news of
recent Israeli settlements in the West Bank and Gaza
should have reached us at a time when, responding
to the anguish of the world and the mounting suffering
of the Palestinian people, the Arab world, the leadership of the PLO, peace organizations in many countries and men of goodwill try to stabilize the region
by first injecting into it a spirit of peacefulness, mutual
confidence and dialogue. This new undertaking of the
occupation authorities means that Israel is still determined to persist in its refusal to freeze its settlements
policy in the occupied Arab territories.
Indeed, although the economic and social problems of Israel
continue to grow and worsen, Israel agrees to invest
in those territories millions of dollars and grants financial and fiscal facilities to those who settle there.
Where, then, is the logical connection between the
desire for peace and the undertaking
of illegal and
costly operations in particularly
sensitive areas in
respect of which the least one can say is that they
represent a determining factor in the quest for peace?

8 1. The PRESIDENT
(intcrp,-etolion
j?orn Spf/‘rriAsh): The next speaker is Mr. Massamba SarrC, Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, to whom the
Council has extended an invitation under rule 39 of
its provisional rules of procedure. I invite him to take
a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
82. Mr. SARRfi (Senegal) (Chairman of the cornmittee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian
People) (interpwtcltion:
from Fretdt~:
Mr. President, just a few moments ago you paid a
well-deserved tribute, in most appropriate terms, to
a great world leader, Leonid Brezhnev. I should like
to take this opportunity, on behalf of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People and on my own behalf, to join in that
tribute and to request the Soviet delegation to convey
these sentiments to the Soviet high authorities and
assure them of our sympathy in their loss. We, also,
bow our heads respectfuully.

79. Thus, this meeting, which the Group of Arab
States has requested, and which the Group of States
members of the Organization
of the Islamic Conference has supported, is on an extremely serious undertaking by Israel at a time when the search for a solution to the question of the Middle East enters into one
of the most active and promising but also delicate and
critical phases it has ever known. That is why, while
we request the Council unanimously
to express its
strong disapproval of this new Israeli adventure, we
also urge each of its members, and particularly those
among them which have the greatest influence and
bear the greatest responsibility
for the maintenance
of peace, to ponder the gravity of this affair and to
consider the beneficial implementation
of specific
measures of deterrence against the Hebrew State. In

83. It is a pleasure for me to congratulate a friend
and a distinguished member of the Council, Mr. Kamanda wa Kamanda, on his appointment to the imPortant post of Minister for Foreign Affairs and International Co-operation of Zaire, a country with which
Senegal enjoys particularly close relations. We wish
him every success in his new post.
84. I wish also warmly and sincerely to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council. Your brilliant diplomatic
career and Your
profound knowledge of international
relations, Your
8

objectivity
and your devotion to the purposes and
principles of the United Nations guarantee that you
will conduct the proceedings of the Council successfully, in the interests of the triumph of peace, understanding and justice in international relations.

comprehensive solution to the Middle East question.
Although at times those proposals have had differknt
objectives, they have had a common approach in many
respects.
91. That was, for example, the case with the problem
of the settlements in the illegally occupied Arab territories. All the proposals in that regard have called
unanimously for an end to this policy of establishing
illegal settlements in those Arab territories, the objective of which is to change the demographic nature
of the region, in violation of the fourth Geneva Convention of 1949.’ All of the proposals recognized that
a policy of this kind constitutes an insurmountable
obstacle to peace. It is obvious that any State committed to peace would subscribe to this conclusion,
which is the conclusion of the international community
as a whole,

85. On behalf of the members of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian people and on my own behalf, I should like to
express our gratitude to the members of the Council
for having been good enough to permit me to take part
in the debate, which, to some extent, affects the exercise of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people.
86. The question we are considering today is a source
of profound concern to the Committee
because it
seriously affects not only the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people but also international
peace and
security.

92. However, Israel’s reaction has been contrary
to that universal approach, In defiance of international public opinion and international law, Israel not
only has continued to strengthen its existing settlements but has dared to announce that several new
settlements will be created in the region. One really
wonders whether this kind of conduct is that of a State
that aspires to co-operation and peace,

87. In the course of the year, the Council has met
on several occasions to consider the question of Palestine and recent events in Lebanon and to take appropriate measures. Each of those meetings has been
made necessary by the policy and practices of the
Israeli Government.
The Security Council and the
Genera] Assembly have taken appropriate measures
to meet the situation. The fact that the Council and the
Assembly have met so often confirms the profound
concern of the international
community.
It is well
known that resolutions have been adopted to thwart
Israel’s policy, but, unfortunately,
so far to no avail.
This shows quite clearly the attitude of Israel towards
the United Nations and the international community.

93. It has now been estimated by trustworthy
sources that there are about 25,000 Jewish settlers in
103 settlements in the West Bank, compared to 3,500
in 1977. Tlw NCIV York Times recently reported a
statement by a spokesman of the World Zionist Organization to the effect that Israel was actively continuing
to carry out a ptan providing for the settlement of
400,000 Jews in the West Bank over a period of five
years and 1.4 million Jews in the same area over a
period of 30 years. This plan is now actually being
carried out by means of the new process of illegally
confiscating land at the expense of the Arab inhabitants. I should also like to stress that changing the
nature of the settlements, which are by no means any
longer just small agricultural co-operatives but rather
urban centres situated near the Israeli frontier, often at
quite a distance from metropolitan zones which would
permit daily commuting, is a policy that will inevitably
hinder the application of any decision that may be
taken by a future Government that wishes to restore
those illegally acquired territories to the Arabs,

88. This year the expansionist policy of Israel has
been seen at its peak. In this chamber we have examined in detail the tragic results of the invasion of Lebanon by Israel. The international community reacted
firmly with an almost unanimous vote in the General
Assembly a few weeks ago, on 24 September [/*es&[ion ES-7/g]. That vote was important
because it
expressed the growing irritation of the international
community
at the consequences of Israel’s policy.
89. Today we have to deal with a rather different
aspect of the same question, but one directly connected with it. Over the last few months, the Committee over which it is my honour to preside has on
more than one occasion expressed the fear that, under
the cover of the tragic events in Lebanon, Israel,
profiting from the fact that the troubles it has created
in that country were monopolizing the attention of the
whole world, might be emboldened to put into effect
its plans for the illegal annexation of the West Bank
and the Gaza Strip to satisfy its ambitions based on
considerations
of its policy of security. There has
been overwhelming proof to justify our fears.

94. There are other Israeli policies and practices
which also threaten international peace and security by
exacerbating tension in the area. Almost every day
reports come in of repressive measures taken against
the civilian population of the West Bank and Gaza.
The papers report demonstrations
being dispersed
by force, with an inevitable loss of life. They report
that schools and other educational
establishments
have been closed for weeks or even months for reasons that are entirely unconvincing. We are told that
foreign teachers are being forced to sign political
declarations on pain of deportation.
We read in the

90. The most recent events in the Middle East have
drawn even more attention to the region. This has led
t0 a number of proposals to find a just, equitable
and
9

papers that mayors and other duly elected officials
have been dismissed from their posts. We are also
told that Israel has refused to extend the visa of a
distinguished personage of the Orthodox Church. All
these are practices which are hardly such as to Promote the restoration of peace in the region.
95. We should not forget that what we learn from
the media is but a fraction of what is actually happening
in the region. Nor should we forget that any failure
on our part to act in the face of this situation would
be a confession of failure for the Organization, as the
Secretary-General so eloquently stressed ‘in his recent
report.”

103. I wish also to extend to my brother and friend,
Mr, Kamanda wa Kamanda, all my best wishes in his
new task as Foreign Minister. Although I shall miss a
friend here, I know that his experience and knowledge are a source of reassurance to me and to the
Palestinian people, and we trust that he will put that
experience to the best use in our joint efforts to attain
a just and comprehensive peace in the land of peace,
in Palestine.
104. Mr. President, I wish to thank you and the members of the Council for having invited us to address
the Council. I wish to state here that we note with
satisfaction and appreciation the progressive change
in the attitude of one member as reflected in the voting
that took place at the start of this meeting.

96. The situation therefore represents a challenge to
the United Nations and it is up to us to meet this
challenge in the interests of peace and co-operation in
this region.

105. I should
quotation:

like to begin my statement

with

a

“Well, the position of the United States historically has been consistent and my own position on
settlements in the West Bank-Gaza area and on the
Golan Heights and in the Sinai has been consistent,
The Israeli Government knows perfectly well after
hours of discussion on this issue what my position
is. We do consider the creation of Israeli settlements
in these areas as being inconsistent with international law and as I’ve said many times, they are an
obstacle to peace.

97. I should not like to conclude, Sir, without
extending my congratulations and paying a tribute to
your distinguished
and brilliant
predecessor, the
representative of Jordan, our friend Mr. Nuseibeh,
for the exemplary fashion in which he conducted the
work of the Council last month.
98. In conclusion, I should like to appeal to the
members of the Council once again to examine this
question, which is of profound concern to us all and
which is threatening peace and security in the region,
so that justice may prevail and violence be stilled.

“Knowing that the Israeli Government still on
occasion authorizes new settlements-they
interpret the law differently from myself-1 hope that
the Israeli Government will severely restrain any
inclination either approved by the Knesset or done
without legal sanction to establish new settlements.
But there’s a limit to what we can do to impose our
will on a sovereign nation.”

99. The PRESIDENT
(interpretntion
from Sparzis/z): The next speaker is the representative of the
Palestine Liberation Organization, on whom I now
call.
100. Mr. TERZI
(Palestine Liberation
Organization): Mr. President, in expressing your sentiments and
those of the Council on the passing of the great leader,
President Brezhnev, you have voiced the deep sense
of loss to the world and to the cause of peace that the
PLO feels. We share your sentiments.

This is part of a statement by the President of the
United States which appeared in The Neut York Tims
on I May 1979. It could have applied equally now.
106. But we read in The N~II~ York Times of today,
12 November, the following statement by President
Reagan:

The speaker- continued in Sptrnish.

101. Mr. President, it is an honour and a pleasure
for me today to address the representative of a friendly
developing country and member of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries, which, moreover, represents
a people with whom the Palestinian people maintain
excellent and brotherly relations. We are convinced
that, under your able guidance, the Council will achieve
positive and fruitful results in promoting peace.

“Well, I don’t think that it would be good diplomacy to be threatening or anything. And I don’t
believe that’s necessary. I think that all of us realize
that peace is the ultimate goal there.”
This was in reply to the question:
“Mr. President, Israel continues to ignore your
call for a freeze on settlements in the West Bank.
How damaging is Israel’s ignoring of that freeze to
the peace process? And what are you prepared to
do about it?”

102. I should also like to express my pride in seeing
your predecessor, a son of Jerusalem, sitting there to
direct the work of the Council last month in exemplary fashion.

107. How much more evasive can one be? This
statement of the President of the United States was
10

preceded by a comment on 4 November by Mr. Alan
Romberg, a State Department spokesman, who said,
as reported in The New York Times of 5 November:

territories occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem,
and, in particular, not to transfer parts of its own
civilian population into the occupied Arab territories.”

” ‘The United States regards this latest announcement of Israel’s intention to begin work on additional
settlements as most unwelcome.’

Yet Israel completely ignores the Council’s
tion and persists in applying its policy,

” ‘As we have previously stated,’ he said, ‘we
cannot understand why, at a time when we are
actively seeking broader participation in the peace
process, Israel persists in a pattern of activity which
erodes the confidence of all, and most particularly
the Palestinians of the West Bank and Gaza, in the
possibilities for a just and fairly negotiated outcome
to the peace process.’

resofu-

I Il.
By 25 November 1980, the Security Council
Commission established under resolution 446 (1979) on
22 March 1979 had presented its third report [S/14268],
and this report-for
reasons not yet clear to us-was
filed among the historic archives and never brought
up for adoption, let alone discussion, by the Council.
One reason, however, was clearly mentioned in the
Council’s decision [~soll,tion 465 (/Y80)] that strongly
deplored the refusal by Israel to co-operate with the
Commission and regretted its formal rejection of resolutions 446 (1979) and 452 (1979). Apparently, the provisions of Article 25 of the Charter of the United
Nations do not apply to one of the more favoured
Members of the Organization, a creature of the United
Nations-perhaps
a Frankenstein
created by the
United Nations-or
at least those provisions are made
not to apply.

“Mr.
Romberg
added, ‘Settlements
activity
raises questions about Israel’s willingness to abide
by the promise of resolution 242 (1967) that territory
will be exchanged for true peace’.”
108. Does that not really cast doubt on Israel’s
intentions and its acceptance of the concept of peace
in the area? The statement says that clearly, but one
must read between the lines,

I 12. We deem it most relevant and important to recall
why the report of the Security Council Commission
established under resolution 446 (1979) was somehow
not brought to light. The answer lies in the document
itself, in chapter V, section B, entitled “Recommendations.” As 717 days have elapsed since that report
was submitted to the Council, let us recall what recommendations the Commission made: I quote:

109. It is relevant to recall that, on 1 September, as
reported in that same NW York Times article, President Reagan stated:
“The immediate adoption of a settlement freeze
by Israel, more than any other action, could create
the confidence needed for wider participation
in
these talks.

“In view of the observations and conclusions
above, the Commission would like to make the
following recommendations.

“Further settlement activity is in no way necessary for the security of Israel and only diminishes
the confidence of the Arabs that a final outcome can
be freely and fairly negotiated.”

“After a thorough assessment of the situation,
and in the light of the numerous recommendations
of the United Nations which are yet to be implemented to deal with the potentially explosive dangers therein, and in the light of the information
available, the Commission has come to the conclusion that appropriate ways and means under the
auspices of the United Nations should be found to
arrest the situation in the interests of the parties
involved, and in the interest of peace and security
in the region and the world at large,

I 10. For some time now, and particularly in its resolution 446 (1979), the Council has repeatedly determined:
“that the policy and practices of Israel in establishing settiements in the Palestinian and other Arab
territories occupied since 1967 have no legal validity
and constitute a serious obstruction to achieving a
comprehensive,
just and lasting peace in the Middle
East.”

“In the Commission’s view, the problem of settlements and occupation raises fundamental problems
for peace. The longer they continue to persist, the
greater the potential for escalating the conflict,
Mutual trust and acceptance through coexistence
will be rendered difficult if not impossible in the area
if the opportunities
are missed. The Commission
perceived a clear consensus in favour of a negotiated settlement and believes that the international
community
should take advantage of that favourable climate to advance the resolution of the prob-

Yet Israel persists in applying that policy and in pursuing those same practices. In that same resolution,
the Council called upon Israel:
“as the occupying Power, to abide scrupulously by
the Geneva Convention . , , of. . . 1949, to rescind
its previous measures and to desist from taking any
action which would result in changing the legal
status and geographical nature and materially
affecting the demographic composition of the Arab
11

lem. The Commission is of the view that the settlements policy is one of the major components at the
core of the conflict in the area.

Reagan knows full well what kind of response he is
getting and that he has no need to wait for Mr. Begin
to come and tell him what it is.

“In that context, the Commission considers that
the persistent refusal of Israel to heed the repeated
appeals of the Security Council on the matter should
be censured.

117. It is very important for every one of us to note
that such colonial settlement activity is not undertaken by pioneers in the wilderness and at random,
The planning is made at a much higher level with, of
course, some aims, Deputy Prime Minister David Levi
reassured the colonial settlers that “from now on the
settlements will be established
with a permanent
infrastructure, including governmental
institutions”.
I am sure that members of the Council will recall that
the Drobles plan is still being implemented. That plan
was discussed extensively in the Council three years
ago.

“The Commission once again deems it necessary
to reiterate its earlier recommendation
that the
Security Council, bearing in mind the inalienable
rights of the Palestinians to return to their homeland, again draw the attention of the Government
and people of Israel to the disastrous consequences
which the settlement policy is bound to have on any
attempt to reach a peaceful solution in the Middle
East.” [S/14268, ptrtm. 241-245.1

118. Now, these Israeli policies are not surprising
if one recalls that Jewish colonial settlers were given
the same rights in the occupied Palestinian territory
as those enjoyed by citizens in what is known as
Israel proper. I refer specifically to rights granted by
the Israeli Government regarding the use of land bought
or acquired from the State. But I should like to clarify
who are the owners of these lands.

113. Those recommendations,
of which I have read
only a portion, were filed to accumulate dust in the
archives of the Council, and the Council was somehow prevented from considering them. I would believe
that somehow somebody in the Council had tried to
protect Israel, which is very clearly accused for its
persistent refusal to co-operate and carry out the decisions of the Security Council.

119. A book published officially
by the Jewish
National Fund-the
Keren Kayemeth
Leisrael-in
1949 in Jerusalem under the title, Jcn’ish Vi/loges i/l
IS/UP/, admits that the land in question is at law the
property of Palestinian Arabs. As I shall be reading
out the following passages from that book, it should
be kept in mind that the total land occupied in 1949
by Israel was more than 8,000 square miles-that
is,
20 million donums. The passages read:

114. All of these recommendations
are very fine,
but we must consider the position of Tel Aviv on this
issue. Ariel Sharon, the Zionist War Minister, that
bulldozer that advances on the corpses of innocent
civilians, declared in the 6 October issue of H~‘aretz
that: “The real struggle of Israel is the struggle on all
Eretz Yisrael, the struggle on the land of Israel.” Yet,
on 27 October, the Je~rrsalem Post quoted him in a
more explicit way: “Massive settlement all over [the
West Bank] is the best answer to various plans that
outsiders are trying to foist on Israel.” That statement
was made after repeated requests by President Reagan
and others. I am certain that Ariel Sharon does not
really refer to the Security Council, because for him
the Council is a thing to be viewed with utter
contempt.

“Of the entire area of the State of Israel, only
about 300,000 to 400,000 donums-apart
from the
desolate rocky area of the southern Negev, at present
quite unfit for cultivation-are
State domain which
the Israel Government took over from the Mandatory regime. The Jewish National Fund and private
Jewish owners possess under 2 million donums.
Almost all the rest belongs at law to Arab owners,
many of whom have left the country. The fate af
these Arabs will be settled when the terms of the
peace treaties between Israel and its Arab neighbours are finally drawn up.”

115. A so-called democratically
elected member of
the Knesset, a certain Hanan Porat, declared his determination in October 1982, when he said: “By next
summer we should pass the critical mass by doubling
the population in the West Bank.” But neither Sharon
nor Porat are alone in promoting aggression.

120. That was written in 1949, and the fate of those
Arabs will be decided when peace treaties are COP
eluded between Israel and its Arab neighbours, thus
completely forgetting that there is a human element,
which is the Palestinian people, and that this is their
land.

116. In response to the statement made by President
Reagan on 1 September, the Settlement Department
in the Jewish Agency, together with the Settlement
Division of the so-called Jewish Labour Federation
-the Histadrut-concluded
the preparation of the
Strategic plan for settlement activities in the next five
years. More than 100,000 new Jewish settlers will be
joining the colonial settlers already trespassing on
our land. That was reported in the Tel Aviv daily,
Ho’N,‘efz, of 29 September. I am sure that President

121. The question that should be faced here in the
Council is: what is to be done? Does the Council COP
tinue to deal with the ramifications
or does it deal
with the roots? Does it continue to deal with derive
tives or does it deal with the origins? The Council is
called upon to bring the prolonged occupation to afl
12

end, so that the Palestinian people can exercise its
right to self-determination
in at least one part of its
homeland. This is the prerequisite for peace, and this
goes even to those who speak of negotiations. We ask:
negotiations with whom? Is not the Palestinian people-represented
by the PLO-the
principal party in
any negotiations on the future of the Palestinian people
and Palestinian territory? And negotiate what? Negotiate the peace? But how can anyone in his right mind
think that peace to some should be at the price of the
elimination of the principal party or, at least, the
acquiescence of the Palestinians
to abandon their
inalienable rights, specifically their right to live in
peace and dignity in their own homes in their own
country?
122. Colonial settlements are not the only cursed
result of occupation. A human-or,
rather, an inhuman-aspect of occupation is the treatment and the
fate of human beings, even if we minimize the matter
and address ourselves only to the so-called Palestinian inhabitants-and
some people have now developed the luxury of saying: let us deal now with the
Palestinian inhabitants in the West Bank and Gazaeven this fragment of the Palestinian people which is
still heroically and defiantly struggling for its survival
in that part of beautiful Palestine, in Jerusalem, in
Nablus, in Bethlehem, in Hebron and in Gaza. Yes,
what is the fate of this fragment of the Palestinian
people? Is it not the confiscation of their homes, their
water, their lifeline-the
arteries of life? Can the
Council humanly and morally shelve the concerns over
all these atrocities committed against our brothers and
sisters, our mothers and our children? Can it avoid or
evade this responsibility?
123, The so-called Palestinian inhabitant is denied
even the right to participate in the deliberation of its
legislative body, the Palestine National Council.

And what exactly does it require from a prospective
faculty member? It says:
to mY request
for the issuance of a work
permit for the academic year 19X2-1983 which was
submitted
on ____
and without affecting my
general Commitment
as per the request referred to
above, I hereby declare that I am fully comhitted
against indulging in any act offering any assistance
to the organization considered to be hostile to the
State of Israel as indicated in the act for the prevention of acts of belligerence and enemy propaganda . . . [such] acts being of a direct or indirect
nature.”
“PUrSUant

126. Is it not terrible that, in the scholastic system
of a so-called democracy B la Israel, all teachers must
sign a pIedge that they disassociate themselves from
their pupils and the aspirations of their people?
127. Scores of faculty members have been denied
permits to pursue their mission-and
teaching is not
merely a wage-earning profession: it is a mission,
128. Yesterday-l
I November-the
Israeli military
Government
denied the extension of work permits to
two more faculty members of the Bir Zeit University,
Over the past two days, such repressive measures have
been escalated against Palestinian academic institutions. The Israeli military authorities in Ramallah,
just north of Jerusalem, have summoned 16 professors
from the Bir Zeit University. Three of them have been
ordered to leave the West Bank. The remaining 13, of
various foreign nationalities, have been banned from
any activities at the University. Fifteen more Bir Zeit
professors have been ordered to appear at the military
governor’s headquarters next Monday for interrogation, And why? Because they have refIllsed to sign
that atrocious and infamous form.
129, Six professors from Al-Najah University were
ordered, by the civil administration in the West Bank,
to leave the area on 26 October. Two of the professors
hold Jordanian passports and their visas expire in
mid-November.
Of course they hold Jordanian passports; maybe they are Palestinians, but to go to their
homes they need visas. The other four professors
hold American and Canadian passports and their visas
will expire in January 1983, but, although their visas
are still valid, the civil administration toId them that
they no longer could enter the University or be reached
there, because they have no work permits. According
to the Jervscdern Post of 26 October,

124. In reply to a question as to whether Palestinians
in the occupied Palestinian territory would be permitted to return to their homes if they accepted the
invitation to attend the meeting of the Palestine National Council, Nrr’rrrctz, on 25 October, reported that
a high-ranking officer of the military Government
stated that there had been orders forbidding people
from the territories from such participation.
Thus,
the Palestinian bantustan-dwellers
are denied even
this right, and, should they disobey, they will not be
allowed to live in their own homes.
12.5. I am sure that all the members of the Council
are aware of the arbitrary regulations against the
educational institutions
in the occupied Palestinian
territory. One tangible form of repression is the atrocious UOVeltY of forcing all faculty members to sign
a documentdisidentifying themselves from their own
People as a prerequisite to their being granted work
permits. That form has been circulated in one of the
documents before the Council [see S//539/, nnrzex].

“The number of faculty members thus removed
from AI-Najah
[University in Nablusl is now 18,
all of whom have refused to sign an oath condemning
the PLO. . .
“A spokesman for AI-Najah said on Sunday that
the expulsions are endangering the continuation of
this year’s studies.”

13

” ‘Another problem is that the university must get
through a yearly licence review by Israeli authorities without any formal criteria for approvals,’ the
Christian Brother said.

130. On 6 November, The New York Titnes reported
that a British biology instructor,
Mark Cheverton,
had been deported the previous day for refusing to
sign that infamous and atrocious form. I am sure that
all members of the Council have heard that the British
Consul in Jerusalem has protested against that act.
Mr. Cheverton described the form as “highly offensive
to a people already deprived of democracy and selfdetermination”.
He also said: “it can only stir up
more trouble by breeding resentment. I object to this
attempt to make me interfere with other people’s
politics and thus to offend those I am trying to work
with and teach.”

” ‘Then there are the denials or delays on what
seem to be perfectly legitimate requests. We wanted
to use our hotel management courses to train Christian tour guides, for example, and this was turned
down. A United Nations aid programme that would
have provided us with computer training was stalled
so long it was withdrawn,’ he said.”
133. While on the subject of computers, I remind
the Security Council that Bir Zeit University was
denied an import permit to introduce a computer for
its own administrative functions. I do not want to be
sarcastic, but maybe the Israeli military Government
wants to spare us Palestinians the blessings of modern
technology. Motivated by its racist ideology, it wants
the Palestinian people to continue to be less sophisticated and maybe adhere to the primitive. But we
assure them that we shall advance, because we are
determined.

13 1. According to the same Nov York Times report,
Brother Thomas Scanlan, Vice-Chancellor
of Bethlehem University, told reporters: “we strongly object
to the military’s
efforts to politicize our work at the
University”.
He said that the requirement for foreign
faculty members interfered “in our religious mission to
serve the Palestinian
people through higher education”.
132.
Ywk

In its issue of 17 October,
revealed the following:

the Catholic

New

134, There are other forms of atrocities. For example,
the Israeli military governor of Gaza summoned more
than 50 Palestinian
professionals-lawyers,
judges
and others-to
the military headquarters, where they
were warned about refusing to respond to invitations
by the Israeli military to attend public functions. They
were ordered to respond to the invitations in future.
That is an act of humiliation
and the arrogance of a
racist colonialist.
There are other, more concrete
manifestations of the curse of occupation.

“The University of Bethlehem, founded in 1973
at the request of Pope Paul VI, had been closed last
June after students demonstrated against the Israeli
invasion of Lebanon. Officially, it is now open, but
Brother Scanlan said only a handful of students are
coming through the Israeli road-blocks.
“A principal obstacle is an Israeli requirement
that faculty and students sign a document specifically rejecting support of the Palestine Liberation
Organization.

135. What is to be done? The exacerbation of the
situation is a direct result of the prolonged occupaw
tion. Consequently, it is incumbent upon the Council
to take effective measures to bring the occupation to
an end, thus creating the first pre-condition for the
process of peace. In the name of the Palestinian people
and of the PLO, I ask: will the Council be permitted
to carry out the task assigned to it by the Charter?

” ‘If the paper only asked for a general rejection
of terrorism and support for the occupying forces,
it might not be a problem,’
Brother Scanlan said,
‘But asking the signers to reject the PLO is another
matter. Most Palestinians, perhaps 85 per cent, recognize it as their government in exiIe.’
” ‘The university is owned by the Vatican and
the Christian Brothers,’ he said. ‘Pope Paul founded
it after his visit to the Holy Land because he was
appalled at the rate of migration of Christians from
the area. He was afraid that the holy places would
become nothing more than museums,
with no
Christian populations living there.’

136. Mr.

KAMANDA
(Zaire)
I should like to say first
how pleased I am, Sir, to see you presiding over the
Council for the month of November. Knowing Your
vast diplomatic
experience and your outstanding
qualities of spirit and mind, I am convinced that the
Council is in the hands of an extremely skilled statesman fully familiar with major international problems
at this particularly troubling time.

(interpretation

“The university is sponsored by the Vatican Congregation for Eastern Rites and has 1,100 full-time
students and 200 part-time students.

KAMANDA

wa

from French):

137. I also pay a tribute to your predecessor,
Mr. Nuseibeh, of Jordan, for the distinction with which
he conducted the Council’s work during October.

*‘All the students are Palestinians,
with 40 per
cent Christian and 60 per cent Muslim. There are
17 Americans on the faculty, including three Christian Brothers, two Jesuit priests, and seven sisters
from various communities,

138. I take this opportunity to ask Mr. TroyanevskY
and the Soviet delegation to convey to the Government
and people of the Soviet Union and to the family of
14

President Leonid Brezhnev, our most heartfelt condolences on the passing of this illustrious man, who
unquestionably
marked the international
relations
of our times with his great political stature and his will
for dCtente. We hope that despite his passing, which
has caused such sorrow to the Government and people of the Soviet Union, a country with which we have
had cordial relations of friendship and co-operation
for so long, that country will continue to make its
indispensable
contribution
to the maintenance
of
international
peace and security, the peaceful coexistence of States and harmony in international relations.

political figure and statesman of the contemporary
world has departed this life. His multifaceted activities were connected with the most important stages
of the history of our State. He played an eminent role
in shaping and carrying out the foreign policy of the
Soviet Union, a policy of peace and peaceful coexistence, dCtente, disarmament,
the prevention of a
nuclear catastrophe, support for the national liberation
movements
and decisively rebuffing the forces of
aggression and war.
142. Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev was aware of the important role played by the United Nations, and he repeatedly stressed that the Soviet Union supported the
efforts of the Organization to strengthen peace and
international
security and to develop co-operation
among States in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations. In a message from the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, the
Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, the Council of Ministers
of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the Communist Party and the Soviet people, it is stressed that
the internal and foreign policies of the Communist
Party of the Soviet Union elaborated under the guidance of Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev will continue to be
pursued consistently and in a purposeful manner.

139, I am deeply moved as I leave the atmosphere
of this glass house-which
reflects the strong and weak
currents in the world and strives to be faithful to the
San Francisco Charter’s prescription for a world of
peace-and
in particular as I leave the Security Council, where I have had the inestimable honour and
privilege to meet people of such quality.
140, In thanking you, Mr. President, as well as all
the other speakers who have addressed such kind
words to me, I wish to assure you that the Republic
of Zaire will continue, as in the past, to support the
lofty mission of the United Nations and, in particular,
the efforts and actions of the Security Council and
the Secretary-General,
in the Middle East and elsewhere, for the maintenance of international
peace
and security,
I4 I,

Mr. TROY ANOVSKY

ist Republics)

(Union of Soviet Social-

(interpretation from Rrrssictn): Mr. Presi-

dent,

allow me to express my sincere gratitude to
and to those representatives who have
spoken here. I should like to thank them for their
condolences on the passing away of the General Secretary
of the Central Committee of the Communist
Party of the Soviet Union and President of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev. A great
you personally

1 Geneva
Cdnvention
relative
Persons in Time of War. (United
No. 973. p, 287).
.
.I Report
of the Secretary-General
ization (A/37/l).

15

to the
Nations,
on

Protection
of
T~~~trfv SuYcs.
the work

Civilian
vol. 75,

of the Organ-

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

publications
your bookstore

NATIONS

may be ohtaincd
From hookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales Section,
New York or Geneva.

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

Les publications
dcs Nations
Unies
rnonde enticr.
Informez-vous
auprb
da ventes,
New York ou Gcneve.

COMO

CONSECtJlR

in United

Nations.

New

York

DES NATIONS

sent en vente darts les librairies
de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
todas partes del mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York
o Ginebra.

Lithu

PUBLICATIONS

DE LAS NAClONES

Unidas
estin en vcnta en librerias
a su librero
o dirljase
a: Nacioncs

00400

UNIES

et les agences
a : Nations

dcpositnires
du
Unies, Section

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidoras
cn
Unidas.
Section
de Ventas,

88-6098%-October

1989---2.n~o
