UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

17

th

NEW

MEETING:

23 FEBRUARY 1983

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2417)

1

.*,.....,.......,l..*,....**.........

Adoption of the agenda . . . . , , . , . . . . . , , . . . , . . , . , . . . , , . . , , , . . . . , , . . . . . . . .

1

Letter dated 19 February 1983 from the Permanent Representative of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council(S/l5615)
,.....,,...,,..,....,.,...,,...,....,,...,...,,....

1

S/PI’.2417

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol W...) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2417th
Held

MEETING

in New York on Wednesday,

23 February

President: Mr. Oleg Aleksandrovich

TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

the German Democratic Republic, Hungary, Madagascar and Viet Nam in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda. In
accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
conformity with Article 31 of the Charter and rule 37 of
the ‘provisional rules of procedure.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.

At’the inviration of the President, Mr. Suja (Czechoslovakia), Mr. Ott (German Democratic Republic), Mr. Rdcz
(Hungary), Mr. Rabetafka (Madagascar) and Mr. Le Kim
Chung (Viet Nam) took the places reservedfor them at the
side of the Council chamber.

Provisional agenda (SIAgendaI2417)
1. Adoption

1983, at 10.30 a.m.

of the agenda

2. Letter dated 19 February 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to
the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/15615)

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russian):The
first speaker is the representative of Benin. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

The meeting was called to order at 11.30 a-m.

4. Mr. SOGLO (Benin) (interpretation from French):
Mr. President, I should like first of all to tell you how
grateful I am for the great honour you have confered on
me by allowing me to address the representatives of the
States members of the Council on behalf of the People’s
Republic of Benin.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Letter dated 19 February 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15615)

5. I am also pleased that this debate, on the deterioration of the situation off the Libyan coast, in the Gulf of
Sidra, is taking place under your competent leadership.
Indeed, you are the distinguished representative of a
great country, the Soviet Union, with which my country
is gratified to have the closest and most cordial relations,
a country which more than 64 years ago raised high the
banner of the glorious October revolution and thus gave
to all the proletarians, all the oppressed and all the
damned of the earth the hope for a new dawn of freedom, dignity and prosperity. I am therefore convinced
that, with your outstanding qualities and your firmness,
our debates will bring successful results.

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russian): In
accordance with the decision taken by the Council at its
2415th meeting, I invite the representative of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya to take a place at the Council table; I
invite the representatives of Benin, Democratic Yemen,
Egypt, Ghana, the Islamic Republic of Iran, the Sudan and
the Syrian Arab Republic to take the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Treiki (Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya) took a place at the Council table; Mr.
SogIo (Benin), Mr. Al-Ashtal (Democratic Yemen), Mr.
Khalil (Egypt), Mr. Gbeho (Ghana), Mr. RajaieKhorassani (Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Abdalla
(Sudan) andMr, El-Fattal (Syrian Arab Republic) took the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber,

6. I should also like to tell your predecessor, the representative of Togo, our brother Atsu Koffi Amega, how
grateful we are for the very remarkable way in which he
conducted the work of the Council last month. No less
could have been expected of such a seasoned diplomat,
who combines a complete knowledge of the facts with an
innate vitality and dynamism.

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russian): I
would like to inform members of the Council that I have
received letters from the representatives of Czechoslovakia,

7. The people and the Government of Benin could not
fail to be concerned at the situation which, since 16 February, has prevailed in the Mediterranean off the coast of
1

Libya. As soon as the events were reported, the Head of
State of Benin, Mathieu Kerekou, addressed to his
Libyan counterpart a telegram, which I shall now read
out:
“The news which has just reached us concerning the
military manoeuvres now in progress in the Mediterranean and in the regions adjoining the Socialist People’s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya is a matter of great
concern to us.
“There can now be no doubt that these military
manoeuvres constitute a threat to the security, peace
and stability of the peoples and States of the region,
“In that connection, we should like, on behalf of the
Beninese people, of their leading party, the People’s
Revolutionary Party of Benin, of their National Executive Council, and on our own behalf, to assure you of
our total support and our active solidarity in your
determination to defend the Socialist People’s Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya
and the achievements of its
revolution.
“We reiterate our unfailing dedication to the ideals
of peace, equality and social justice so dear to our two
peoples.
“Now and in the future, as in the past, the Beninese
people will militantly support any action designed to
safeguard peace, cohesion and good understanding in
all corners of Africa so that the peoples of these
regions may devote themselves whole-heartedly to the
national tasks of construction and development,”
8. By its participation in this debate, my delegation
wishes only to reaffirm the immutable principles on the
basis of which the United Nations was founded and to
which we have al1 declared our commitment.
9. In fact, non-interference in the internal affairs of
other States and the peaceful settlement of disputes have
always constituted the key principles on which the foreign policy of my country has been based. This is why the
Government of Benin has always deplored any policy
based on force or the threat of force, from any source, in
international relations.
10. If the Council were able to invite the various parties
to the conflict to heed these principles, it would discharge
the primary task incumbent upon it and protect the peoples of the region from a situation which threatens not
only their efforts at construction and development but
also international peace and security.
11. Ready for the revolution,

the struggle continues!

12. Mr. NATORF (Poland): At the very outset, I wish
to associate myself with the cordial words of welcome
extended to our new colleague, Mr. Abdullah Salah, of
Jordan. My delegation wishes him every success in discharging his duties.

13. The item on our agenda today is the letter dated 19
February from the representative of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya addressed to the President of the Council
requesting an urgent meeting of the Council to consider
the deteriorating situation near the Libyan shores that
could jeopardize the security and peace of the region and
the world.
14. For a few days the world has been watching the
development of the situation with grave concern and
attention. AWACS aircraft were dispatched by the
United States to a country neighbouring Libya. The
United States aircraft-carrier Nimitz, accompanied bY
some naval vessels, was deployed close to the Libyan
coast.
15. Coupled with those military moves was a press campaign maintained at a high pitch, as well as unfriendly if
not openly hostile statements addressed to Libya.
16. These actions of the United States were unprovoked. There is no justification for them. The Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya has on numerous occasions, both in the
past and now, confirmed that it has no intention whatsoever of interfering in the internal affairs of any country
and that it is anxious to see security and peace prevail in
the area. Such confirmation was given once again in the
statement delivered yesterday by the representative of
Libya [2415th meeting], who also presented a long list Of
self-evident facts testifying to the hostile steps against
Libya taken by the United States. The efforts to prove
the allegations, accusations and false suggestions that the
moves were connected with “plotting to overthrow” one
of the neighbouring Governments are condemned to failure. They will not be found credible by world public
opinion, It will not be easy to believe claims that the
depioyment of naval vessels and the air force in the
region had been planned beforehand as a training exercise. Neither can one easily accept charges that the
Libyan policy towards its neighbours posed a threat to
the security of the region. Interestingly, none of its neighbours has requested a meeting of the Council.
17. The provocations against Libya stem from the policy of confrontation based on military threats, intimidation and coercion that is being pursued by the United
States Administration.
It is this very policy that is airned
at influencing events and at interfering in the internal
affairs of others whenever they are not to the liking of
that Administration.
The efforts to apply this policy are
well known in other regions of the world also, and in
many countries, including my own.
18. My country attaches particular importance to the
question of the consolidation of peace. Not so long ago,
in the Political Declaration adopted at the meeting of the
Political Consultative Committee of the States Parties to
the Warsaw Treaty, held at Prague on 4 and 5 January,
Poland, together with other socialist members of the
defensive alliance, noted, inter &a, that:
“the improvement of the situation in the world is to a
great extent connected with the elimination of existing

and prevention of new flashpoints of military conflict
in Asia, Africa, Latin America and other areas”

Council, because it shares the concern of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya and other States that a deterioration of
the situation in that region could have dangerous consequences for peace and security.

[S/1.5556, annex, sect. Iv].

19. Hence, my delegation has followed the present
debate with keen interest and attention. We took note,
inter aliu, of the statement made yesterday by the representative of Malta, [2416rh meeting], in which he spoke
about the responsibility of the regional Powers for building the structures of peace and security in their region,
including the possibility of changing the Mediterranean
into a zone of peace.

26. The peoples of the non-aligned countries in Africa,
as well as in Asia and Latin America, have embarked
upon a road of independent development. They resolutely oppose all attempts by imperialist Powers to interfere in their internal affairs and attempts by those Powers
to achieve their neo-colonialist aims through pressure
and blackmail, through threats and use of force. The
German Democratic Republic holds the view that the
peoples and States in the Middle East also are able to
solve their problems by their own sovereign decisions. To
this end, they need neither an imperialist world gendarme
nor a self-appointed arbitrator who wants to dictate law
and order to them through gunboat politics. Many
people concerned about the maintenance of peace in the
world rightly wonder why the United States is once again
demonstrating its policy of strength thousands of miles
away from its own territory on the pretext of safeguarding its so-called vital interests. This is obviously an element of the imperialist course of confrontation and
super-armament, of the crusade against social progress
and national liberation in the world. It is also no secret
that imperialism is pursuing the aim of extending its military presence in the Middle East and of implementing its
hegemonistic endeavours in that region.

20. At this point, may I recall that it has been the
States Parties to the Warsaw Treaty which have for years
consistently been putting forward proposals concerning
the lowering of the level of deployment of the naval forces of the opposing military blocks in the Mediterranean.
In the above-mentioned Political Declaration, they called
for the opening of talks on the limitation of naval activities, on the limitation and reduction of naval equipment
and on the application of confidence-building measures
to seas and oceans. They were in favour of withdrawing
nuclear-equipped vessels from the Mediterranean and of
renouncing the deployment of nuclear weapons on the
territory of Mediterranean
non-nuclear
countries
[S/155.56, annex, sect. If/.

21. If the other parties concerned had responded to
these proposals constructively, we could now have been
much closer to attaining the objective set forth in the
statements of Malta, Libya and other countries of the
region.

27. The “strategic alliance” between the United States
and Israel and the refusal to contribute to a comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the Middle East problem
serve that purpose, Also aimed at achieving this purpose
is the creation of a so-called rapid deployment force
which can now already be moved in full strength to the
region of the Middle East and the Near East within the
shortest possible time. A United States central military
command for this region has the task of setting up new
military bases and of conducting and co-ordinating military action, The true causes of the persistent increase in
tensions in the region of the Middle East and the Mediterranean, as well as in other areas of the world, can be
found in this imperialist policy.

22. In accordance with the provisions of the Ch-ter of
the United Nations, the Council is.responsible for maintaining peace and security. Today, in discharging this
duty, we focus our attention on the unprovoked actions
which bring potential dangers. The Charter places an
obligation on all Members to
“refrain in their international relations from the threat
or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State, or in any other
manner inconsistent with the purposes of the United
Nations .”

28. This is becoming visible on the European continent,
where, because of the planned deployment of new American medium-range nuclear missiles, peace and security
are greatly threatened. In Latin America and the Caribbean, new provocations are persistently launched against
the independence and sovereignty of the States and peoples of those regions. In southern Africa, the apartheid
rtgime is encouraged to perpetrate new acts of aggression
against sovereign States. In many regions of Asia, new
tensions are provoked by the imperialist
policy of
confrontation.

23. We wish to point out that these provisions should
be strictly observed by all Members of the United
Nations, including the United States, a permanent
member of the Security Council.
24. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russian):
The next speaker is the representative of the German
Democratic Republic. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

29. Faithful to the principles of its socialist foreign policy and devoted to the principles and purposes of the
Charter of the United Nations, the German Democratic
Republic opposes military and political actions which
dangerously increase tensions, and unswervingly supports a peaceful solution of all international issues. The

25. Mr. OTT (German Democratic Republic): The
Council must again deal with problems in the region of
the Middle East and the Mediterranean. My delegation
understands the request made by the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya for the convening of an urgent meeting of the
3

ment had dispatched no offensive aircraft into the
disputed area and had thus violated no Libyan airspace
or Libyan territorial waters, she did not challenge the
list of aggressive and destabilizing acts and intentions
against Libya which was cited by the Libyan representative. Instead, she drew attention to what she referred to
as Libya’s policy threatening the peace and security of
that country’s neighbours,

German Democratic Republic continues to side with the
people of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and with the other
Arab States in their struggle for the preservation of their
independence and national sovereignty.
30. Mr. MASHINGAIDZE
(Zimbabwe): I wish first of
all, Sir, to add my own voice to those of the many who
have already congratulated you on your assumption of
the presidency for this month. Because of your wellknown diplomatic qualities and wide experience, as well
as your personal charm, the current deliberations of the
Council are already assured of a successful outcome.

37. The United States representative further warned
that her country would intervene wherever and whenever
it felt that Libya was threatening a country which is
friendly to the United States. Indeed, she affirmed her
country’s rights in that regard. Accordingly, it has been
argued that the dispatching of hideous and sophisticated
military equipment to North Africa last week was done
in pursuit of this objective. That is all in spite of the
assurances by both Egypt and the Sudan that neither of
them had been threatened by Libya. It would appear lo
us, therefore, that last week’s events, which naturally
caused so much consternation and outrage in Libya and
other parts of the world, including the United States
itself, were prompted by motives other than the protection of a friendly country or countries. In our view, it
would appear that last week’s events were prompted by a
desire on the part of the United States to settle some
undisclosed scores with Libya.

31. Through you, Mr. President, I wish to pay a richly
deserved tribute also to your predecessor, the representative of Togo, Mr. Amega, for the exemplary manner in
which he presided over the business of the Council during the month of January.
32. On my own behalf, and on behaIf of the Zimbabwe
delegation, I should also like warmly to welcome the
new representative of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan,
Mr. Abdullah Salah. My delegation looks forward to an
excellent working relationship with him, as we have
always had with his predecessor.
33, The current meetings of the Council have been convened at the request of the Government of the Socialist
People’s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to “consider the deteriorating situation near the Libyan shores that could jeopardize the security and peace of the region and the
world”, to quote from the letter which the Libyan representative addressed to the President of the Council on 19
February. The letter, further, attributed this deterioration of the situation to what it called the “provocative
military actions of the United States Administration”,
which moved its nuclear-powered aircraft-carrier Nimitz
and some other naval vessels too close to the Libyan
coast. It is also reported that, in addition, the United
States dispatched four air-force airborne warning and
control system planes, called AWACS, to Libya’s eastern
neighbour, Egypt. These very sophisticated planes, we
are told, have been sent there for the purpose of carrying
out spying and surveillance activities over the already
troubled and dangerously sensitive Libyan territory and
waters.

38. The Council must make it clear to all concerned
that no country, no matter how powerful, has any right
or authority to arrogate to itself the role of policing the
world; that while countries have every right to define
their national interests and aspirations as they perceive
them, no country has any right to pursue its rights in a
manner which endangers regional or international stability, peace and security. There can be no doubt that the
dispatching of hideous and sophisticated military equip
ment to North Africa last week by the United States
dangerously threatened regional and world peace and
security. The Council must particularly deplore and
denounce such reckless actions and violations of the
Charter of the United Nations, especially when the perpetrators are its members, indeed its permanent members,
which should be aware of their special responsibility
under the Charter.
39. The events of last week must have surprised and,
indeed, shocked all the members of the Council, as they
did us of the Zimbabwe delegation, taking place as they
did at a time when the Council is carrying out serious
consultations on the report of the Secretary-Genera1 on
the work of the Organization in order to make the Council more effective in its role as the guarantor of international peace and security.

34. The Libyan charges, however, have been rejected as
“false and malicious” by the representative of the United
States in a letter of 22 February addressed to the President of the Council. The United States representative,
further, made counter-accusations against Libya, whose
policies, she said, posed a threat to international peace
and security [see S/15617].
35. In his statement before the Council on 22 February
[2415rh meeting], the Libyan representative catalogued
numerous acts of aggression and destabilization perpetrated by the United States Government against his
country.

40. Finally, because of the by now all-too-familiar
and
long history of unhappy United States-Libyan relations
caused in part by United States military manoeuvres in
the disputed region and also because of the likely threat
of those unhappy relations to international peace and
security if allowed to persist-and also partly because the
United States has only partially withdrawn its sophisti-

36. Although, for her part, the United States representative maintained [ibid.] that the United States Govern4

cated equipment from the area-the Council must continue to be seized of the question beyond this series of
meetings until it is satisfied that the situation has
changed for the better.

ately violated Libyan airspace in August 1981 and even
went so far as to open fire on Libyan planes that were on
mission within the boundaries of the national territory of
the Jamahiriya. It is easy to imagine, therefore, how the
risks of explosive conflicts between Libyan military forces and American military forces could escalate were the
current presence of American naval and air forces to
continue to be maintained so near to the international
frontiers of the Jamahiriya.

41. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russian):
The next speaker is the representative of Viet Nam. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
42.

Mr. LE KIM

CHUNG

48. It is appropriate to take note of the fact that the
new acts of provocation by the United States against the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya represent the culminating point
in a premeditated and hostile campaign of subversion,
intimidation
and destruction that has been waged for a
long time against the people’s socialist rCgime in Libya,
as well as against other progressive non-aligned countries
in the region, a campaign intended both to divide the
Arab States in order to subjugate them and to impose
United States imperialist domination
throughout the
Middle East region.

(Viet Nam) (interpretation

from French): I should like to begin by extending to you,

Sir, on behalf of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, our
warm congratulations on your assuming the presidency
for this month and to wish you every success in the discharge of your weighty responsibilities in the interest of
maintaining international peace and security.
43. I should also like to convey my best wishes to all the
members of the Council, and particularly to the newly
elected members.

49. Of particular gravity is the fact that such brazen
acts are being perpetrated by the United States itself, a
permanent member of the Security Council and therefore
a country bearing the main responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security. This is a threat
to use the force of arms against a peace-loving Arab
State, a member of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and a Member of the United Nations, in absolute
violation of the fundamental principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and international law, as well as of
the elementry rules governing the conduct of equal and
sovereign States. Such arrogance is particularly intolerable in that it was blatantly displayed yesterday, in a
solemn meeting of the Council, by the representative of
the United States [24/5th meeting], who reaffirmed that
her country was prepared to repeat similar acts of military provocation.

44. Lastly, I should like to thank members of the Council for having given me this opportunity to address the
Council at this time.
45. Scarcely had the Council terminated the meetings
that were convened to consider the danger inherent in the
policy of annexation practised by Israel in the occupied
Arab and Palestinian territories than it has been called
upon to meet once again post-haste today to examine the
serious situation that has been created by the acts of
military threat and provocation perpetrated by the
United States against the Socialist People’s Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya.
46.

After having fabricated a so-called Libyan threat
the Sudan, the United States Government was
emboldened to send large naval and air forces to the
immediate vicinity of the sea and land frontiers of the
Jamahiriya, to engage in activities there extremely hostile
to that country. The Jamahiriya has thus had to confront
a serious threat of aggression against its sovereignty and
its territorial integrity, a threat likely to generate explosive situations that will militate against the peace and
security of the entire Mediterranean region.

against

50. This, however, reveals the international-policeman
mentality and acts that the United States has not hesitated to employ in other circumstances in various parts
of the world in order to impose its diktat and its hegemony upon peoples of countries that are resolutely struggling to safeguard their dignity, their freedom and their
independence.

47. In his letter dated 18 February, addressed to the
President of the Council [S/15614], the representative of
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya reaffirmed his country’s
policy of peace and good-neighbourliness and demonstrated that there was no valid justification for such farreaching acts, responsibility for which must be borne
solely by the United States. We can get a better idea of
the serious nature of the threat that has been posed by
these new acts of provocation if we recall the anachronistic position of the United States with regard to the extent
of the territorial waters of coastal States. Indeed, pointedly ignoring the new United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea,’ which has fixed the extent of territorial
waters at 12 nautical miles, the United States Government persists in recognizing a limit of only 3 miles. It was
in the light of that concept that the United States deliber-

51. In this connection, I would invite representatives to
recall the famous so-called Gulf of Tonkin incident, an
incident that was entirely trumped up by the United
States in 1964 as a pretext for unleashing its war of
destruction against what was then North Viet Nam. May
I here stated parenthetically that there is in fact a striking
similarity between the present situation obtaining on the
Libyan maritime borders and that which then prevailed
off the coast of Viet Nam. Indeed, the Gulf of Tonkin is
the virtual counterpart of the Jamahiriya’s Gulf of Sidra,
for in 1964 American warships defiantly penetrated parts
of that Gulf that are within our domestic waters in order
to indulge in acts of provocation and to create a pretext
for undertaking punitive acts of aggression against our
country.
5

52. Unfortunately, those provoc&ive acts swiftly led to
a full-scale war of aggression imposed on the Vietnamese
people by four successive United States Administrations,
the longest, costliest, most immoral and, indeed, the
most unpopular war of aggression ever waged in United
States history, and one which finally ended in lamentable
failure. The Vietnamese people, which today is still the
victim of daily acts of provocation, subversion and
undermining that pose serious threat to its sovereignty
and territorial integrity-acts
committed by the expansionists and hegemonists of Asia, in close collusion with
the American imperialists-profoundly
sympathizes with
the people of the Socialist People’s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and fully supports it in its resolve to exercise its right
of self-defence and to take every necessary step in order
to defend the independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of its country, as well as the inviolability of its
airspace and territorial waters. On the basis of its own
personal experience, the Vietnamese people is convinced
that this just struggle enjoys the firm support of all peaceand justice-loving forces throughout the world, including
those in the United States, and that it will certainly be
crowned with victory.

56. Mr. SUJA (Czechoslovakia): Mr. President, may1
first of all express my thanks to you and the membersol
the Council for giving me this opportunity to address the
question under discussion. We are happy to see in the
Chair an experienced and wise diplomat, the representative of a fraternal country which so actively, consistently
and as a matter of high principle struggles for the
strengthening of world peace and international security
and for disarmament and the policy of dCtente, a country
which so resolutely defends the rights and vital interests
of the nations of-the world.
57. I should like also to express our appreciation to
your predecessor, Mr. Amega of Togo, for his responsible and eloquent guidance of this body during the month
of January.
58. Let me also congratulate the new members of the
Council and wish them success in their very responsible
work.
59. Czechoslovakia is following with grave concern the
tense situation that has arisen in connection with the
activity of United States military forces in the immediate
vicinity of the territory belonging to the Socialist Peapie’s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. The convening of the
Council at Libya’s request to consider this problem is
fully justified, since Libya is entitled to exercise its right
to defend its existence pursuant to Article 2, paragraph 4,
of the Charter of the United Nations.

53. In conclusion, I should like to read out the following statement made on 21 February by the spokesman
for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam in connection with the United
States acts of provocation against the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya.

60. The need for a thorough consideration of the problem is multiplied by the fact that this is not the first
instance within a short period of time when the United
States has threatened to use force against Libya for the
purpose of asserting its military-political
interests. The
case under consideration offers another example of how
far the policy of acting from a position of strength can
go. As numerous speakers before me have stated, the
allegation concerning a so-called Libyan threat to the
territorial integrity of another State is not based on reality, as is confirmed by statements of official representatives of some countries in that region.

“The people and Government
of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam vehemently condemn the aforementioned acts of provocation and demand that the
Government of the United States immediately put an
end to all its threats and to all its acts of intervention
and aggression against the Socialist People’s Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya and other Arab States. The people
and Government of the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam reaffirm their militant solidarity with and firm
support for the people of the Jamahiriya, as well as for
the peoples of Palestine and other Arab countries in
their struggle against American imperialism
and
Israeli Zionism in order to secure their fundamental
sacred and inviolable national rights.”
54. I have been requested by my Government to ask the
Council, after urgent consideration of the present serious
situation that has been created by the United States on
the sea and land borders of the Socialist People’s Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, to take the necessary steps commensurate with the weighty responsibility incumbent upon it
under the Charter to prevent a recurrence of United
States acts of provocation and aggression against the
Jamahiriya and to preserve the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of that country, as well as
peace and security throughout the Mediterranean region.

61. Whatever the assertions of the parties might bc,
there is no norm in international law that would entitle
anybody to threaten to use force to achieve changes in
the relations between other subjects of international
la\v.
May I be permitted to recall that the Charter provides for
sufficient peaceful means of resolving possible disputti
among States on the bilateral and regional, as well as
world-wide, levels. It is well known that under Chapters
VI and VII of the Charter, an exceptionally important
role is ascribed to the Security Council. It is to be
expected, particularly of a permanent member of the
Council, that it assert and use in practice only those
means which strengthen international peace and security
and enhance the role of the United Nations.

55. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russian):The
next speaker is the representative of Czechoslovakia, whom
I invite to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement,

62. Obviously, what we are dealing with here is, in sub.
stance, as act of pressure designed to weaken the international standing of Libya, a country which consistently
stands up against imperialism and for the definitive elimi6

68. When we consider the current strategic doctrines of
the United States, the borderline between a threat of
force, including nuclear force, and its actual use becomes
ever less distinct. In this connection and also in the context of the plans for the deployment of medium-range
nuclear missiles in some Western European countrieswhich can be a source of tension in that region, too-the
socialist countries have repeatedly stated that they are
keenly interested in strengthening the security of the
Mediterranean and in transforming that region into one
of peace and co-operation, A realistic programme has
been submitted for reducing military tension in the Mediterranean which includes the adoption of confidencebuilding measures in the military sphere, reduction of
armed forces, non-deployment
of nuclear weapons on
the territory of non-nuclear Mediterranean States, and
withdraw1 from the Mediterranean Sea of ships carrying
nuclear weapons.

nation of colonialism, Zionism and racism in all their
forms and manifestations. It is an endeavour to complicate Libya’s further successful progress in building up its
economy and, in a broader context, to aggravate tensions
in that region.
63. Similar attempts directed against the Arab States
are aimed at artificially creating further conditions for a
settlement of the problems of the Middle East in the
spirit of the Camp David negotiations and against the
interests of the Arab countries and the Palestinian Arab
people.
64. However, this provocation is also another dangerous manifestation of the current militaristic policy of the
United States in the entire strategic region of the Middle
East, including the Gulf, as well as in the region of the
Indian Ocean-in other words, in the operational area
of the newly established central military command of
the United States; in that area where, as is known, the
infrastructures for the rapid deployment forces are being
completed. In this case, too, it is again borne out that
agreements for American military bases in the territories
of other States thousands of kilometres away from the
United States serve in practice as a spring-board for the
systematic escalation of its military force in critical areas
of the world, for military manoeuvres and command
exercises and for demonstrations of strength to independent countries in those areas.

69. This military threat offers further proof of the
pressing need to adopt without delay effective international instruments that would eliminate any use of force,
both nuclear and conventional, as well as the threat of
the use of such force also in respect of third countries.
That, too, as is known, was suggested at the abovementioned Prague session of the highest organ of the
Warsaw Treaty on 5 January, but so far the United
States has not responded to that proposal.
70. Czechoslovakia, which in September last year concluded a treaty of friendship and co-operation with
Libya, fully supports the justified demands of that country for the safeguarding of peace, sovereignty and security in keeping with the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.

65. The fact that this course of action is in direct contravention of the inalienable rights of the respective
States and that it ignores the basic principles of the Charter is rightly a matter of concern to the international
community. Nor can there be any doubt that this threat
of force in respect of Libya is obviously related to
American-Israeli strategic co-operation. Therefore, the
activity of the United States near Libya’s borders not
only represents a direct threat to Libya itself but also
endangers peace and stability in the entire region, a
region the problems of which can be solved only by collective and constructive efforts of all interested States,
particularly by utilizing the relevant United Nations
instruments.

7 1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Russian):
The next speaker is the representative of Madagascar. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
72.

Mr.

RABETAFIKA

(Madagascar) (iltferpretatian
that exist between
our two peoples and Governments prompt me to associate the delegation of the Democratic Republic of Madagascar with all those which have congratulated you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency, Your great experience within the United Nations and your mastery of
international affairs are a guarantee of the successof the
present debates of the Council.

from French): The excellent relations

66. As emphasized in the Political Declaration of the
States Parties to the Warsaw Treaty, adopted at Prague
on 5 January:
“It is most important for all to recognize the legitimate right of the people of every country to decide its
own internal affairs, without external interference,
and to . . . respect the independence, territorial integrity and inviolability of the borders of States, observe
the principle of the renunciation of the use of force or
threat of force; and that no Power try to pursue a
policy of hegemony or to establish ‘spheres of interest’
or ‘spheres of influence”’ [S/15.556, annex, sect. Iv].

74. Lastly, I should like through you, Mr. President, to
thank the members of the Council for having agreed to
allow my delegation to participate in this debate.

67. The decision to dispatch military units to the zone
adjacent to the sovereign territory of Libya cannot be
regarded other than as a gross violation of the cogent
norms of international law.

75. In its capacity as a member of the Organization of
African Unity [MAUI, the Democratic Republic of Madagascar is always concerned when the security, independence and sovereignty of a country which belongs to that

73. We extend our fraternal and sincere thanks to the
representative of Togo for the responsible and effective
way in which he presided over the Council last month.

7

organization are challenged. The events that led to the
convening of this emergency meeting of the Council,
therefore, did not leave us indifferent, above all because
they concern the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, which shares
with our country the same revolutionary ideals and with
which we have very close relations of friendship and cooperation,

84. It is those countries that are primarily concerned
with the maintenance of harmonious relations among
themselves, and the injection of a foreign influence in
that equation tends to exacerbate rather than to allay
localized tension. In the case now before us, the confrontation of Libya with a super-Power cannot fail to be of
serious concern to the countries of the region since that
confrontation opens the possibility of widening the crisis
without excluding the possibility
of confrontation
between the two super-Powers. That inherent danger can
only aggravate the feeling of insecurity of the African
countries which more and more see a further division of
the African continent into several zones that are under
the exclusive influence of any given Power.

76. Every country is entitled to its own interpretation of
circumstances, and we know that some not only downplay the scope of the request made by the Libyan
Government but even go so far as to see in the present
debate little more than a pointless verbal conflict,
77. But is it possible to say that the Libyan accusations
are pointless, that there was no threat, no intimidation or
provocation against that country7

85. The third consideration, and the last that comes to
mind, stems from that arbitrary division and from the
role that foreign Powers try to play in regions that fall
within their spheres of influence.

78. We do not wish in this statement to repeat on our
own behalf what The New York Times, on 22 February,
revealed concerning the existence of a plan aimed at
provoking Libya and then of destroying all or part of the
Libyan air force; indeed, this was mentioned here by the
representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya [2415th
meeting, para. 2.51. That newspaper is responsible for the
news it prints; it is a newspaper which we have come to
consider as one of the symbols of a free and independent
press, the pride and pillar of American democracy.

86. Unfortuhately,
as in the present case, it happens
that, on the basis of ideological analysis, which is not
always correct, certin Powers tend to impose their views
and have their own interests prevail over the interests of
the countries of the region in the search for solutions to
local conflicts.
87. In the view of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of Madagascar, the military demonstration that
is at the root of the present crisis was a manoeuvre which
did not contribute to the establishment of stable and
harmonious relations among the countries of the region.
On the contrary, it pointlessly endangered the peace and
security of the region since, as indicated by the press,
recurrence of the serious incidents of August 1981 was
even envisaged. It has become a source of division
among African countries and has exacerbated tensions to
the detriment of international peace and security.

79. Suffice it for US to point out that there is a certain
contradiction in, on the one hand, denying all the Libyan
accusations and, on the other, proclaiming that the mission of the AWACS and the aircraft-carrier Nimitz
yielded the planned-for results.
80. On the basis of the latter affirmation, it seems to us
impossible to escape the conclusion that there is at least
one point of agreement between the American side and
the Libyan side-namely,
that there was a desire on the
part of one to inffuence the other and to dictate certain
behaviour to it.
81. A certain number of considerations
in light of the latter observation,

88.. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, for its part, affirms
that there is no situation in the region that warrants this
military provocation on the part of the United States. It
has proclaimed before the Council and before other
bodies its commitment
to peace and security in the
region and has indicated at the highest political level its
intention not to intervene in the internal affairs of its
neighbours.

come to mind

82. The first concerns the fact that the Charter of the
United Nations prohibits the threat or use of force in
international relations. This is an obligation incumbent
upon States regardless of the nature of the problems they
have to solve and whether or not they have normal diplomatic relations. It is also the duty of those that have
particular responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security. In any event, a demonstration
of force in no way becomes legitimate just because it
produced the desired effect.

89. We, for our part, are convinced that it is in no way
the intention of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to declare
any kind of war against any of its neighbours.
90. The Government of the Democratic Republic of
Madagascar has no doubt that the resources of regional
agreement could help the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya’s
neighbours to find, together with the Jamahiriya,
the
arrangements that are most in keeping with their common interests. This is why the Democratic Republic of’
Madagascar solemnly appeals for an end to the policy of
confrontation,
provocation and pointless intimidation
and appeals to the super-Powers in particular to refrain
from that policy, whether it be in Africa, as is the case

83. The second consideration involves the regional
aspect of the situation to be resolved. Clearly, if a question involving the security or alleged security of a region
or subregion arises, the responsibility to define the nature
and scope of the question belongs first and foremost to
the countries belonging to that region and, if they so
desire, to the Security Council.
8

now, or in Asia, as was the case in the manoeuvres off the
coast of Korea.

primary responsibility for the maintenance
tional peace and security.

91. The Democratic Republic of Madagascar invites
the African countries concerned to embark, through dialogue, on a policy of dCtente and mutual accommodation. In our view, this is the only course of action
commensurate with their prestige, the only way of removing the continent from the influence of the major Powers, In a word, it is the only course of action that can lead
to the establishment of a genuine and lasting peace in the
region.

98. The tense global situation is indeed cause for concern. This most recent tension can only aggravate an
already charged atmosphere. There is, therefore, greater
need for restraint and calm. As the forum primarily
responsible for the maintenance of international peace
and security, we must follow very closely the situation
brought to our attention by the Government of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, It is my delegation’s sincere
belief that, with this just resort to the Council, a climate
of peace and stability will soon be restored within the
region.

92. Mr. KARRAN (Guyana): I should like, first of all,
to join with previous speakers in welcoming the representative of Jordan, Mr. Abdullah Salah. My delegation
looks forward to working very closely with him, as we
did with his distinguished predecessor, Mr. Nuseibeh.

of interna-

99. The PRESIDENT
(interpreratbn from Russian):
The next speaker is the representative of Ghana. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

93. We are meeting at the request of the Government of
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to consider “the deteriorating situation near the Libyan shores that could jeopard;
ize the security and peace of the region and the world”.
My delegation supports the call for this series of meetings, for it is within this forum that conflict situations
ought to be examined with a view to defusing tensions.

100. Mr. GBEHO (Ghana): At the outset, Sir, I should
like to offer you my Government’s congratulations and
my own on your assumption of the presidency.
101. Similarly,
our congratulations
go to the new
members of the Council on their having been called upon
to play a role in bringing international peace and security
to a troubled world.

94. The international community has been calling for
the creation of zones of peace in various regions of the
world, with the emphasis on the establishment of friendly
relations among States. In inter-State relations, nations
must pursue action that would lead to stability and
peace; they must respect political independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity and must refrain from acts
of provocation and aggression against other States, for
such acts jeopardize peace and lead to instability and
tension.

102. I should also like to thank you, Sir, for giving me
the opportunity
to participate in the debate on this
serious occasion when the Council is dealing with a
threat to international peace and security in the eastern
Mediterranean.
Ghana, as a Member of the United
Nations, shares the international community’s concern
about any situation which poses a potential or actual
threat to international
peace and security. When the
situation involves fellow members of the OAU and the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries with which Ghana
has friendly relations, our anxiety is substantially
increased. It is also a matter of considerable embarrassment for us when the situation involves a super-Power
with which we are friendly and to which we look to use
its undisputed leverage and leadership to ensure international peace and harmony.

95. Guyana reaffirms the right of every sovereign State
to choose its own political, economic and social systems
without outside interference or threat.
96. These fundamental principles are embodied in the
Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,’
and in the Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security.3 More recently, these principles have
been elaborated by the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries in the Declaration on the Inadmissibility
of Intervention and Interference in the Internal Affairs of
States.” This most recent declaration, which was adopted
by the General Assembly in 1981, is the culmination of
several years of work by the Non-Aligned Movement and
is subscribed to by the parties concerned in this matter. It
is therefore incumbent upon States to abide by these principles, which are not contrary to the principles embodied
in the Charter.

103. It is in this context that my country is intervening
in the debate occasioned by the letter dated 19 February
from the representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
addressed to the President of the Council.
104. Our concern about recent events in the eastern
Mediterranean
stems from the awareness that, unless
prompt and effective action is taken to deal with simmering tensions, there is always the danger of escalation into
a full-scale crisis. It is therefore timely and appropriate
that the Council has taken up the issue,
105. It is our fervent hope that urgent action will be
taken to remove any risk of further tensions. In this
regard, Ghana would like to remind the Council that all
States Members of the United Nations are enjoined to
conduct their affairs so as to promote international peace.

97. My delegation is particularly concerned over the
tendency of some States to arrogate to themselves the
role of the Security Council, the body charged with the
9

and security and that threats of aggression and other
similar actions are not only contrary to the Charter but
actualIy worsen the situation.

of its air force as possible. If no strike occurred, the
plan was to assert that prompt help to Egypt had
deterred Libya. This was, in effect, what Mr. Shultz
said Sunday.”

106. Ever since the recent tension in the eastern Mediterranean started building last week, Ghana’s concern
has been considerably heightened by a conspicuous lack
of watertight evidence in favour of the military and naval
buildup that the United States precipitated in the area.
On the contrary, available reports have encouraged caution rather than the rush to arms that we have all
witnessed.

111. If this indeed is the story, then it was a serious
threat to the sovereignty of a State Member of the United
Nations and other States in the area which the Council
should deprecate and seek to prevent in the future.
112. The Charter of the United Nations contains provisions for dealing with perceived threats to international
security, but none of these provisions authorizes the unilateral diversion by a State Member, or the dispatch, of
its aircraft-carriers and sophisticated military aircraft to
an area of tension,

107. We have listened carefully to the statements by the
representatives of both the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and
the United States [2415th meeting]. We find the catalogue
of unfriendly actions against the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya which its representative described to be very
disturbing.

113. Ghana would like to draw attention to the inherent dangers of such actions. It would be unfortunate if
the world community discerned or condoned the notion
of a super-Power provoking or threatening a small country. Ghana, as a small country, cannot but look with
concern at actions which might carry such implications,
or at the very least convey that impression,

108. The statement by the representative of the United
States provided an explanation which, while clearly demonstrating that the United States acted in its own selfinterest, did not in itself contribute to a lessening of
international
tension. We have come to that regrettable
conclusion after having carefully studied statements
attributed to the President of the United States, the Secretary of State, George P. Shultz, and State Department
officials. Their statements, both official and private, have
not only contradicted one another in some cases but also
have failed to establish clearly, for the benefit of the
international
community, the so-called Libyan threat to
which the United States reacted.

114. As a member of the OAU, Ghana cannot rejoice
in military activities off the coast of the continent which
were intended to provoke and threaten a sister country.
It is against the concept of our collective unity and
should not be allowed to recur. It is also important for
me to state the position of my country, as a member of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, that we cannot be silent over the injustice nor tolerate the threat that
was involved in the active confrontation between a superPower and a small and weak fellow non-aligned country.
It is a fact that if the international community is to assure
itself of peace and security, then the objectives of such
regional organizations should not be needlessly disregarded, as was the case last week.

109. One would have thought that, in such a serious
situation that warranted the rush of a super-Power to the
rescue of African countries in the region, the protected
would themselves be clearly convinced of the so-called
threat, This waas obviously not the case, as reported in
The Washington Post of 21 February. That newspaper
reported official Government sources in Khartoum as
stating that there had been no coup attempt and that only
25 persons had been arrested over the past three months.
The same newspaper quoted the Egyptian Defence Minister, Abdelhalim Abu-Ghazala, as telling reporters that
he did not see any signs of crisis or a possible aggression
against the Sudan at present. A Foreign Ministry spokesman in Cairo was also reported as having said that Egypt
did not see any real threat against President Nimeiri.
Even more significant is the report that the Sudan confirmed that no joint manoeuvres were taking place or
planned between the two armies for the time being. In such
circumstances, it is difficult to comprehend the manner in
which the danger was determined or the justification for
what has turned out to be an over-reaction on the part of the
United States.

115. Furthermore, it should be underscored that the
security of a region, particularly the explosive Mediterranean area, should first and foremost be the responsibility
of the countries of the region and not the unilateral and
desperate decision of a country outside the region, however militarily significant.
116. In this context, the United States Administration
should take friendly cognizance of the extreme sensitivity
of all developing countries to strong-arm tactics by the
great Powers. Our memories are too painfully full of
such actions taken in the past in all the regions of the
world against weaker countries by the stronger nations of
the world.
117. The incidents of last week clearly bear out the
concern expressed last year by the Secretary-General,
when he called for greater support for the United Nations
in order to avert international anarchy. The United
Nations has the machinery for dealing swiftly and meaningfully with such matters, and it must be relied upon,
especially by its Member States, rather than be set aside

110. But it seems that the real purpose of the rapid
deployment of forces by the United States in the area was
revealed in The New York Times of 22 February, when it
stated that:
“The plan, according to the American officials, was
to lure Libya into striking and then to destroy as much
10

in favour of unilateral military confrontation, which can
only precipitate threats to international peace and security.
118. Ghana, which has traditionally
been a strong
advocate of dialogue and the peaceful resolution of disputes between States, would like at this point to launch
an appeal to all parties to this situation to avoid military
brinkmanship
and find peaceful methods to resolve their
differences. In this regard, we note that in his statement
the representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya mentioned the willingness of his country to enter into dialogue
with the United States [ibid.]. We hope this offer will be
taken up with a view to seeking a peaceful solution.
119. Ghana appeals to all parties to act with restraint
and, to make the fullest possible use of existing regional

Litho in United Nations, New York

and subregional organizations to bring about the peaceful resolution of differences.
120. We live today in an international environment so
fraught with grave dangers that it would be tragic to add
to them unnecessarily, as would be the case if this situation were allowed to escalate,
The meeting rose at 12.5.5p.m.

NOTES
’ Ojjiccilrl Records of die Third Unifed Notions Conference on the Law of the Sea, vol. XVlI
(United Nations publication,
Snles No. E.84.V.2). document
A/CONF.62/122.
‘General

Assembly

resolution

2625 (XXV),

‘General

Assembly

resolution

2734 (XXV).

‘General

Assembly

resolution

36/103.

annex.

annex.

60205-November

1990-2,050
