A /73/PV.39

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-third session

39th plenary meeting

Monday, 26 November 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Espinosa Garcés . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ecuador)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Korneliou
(Cyprus), Vice-President, took the Chair.

(i) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Economic Cooperation Organization

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

(j) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
International Organization of la Francophonie

Agenda item 128
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
Report of the Secretary-General (A/73/328)
(a) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union
(b) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation

(k) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization
Note by the Secretary-General (A/73/111)
Draft resolution (A/73/L.22)
(l) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Council of Europe
Draft resolution (A/73/L.27)

(c) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Asian-African Legal Consultative Organization

(m) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Economic Community of Central African States

(d) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
League of Arab States

(n) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons

Draft resolution (A/73/L.23)
(e) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Latin American Caribbean Economic System
(f) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization of American States
(g) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe
(h) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Caribbean Community

Note by the Secretary-General (A/73/97)
(o) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Black Sea Economic Cooperation Organization
Draft resolution (A/73/L.25)
(p) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Pacific Islands Forum
(q) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(r) Cooperation between the United Nations and the

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-39775 (E)

*1839775*

A/73/PV.39

Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
(s) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization
(t) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Collective Security Treaty Organization
Draft resolution (A/73/L.24)
(u) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Central European Initiative
Draft resolution (A/73/L.17)
(v) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization for Democracy and Economic
Development — GUAM
Draft resolution (A/73/L.26/Rev.1)
(w) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Commonwealth of Independent States
Draft resolution (A/73/L.28)
(x) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
International Organization for Migration
(y) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the International Criminal Police Organization
(INTERPOL)
Draft resolution (A/73/L.21)
(z) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea
The Acting President: Under sub-item (t), I
should like to inform members that action on draft
resolution A/73/L.24, entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the Collective Security Treaty
Organization”, has been postponed to a later date.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lassina Zerbo, Executive
Secretary of the Preparatory Commission for the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test Ban Treaty Organization,
to introduce his reports covering the years 2016
and 2017.
Mr. Zerbo (Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty Organization): I am honoured to address the
General Assembly under the agenda sub-item entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization”.
I addressed the General Assembly in September
during its high-level commemoration of the
2/32

26/11/2018

International Day against Nuclear Tests (see A/72/
PV.112). In my statement, I spoke of the consequences
of nuclear testing for humans and the environment,
as well as for international peace and security. The
devastating impact of nuclear testing underpins our
moral conviction and provides us with the strength and
resolve needed to finally put an end to that chapter of
human endeavour once and for all. The entry into force
of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT)
is the only viable path to achieving that end. Enhancing
cooperation towards that objective should therefore be
a priority for us all. With that aim in mind, I am pleased
to report to the Assembly today on the following issues:
the current status of the Comprehensive Nuclear-TestBan Treaty, developments related to the verification
regime, and enhanced cooperation with the United
Nations and other measures to strengthen the Treaty
and its verification regime.
On the current status of the CTBT, the objective of
the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty is to put a
verifiable end to nuclear-test explosions by everyone,
everywhere and for all time. A comprehensive nucleartest ban is one of the oldest items on the international
nuclear disarmament agenda, first proposed more than
six decades ago. Thanks to the support of the General
Assembly and the tireless efforts of the dedicated staff
of the Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization, we continue to
make strides towards a world free from the dangers of
nuclear testing.
Although the CTBT has yet to enter into force, the
Treaty enjoys near-universal support and has solidified
the de facto international norm against nuclear
testing. In stark contrast with the darkest days of the
Cold War, when nuclear testing was commonplace,
the international community is unanimous in its
condemnation of any violation of that norm today.
That has been true since the Treaty’s opening for
signature in 1996 and has been the case with each of
the nuclear tests by the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea — the only State to carry out a nuclear-test
explosion this century.
We recently welcomed the ratification by Thailand
and the signature by Tuvalu earlier this year. There are
now 184 States that have signed the CTBT, of which
167 have ratified it. I wish to thank the Governments
of Thailand and Tuvalu once more for their support and
resolve, which has bolstered global efforts to achieve a
nuclear-test-free world.
18-39775

26/11/2018

The CTBT is one of the most adhered-to arms
control and international security-related instruments
and receives overwhelming support from United
Nations States Members. Nonetheless, the CTBT
has not yet become legally binding international law,
as eight annex 2 States must still ratify the Treaty to
achieve its entry into force. Those States are China, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Egypt, India,
Iran, Israel, Pakistan and the United States of America.
The de facto norm against nuclear testing grows
in strength with every signature and ratification of the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. But history
teaches us that norms and voluntary moratoriums can
never substitute for a legally binding and credibly
enforceable nuclear-test ban. There were moratoriums
on nuclear testing by the United States, the Soviet
Union and the United Kingdom from 1958 to 1961 as
negotiations were taking place on a nuclear-test ban in
Geneva. However, changing political circumstances
and a rise in tension between the United States and the
Soviet Union led to a collapse of those negotiations.
Soon afterward, the two super-Powers resumed their
nuclear-test programmes and carried out more nuclear
tests between 1961 and 1962 than in the whole of the
previous decade. That is not to be forgotten.
Legal instruments such as nuclear-weapon-free
zones, and most recently the Treaty on the Prohibition
of Nuclear Weapons, can ultimately complement the
CTBT. But an in-force treaty with a fully completed
verification regime is the path to an effectively
verifiable and credibly enforceable prohibition on
nuclear testing. That is the only way that Member States
will have trust and confidence that the Treaty is being
complied with. That is why we are continuing our work
on confidence-building and education and outreach
with the annex 2 States, with the aim of creating the
right conditions globally and regionally that would be
conducive for positive consideration of their signature
and/or ratification of the Comprehensive Nuclear-TestBan Treaty.
With that in mind, the Conference on Facilitating
the Entry into Force of the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty, also known as the Article XIV
Conference, has been held every other year to promote
the Treaty’s entry into force. When the tenth Article
XIV Conference was held last year in New York, the
Conference offered an opportunity for States to renew
their commitment to the CTBT as a core element of
the nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation regime.

A/73/PV.39

A high number of Foreign Ministers participated in
the conference. Secretary-General António Guterres
and the then-President of the General Assembly,
Mr. Miroslav Lajčák, addressed the opening meeting.
In addition, the ninth Ministerial Meeting of the
Friends of the CTBT, held this year, brought together
a large number of Foreign Ministers and other highlevel representatives from States signatories to
review the progress that has been made and issue
a joint call for the prompt entry into force of the
CTBT. The meeting was organized by the Friends of
the CTBT — Australia, Canada, Finland, Germany,
Japan and the Netherlands — in cooperation with the
co-coordinators of article XIV, Iraq and Belgium. The
ministers were unanimous in their commitment to
the entry into force of the CTBT, while highlighting
the verification regime as an essential tool for
ensuring compliance.
From 21 May to 1 June, we convened the second
CTBT Science and Diplomacy Symposium, which
brought together more than 120 policymakers,
diplomats and practitioners, as well as academics,
students and young professionals from around the
globe. Hundreds more participated in the Symposium
virtually through the CTBTO Knowledge and Training
Portal. The Symposium served to raise public awareness
of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and its
contribution to international peace and security, and
to deepen the understanding of the participants, in
particular those from the non-ratifying annex 2 States,
about the Treaty and its Organization. Attendees took
part in in-depth and dynamic discussions on various
legal, political and technical aspects of the Treaty,
and participated in creative thinking and collective
solution finding.
The CTBTO’s efforts to raise awareness about
the Treaty have continued in New York as well. Since
its establishment last year, the CTBTO New York
Liaison Office is continuing to cultivate and enhance
relationships with the 193 States Members of the United
Nations and various entities represented in New York.
Capacity-building exercises and visual presentations
organized through the Liaison Office mechanism have
helped to generate attention and further knowledge
about the Treaty and the CTBTO, not only among the
Permanent Missions but also among the general public.
Turning to developments related to the verification
regime, I am pleased to report that the system is nearing

18-397753/32

A/73/PV.39

completion. The progressive build-up of the system has
resulted in a level of maturity, readiness and relevance
that has been demonstrated on numerous occasions and
in a variety of circumstances. By virtue of the consistent
efforts and hard work by CTBTO staff in Vienna, the
full establishment of the Comprehensive Nuclear-TestBan Treaty verification regime is well within reach.
I just returned from a mission to Australia to
celebrate the completion of the Australian segment
of the International Monitoring System stations, the
third-largest of any State. With the certification of the
infrasound station at Davis base in Antarctica, all 21
monitoring facilities located on Australian territory
are now complete. Those strategically positioned
stations are sending reliable, high-quality data to our
International Data Centre in Vienna for analysis.
We have installed or certified several important
new International Monitoring System stations in
the past several years. Of particular note, the last
remaining hydroacoustic station in the Crozet Islands,
in the southern Indian Ocean, was certified, which
marked a major milestone on the way to completion
of the verification system. Five stations were also
certified in China — two primary seismic stations and
three radionuclide stations. Additional achievements
include the certification of an infrasound station
and a radionuclide station in the Galápagos Islands,
Ecuador, as well as the certifications of stations and
radionuclide laboratories in the Russian Federation,
Ethiopia, the United Kingdom, Italy and France. As of
November 2018, there are 296 certified International
Monitoring System facilities, and another 16 installed
or under construction, bringing the verification system
to slightly over 92 per cent completion.
The International Data Centre continues to process
and analyse data registered at monitoring stations, which
are shared with 1,300 institutions in 130 countries. The
International Data Centre is progressively carrying out
its work through experiments and full-scale testing.
In addition to the steady advancement in the Treaty’s
International Monitoring System, the capabilities of
the International Data Centre are also continuing to
develop. In fact, they have achieved a far better detection
threshold than many thought would be possible when the
Treaty was negotiated and the International Monitoring
System was conceived.
The Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
Organization is also continuing to prepare for the entry
4/32

26/11/2018

into force of the Treaty by strengthening its on-site
inspection capabilities. That includes developing
on-site inspection elements, conducting integrated
field exercises and evaluating the organization’s
on-site inspection activities. After having concluded
and evaluated the on-site inspection field exercises of
2008 and 2014, we are now in a new cycle of on-site
inspection development and have a new action plan
for on-site inspection activities that began in 2016 and
will continue until 2019. With regard to our project to
build a permanent equipment storage and maintenance
facility, its construction is well under way at the site
in Seibersdorf, Austria. That permanent facility will
be in charge of on-site inspection and have other
organization-wide operational functions, including
storage, maintenance, testing and training. Those
achievements prove that the Treaty’s verification
regime has reached an advanced state of readiness. Our
strategic goal of moving towards the acceptance of the
verification regime is progressing in accordance with
our planning.
The reliability of the verification regime has been
demonstrated by the performance of the system in its
timely and accurate detection of each and every nuclear
test conducted by the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. On the occasion of the nuclear test conducted in
September 2017 by the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, the identified test-area error ellipse was only
110 square kilometres and has since shrunken to less
than 10 square kilometres, bearing in mind that the
Treaty stipulates that the area of an on-site inspection
site can be up to 1,000 square kilometres. Our precision
has increased nearly ten-fold. For the five previous
tests, data from 125 international monitoring stations
were used to determine the magnitude of the events and
compute their locations.
The Treaty’s verification regime and its associated
technology and data have also proven valuable
for civil and scientific purposes. For example, the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization
cooperates with UNESCO in the area of tsunami
early warning. It also provided timely and trustworthy
information on the dispersion of radiation during the
Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant accident.
By virtue of the quality and accuracy of its data, the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization
is now a member of the Inter-Agency Committee on
Radiological and Nuclear Emergencies. The Committee
is tasked with coordinating among relevant international
18-39775

26/11/2018

intergovernmental organizations to prepare for and
respond to nuclear and radiological emergencies. The
potential for International Monitoring-System data to
contribute to volcanic ash advisories for airline safety,
other disaster risk reduction and mitigation efforts and
countless other related areas is currently being explored.
Nuclear test monitoring data and technologies can
also help support the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs). International Monitoring System stations can
be a valuable asset for research related to climate change
in line with SDG 13, on climate action. Monitoring
the movements of glaciers, hurricanes and tornadoes
and the seasonal variations of specific radionuclides
helps scientists better understand the effects of
climate change. Moreover, the hydroacoustic stations
of the International Monitoring System help whale
conservation efforts by recording whale vocalizations
to support research on whale populations and their
migration patterns, thereby contributing to SDG 14, on
life below water.
In order to ensure that the verification regime
remains at the forefront of scientific and technical
innovation, we must also strive to further enhance the
Organization’s strong relationship with the scientific
and technological community. That is achieved
through the CTBT’s biennial Science and Technology
Conference series, which is organized for scientists
and experts from a broad range of disciplines that
are relevant to all aspects of nuclear-test monitoring.
The sixth Science and Technology Conference, which
was held in Vienna in 2017, welcomed nearly 1,000
scientists, academics, students, members of the media
and representatives from Government agencies from
more than 120 countries. Throughout the conference,
650 abstracts, nearly 400 posters and 100 oral
presentations were disseminated. Preparations for the
next event, which will take place from 24 to 28 June
2019, are well under way. The successful development
of the Treaty’s verification regime is a product of
enormous collective investment. Member States have
contributed substantial financial support valued at more
than $1 billion. They have invested their time, energy
and resources to help put in place the most expansive
verification regime ever designed. We must all strive to
ensure that those investments are protected.
I will now speak about the Organization’s enhanced
cooperation with the United Nations. Promoting
international peace and security through collective
action is at the core of the work of the United Nations.

A/73/PV.39

There is no greater threat in scale and consequence to
peace and security than the use of weapons of mass
destruction. As such, the United Nations has tirelessly
endeavoured since its establishment to reduce and
eliminate that risk. Multilateral non-proliferation and
disarmament instruments, such as the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, constitute the legal, technical
and normative backbone of those efforts. It is only
once we have fully implemented the Treaty and other
key elements of a multilaterally verifiable nuclear
disarmament framework that we will move closer
to realizing our vision of a world free from nuclear
weapons. Since the CTBT opened for signature, more
than 20 years ago, the United Nations has consistently
supported the effective implementation of the Treaty
and the efforts to advance its entry into force.
The launch in May of the Secretary-General’s agenda
for disarmament underpins the United Nations effort to
advance cooperation with the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty Organization. Notably, action point 4
of the implementation plan towards the elimination of
nuclear weapons is “Bring the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty into force”. To that end, the SecretaryGeneral aims to facilitate progress in the signing and
ratification of the Treaty through active diplomacy,
public outreach and coordination with the organization
and its member States. Such advocacy will include direct
engagement with the Heads of State or Government of
the annex 2 States. I applaud the Secretary-General for
taking the initiative on that important issue, and I look
forward to cooperating with him and his good offices
towards our shared goals.
Of course, those activities are directly in line with
the Agreement to Regulate the Relationship between the
United Nations and the Preparatory Commission for the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization,
which recognizes the need for the two bodies to work
jointly in order to achieve their common objectives.
Another aspect of the Agreement that I would like to
highlight is reciprocal representation. The Agreement
states that, whenever other principal organs of the
United Nations consider matters that are of relevance to
the activities of the CTBTO Preparatory Commission,
the Executive Secretary or a designated representative
may, at the invitation of that organ, attend its meetings
to supply it with information. In that context, I would
like to report that on 27 September, on the margins of
the General Assembly high-level week, I attended the
meeting of the Security Council (see S/PV.8363) on

18-397755/32

A/73/PV.39

non-proliferation and the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea. The meeting provided an important platform
for States and relevant entities to stress the importance
of the CTBT for international peace and security and to
appeal for the Treaty’s entry into force. I wish to reiterate
the readiness of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty Organization to participate, as appropriate, in
meetings and provide relevant information and reports
in order to contribute to discussions and deliberations
on those critical issues.
The relationship agreement also calls on the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization
to furnish special studies or information, as requested
by the United Nations, as well as to provide, within its
competence and in accordance with the provisions of
the Treaty, information and assistance to the United
Nations in the exercise of its responsibilities under
the Charter of the United Nations. That is particularly
relevant in the light of the Secretary-General’s remarks
concerning the readiness of United Nations agencies
to support the process of denuclearization in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The recent
announcement by the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea that it is committed to inviting international
inspectors to confirm a closure of its nuclear-test site has
opened a window of opportunity for the organization.
Within its mandate and with the approval of our
member States, the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty Organization Preparatory Commission stands
ready to contribute its expertise, technologies and
monitoring assets to any multilateral process aimed
at confirming the closure of the Punggye-ri nucleartest site. Moreover, if an agreement on verifiable
denuclearization is reached, a prohibition on nuclear
tests must be included as an interim step pending the
ratification of the CTBT by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. The organization and its verification
regime can be explicitly called upon to verify that
aspect of the agreement.
If the international community is serious about
its commitment to achieving a world free from
nuclear tests, then we must be prepared to seize every
opportunity to promote the CTBT and advance its entry
into force. If the ongoing talks with the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea — the only country to
test in the twenty-first century — do not constitute
such an opportunity, then I do not know what does.
Engagement with the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea offers opportunities to continue to prove that
6/32

26/11/2018

the organization’s technical capabilities are mature and
primed to fulfil the verification task. Such engagement
also holds the potential to bring Pyongyang into the
orbit of the CTBT as one of the most challenging States
listed in the Treaty’s annex 2. This is nothing short of a
historic opportunity for the Treaty and its verification
regime, and if we want to see a worldwide halt to nuclear
testing, we must be ready and willing to seize it.
Another key focus of the organization is to
empower the next generation, in particular women, to
work to ensure the Treaty’s verifiability well into the
twenty-first century and beyond. For that reason, we
have established the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty Organization Youth Group, in recognition of the
importance of the next generation’s active involvement
aimed at advancing the Treaty’s entry into force. The
Youth Group has reached a membership of more than
500 and is creating a groundswell of excitement and
support for the CTBT and its role in international peace
and security. Through active engagement, sustained
advocacy and research and publishing, the Youth Group
is complementing the efforts of the organization and its
member States to ensure that the CTBT remains firmly
at the top of the international agenda.
Looking ahead, it is impossible not to recognize,
and perhaps even to dwell upon, the challenges that
confront the international community, including the
viability of multilateralism as a means to advance peace
and security. That is particularly true in the area of
nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament. However,
after decades of consistent efforts and hard work, the
CTBT and its verification regime have become the most
practical and achievable step towards a world free of
nuclear weapons. The success of the CTBT will be a
success for multilateralism.
The world is already benefiting from the value
of the CTBT under the de facto global norm against
nuclear testing; but, without determined and urgent
action to maintain the Treaty’s relevance and bring
about its entry into force, the goodwill and momentum
generated in recent years will remain at risk. The
General Assembly’s leadership can make a difference
in that regard by finishing what we started with the
CTBT. Let us strengthen our resolve and work together
to bring the Treaty into force as a key step towards the
realization of lasting peace and security in a world free
from nuclear weapons.
18-39775

26/11/2018

The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Croatia to introduce draft resolutions
A/73/L.17 and A/73/L.27.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): I have the honour to
introduce two draft resolutions today. The first one
is draft resolution A/73/L.17, entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Central European
Initiative”, which I have the privilege to introduce on
behalf of 17 members of the Initiative, who are original
co-sponsors of the draft resolution.
The cooperation between the United Nations and
the Central European Initiative (CEI) began with
resolution 66/111, adopted on 9 December 2011, by
which observer status was granted to the Initiative.
The cooperation between the two entities is focused on
furthering political and socioeconomic development. In
that respect, I should especially highlight the Initiative’s
plan of action for the period 2018-2020, which was
drawn up in line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and contributes to its implementation
through projects at the regional level.
The CEI is committed to fruitful cooperation with
the United Nations, the specialized agencies and other
organizations and programmes of the United Nations
system, with the aim of achieving mutual participation
in events and meetings of common interest and
developing practical and results-oriented joint projects,
in particular with UNESCO and the Economic
Commission for Europe.
As Croatia holds the presidency of the CEI for 2018,
allow me to express our gratitude to all the member
States of the Initiative for their excellent cooperation
with the presidency. Let me conclude this part of
my introduction by stating that the member States
of the CEI express their hope that this biennial draft
resolution will be adopted without a vote, as was the
case on previous occasions.
Allow me now to turn to the second part of my
introduction. Based on the mandate given by the
Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe to
the Croatian chairmanship of the Council for the period
from May to November 2018, which officially ended on
21 November, I also have the honour to introduce draft
resolution A/73/L.27, entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the Council of Europe,” on
behalf of the co-sponsors.

A/73/PV.39

With the Council of Europe’s seventieth anniversary
approaching in 2019, it is worth mentioning that
cooperation between the United Nations and the Council
of Europe started as early as in 1951 and was updated
in 1971 with the cooperative arrangements between the
secretariats of the United Nations and the Council of
Europe. In 1989, the Assembly granted the Council of
Europe an invitation to participate as an observer in
its sessions. From 2000 onwards and every second year
since 2004, a draft resolution on cooperation between
the United Nations and the Council of Europe has been
submitted and adopted.
The draft text before us today includes important
updates with regard to the work undertaken by the
Council of Europe and the United Nations in areas of
common interest since the adoption of resolution 71/17,
in 2016, and it recognizes the ever-increasing role of
the Council of Europe in protecting and strengthening
human rights and fundamental freedoms, promoting
democracy and upholding and strengthening the
rule of law through its standards, principles and
monitoring mechanisms, as well as through the
effective implementation of its legal instruments. It
also reaffirms the commitments and aspirations of both
organizations to further enhance their cooperation in
fields of common interest.
The Council of Europe remains committed to
the promotion of its objectives around its three key
pillars — human rights, democracy and the rule of
law — and stands ready for dialogue and cooperation
to advance its core values and achieve greater synergy
between the United Nations and the Council of Europe.
In conclusion, I take this opportunity to thank all
members of the Council of Europe and the observer
States for their cooperation and the support extended
to the Croatian chairmanship and all other New
York-based delegations that have been actively and
constructively engaged during the discussions on the
draft resolution before us, enabling us today to have a
text that we hope can be adopted without a vote, as on
previous occasions.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil to introduce draft resolution
A/73/L.21.
Mr. Vieira (Brazil): I have the honour to introduce,
on behalf of Switzerland and my own country, Brazil,
draft resolution A/73/L.21, entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the International

18-397757/32

A/73/PV.39

Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL)”. Brazil
has been a member of INTERPOL since 1986, and
Switzerland since 1956. Both our countries have
maintained close cooperation with INTERPOL over
the years and strongly support INTERPOL’s activities,
goals and objectives.
The Office of the Special Representative of
INTERPOL to the United Nations in New York was
established in October 2004 so as to raise awareness
of INTERPOL’s role within the United Nations
community and to encourage the use of its tools,
databases and resources available to Member States that
are also member countries of INTERPOL, as well as
to identify areas of common interest and opportunities
for increased cooperation and coordination. The Office
has taken a lead role in further enhancing INTERPOL’s
cooperation with United Nations entities directly
involved in activities related to law enforcement,
such as the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate and the Office of Counter-Terrorism.
The General Assembly adopted resolution
71/19 by consensus in 2016, the first resolution to
address cooperation between the United Nations and
INTERPOL. This year’s draft resolution represents
the first review of the original text. The fundamental
threefold purpose of the draft resolution remains
unchanged: acknowledging and taking stock of the
existing cooperation between the United Nations and
INTERPOL, strengthening that cooperation within
the respective mandates of both organizations and
raising awareness among Member States of the role of
INTERPOL at the United Nations.
We are convinced that the reviewed draft resolution
is a solid and well-balanced text. It reflects the significant
changes in the international security priorities at the
United Nations since the first resolution was adopted,
such as counter-terrorism activities, foreign terrorist
fighters and the need to counter the use of information
and communications technologies for criminal or
terrorist purposes, among others. It is our hope that the
draft resolution will build a strong basis for the further
strengthening of the cooperation between the United
Nations and INTERPOL, for the benefit of all Member
States that are also member countries of INTERPOL.
The revised draft resolution calls for the
strengthening of cooperation in two main areas,
namely, preventing and combating transnational crime
and preventing and countering terrorism. Throughout
8/32

26/11/2018

the operative paragraphs, those two main areas are
broken down into a wide range of topics, such as
combating trafficking in persons and the smuggling
of migrants, tackling the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons and supporting peacekeeping and
peacebuilding efforts, just to name a few. Furthermore,
the main INTERPOL tools, databases and other
resources readily available to Member States are all
mentioned in the text. It goes without saying that those
new additions and improvements will help the work of
INTERPOL at the United Nations.
In our view, it is a great achievement to have
reached consensus on such important and complex
issues, which have an impact at the national, regional
and global levels. By taking advantage of existing
synergies, stronger cooperation and coordination
between the United Nations and INTERPOL will
serve the goals and purposes of both organizations and
ultimately contribute to long-term improvements in law
enforcement activities.
On behalf of the main sponsors, Brazil and
Switzerland, I would like to take this opportunity to
thank the representatives of all of the Member States
who actively took part in the consultations process for
their constructive inputs. Our thanks also go to the
members of the Office of the Special Representative
of INTERPOL to the United Nations for the excellent
technical advice provided throughout the negotiations.
Their valuable contributions, guidance and support
have been greatly appreciated by all delegations.
Finally, we sincerely appreciate the presence today
of the Secretary General of INTERPOL, Mr. Jürgen
Stock, who will address the Assembly later, as a strong
sign of INTERPOL’s support for our work here at the
United Nations.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy to introduce draft resolution
A/73/L.22.
Mrs. Zappia (Italy): Allow me, first of all, to
express my appreciation to the Executive Secretary of
the Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization (CTBTO),
Mr. Lassina Zerbo, for his statement and for his report
on the major activities carried out by the Preparatory
Commission and the Provisional Technical Secretariat
in 2017.
18-39775

26/11/2018

Today’s debate on the cooperation between
the United Nations and the CTBTO in the General
Assembly provides the international community
with an opportunity to renew its commitment to the
ultimate goal of a peaceful and secure world free of
nuclear weapons. A progressive approach based on
concrete and verifiable measures aimed at enhancing
mutual confidence and increasing the perception of
solid international security may play a decisive role
in furthering such a goal. The entry into force of the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) has a
crucial place among nuclear disarmament measures.
During the past two decades, despite not having
entered into force, the CTBT has paved the way for
a moratorium on nuclear tests that in the twentyfirst century has been implemented by all countries
in the world but one. And, through its Preparatory
Commission and Provisional Technical Secretariat, the
CTBT has led to the establishment of a highly effective
and fully reliable global monitoring system, whose
invaluable role in quickly providing trustworthy and
independent data has been demonstrated repeatedly.
However, progress along the way towards
non-proliferation and disarmament requires that
the current voluntary moratorium on nuclear-test
explosions be translated into a binding norm by means
of the CTBT’s entry into force. Our shared commitment
is crucial to reaching that goal. As the 2018 Chair of
the CTBTO Preparatory Commission, Italy invites
all partners to work closely together to turn political
momentum into action and, eventually, reality.
In that very spirit, following a consolidated
practice by the countries that have chaired the
CTBTO Preparatory Commission, and consistent
with the cooperation agreement concluded between
the United Nations and the Preparatory Commission
in 2000, the delegation of Italy wishes to submit to
the General Assembly draft resolution A/73/L.22,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization”.
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations (A/73/328), as well
as of the report of the Executive Secretary of the
Preparatory Commission for the CTBTO, and noting
with appreciation the establishment of the CTBTO New
York liaison mechanism in June 2017, the text envisages

A/73/PV.39

the decision to include in the provisional agenda of the
seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly, under
the item “Cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and other organizations”, a sub-item
specifically devoted to discussing the cooperation
between the United Nations and the Preparatory
Commission for the CTBTO. In that regard, the
Secretariat has informed us that an oral amendment
is required regarding the third preambular paragraph,
which should read as follows:
“Noting with appreciation the establishment
of the New York liaison mechanism between the
United Nations and the Preparatory Commission
for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
Organization in June 2017”.
This draft resolution, which has been submitted
biennially for several years, performs a procedural
function but, above all, it has a political value. The
activities that the Preparatory Commission and the
Provisional Technical Secretariat are performing
pursuant to the Treaty and the CTBTO resolution
establishing the Preparatory Commission to foster
non-proliferation and security contribute to the
fulfilment of the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations. Close cooperation between
the United Nations and the CTBTO Preparatory
Commission therefore serves the interests of the
international community. Synergies are in fact mutually
beneficial and need to be pursued with determination.
Against that backdrop, we are confident that the
General Assembly will be willing to adopt the draft
resolution we have submitted, as a means to continue
keeping non-proliferation and disarmament high on
our agenda.
The Acting President: I should like to inform
members that action on draft resolution A/73/L.23,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the League of Arab States” is postponed to a later date
to allow time for a review of its programme budget
implications by the Fifth Committee.
I now give the floor to the representative of Qatar
to introduce draft resolution A/73/L.23.
Ms. Al Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): As Chair
of the Group of Arab States for the month of November,
and on behalf of the following Arab countries — Algeria,
Bahrain, Comoros, Djibouti, Egypt, Iraq, Jordan,
Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Mauritania, Morocco, Oman,

18-397759/32

A/73/PV.39

Palestine, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, the Sudan, Somalia,
Tunisia, the United Arab Emirates, Yemen — it is my
honour to introduce to the General Assembly the draft
resolution contained in document A/73/L.23, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
League of Arab States”.
The draft resolution before members embodies
one of the fundamental principles established in the
Charter of the United Nations, namely, the cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
in areas of common interest, particularly in the area
of international peace and security, as provided for in
Chapter VIII of the Charter. The draft resolution is
based on the need to strengthen cooperation between
the two organizations, the United Nations and the
League of Arab States, with a view to achieving their
common goals and objectives.
The draft resolution reflects the high level of
cooperation between the secretariats of the United
Nations and the League of Arab States at the practical
level as well as the ongoing efforts to continue and
strengthen their cooperation in the future. The draft
resolution further aims to continue and improve
interaction and consultation between the specialized
agencies, programmes and institutions of the United
Nations and their counterparts from Arab organizations
and institutions.
Consequently, we call on Member States to support
the draft resolution contained in document A/73/L.23,
and we call on the General Assembly as well to adopt
it by consensus.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Azerbaijan to introduce draft
resolution A/73/L.25.
Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): In our capacity as
Chairman-in-Office of the Black Sea Economic
Cooperation Organization (BSEC), the Republic
of Azerbaijan is pleased to introduce, on behalf of
its sponsors, draft resolution A/73/L.25, submitted
under sub-item (o) of agenda item 128 and entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Black Sea Economic Cooperation Organization”.
The draft resolution, which is based on resolution
71/18, adopted by consensus by the General Assembly
on 21 November 2016, was discussed in informal
consultations in an open and transparent manner. It
includes substantive and technical updates and new
10/32

26/11/2018

paragraphs reflecting developments over the past
two years. I would like to thank delegations for their
constructive approach and contribution throughout the
negotiations process.
The draft resolution reiterates the conviction
that the strengthening of cooperation between the
United Nations and other organizations contributes
to the promotion of the purposes and principles of
the United Nations. It further refers to the activities
of the organization aimed at strengthening regional
cooperation in various fields and welcomes the efforts
towards elaborating and implementing concrete joint
regional projects.
The draft resolution welcomes the ongoing
cooperation by the Black Sea Economic Cooperation
Organization with the funds, programmes and
specialized agencies of the United Nations system and
encourages developing practical and goal-oriented
projects in areas of common interest. It also seeks
to promote the interest of the Black Sea Economic
Cooperation Organization in the implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, bearing
in mind the importance of regional and subregional
dimensions and interconnectivity in sustainable
development and their supporting role in facilitating
the effective translation of sustainable development
policies into concrete action at the national level.
The report of the Secretary-General entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and other organizations” (A/73/328) describes, inter
alia, the joint activities of the United Nations and the
Black Sea Economic Cooperation Organization and the
reinforced engagement of the United Nations with the
BSEC secretariat and its member States with respect to
the implementation of the 2030 Agenda.
The adoption of the draft resolution will further
contribute to enhancing cooperation between the United
Nations and the Black Sea Economic Cooperation
Organization, supporting the implementation of ongoing
projects in areas of mutual interest and strengthening
the relevance and visibility of the activities undertaken
for the benefit of the countries of the region. We
look forward to Member States support for the draft
resolution and its adoption by consensus.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Moldova to introduce
draft resolution A/73/L.26/Rev.1.
18-39775

26/11/2018

Mr. Moraru (Republic of Moldova): As the country
currently holding the chairmanship of the Organization
for Democracy and Economic Development — GUAM,
the Republic of Moldova has the honour to introduce, on
behalf of its sponsors, draft resolution A/73/L.26 Rev.1,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization for Democracy and Economic
Development — GUAM”.
As
a
full-fledged
international
regional
organization, with the distinct vocation of promoting
democracy in its member States and their economic
development, GUAM attaches great importance to
cooperation with the United Nations. That cooperation
began in 2004, when GUAM obtained observer status
in the General Assembly, pursuant to resolution
58/85. The United Nations has been an important
partner to the GUAM member States in their pursuit
of stability and sustainable development. The previous
resolutions on this subject, particularly the biennial
resolutions 67/109 and 69/271, all entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization for
Democracy and Economic Development — GUAM”,
defined the framework for cooperation between the
two organizations. The Secretary-General’s report
(A/73/328), submitted under the current agenda item,
highlights some areas of focus where cooperation
between the United Nations and GUAM was envisaged
in the period since then in terms of enhanced interaction.
The draft resolution that is being introduced today
under sub-item (v) of agenda item 128 underscores
the importance of continued cooperation between
the United Nations and GUAM and acknowledges
GUAM’S efforts to enhance cooperative relationships
with the United Nations and its member States. It also
takes note of GUAM’s activities aimed at promoting
regional cooperation in various areas.
The overall goal of the draft resolution is to further
develop cooperation between the United Nations
and GUAM and through a dynamic and substantive
partnership to better contribute to the promotion of the
vision and principles set out in the Charter of the United
Nations. It emphasizes the importance of strengthening
dialogue, cooperation and coordination between the
United Nations system and GUAM, and urges the
agencies, programmes, funds and other specialized
institutions of the United Nations to cooperate and
develop direct contacts with GUAM for the joint
implementation of projects aimed at attaining common
objectives. Lastly, it asks the Secretary-General to

A/73/PV.39

submit to the General Assembly, at its seventy-fifth
session, a report on the implementation of the current
draft resolution.
The text of the draft resolution proposed for
adoption today is based on the Assembly’s previous
consensus resolutions on the topic. It has been discussed
in informal consultations in an open and transparent
manner. The sponsors of the draft resolution took into
account the comments and suggestions of all interested
delegations. I sincerely hope that this year’s draft
resolution will be adopted without a vote, as has been
the case in past years.
In conclusion, I would also like to express the
sponsors’ firm belief that once the draft resolution is
adopted it will further strengthen cooperation between
the United Nations and GUAM, thereby contributing
to the promotion of shared objectives in the area of
international peace and development, including the
Sustainable Development Goals, as set out in the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tajikistan to introduce draft resolution
A/73/L.28.
Mr. Hikmatov (Tajikistan) (spoke in Russian): The
delegation of the Republic of Tajikistan, as President
of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) for
2018, has the honour to submit for the attention of the
General Assembly draft resolution A/73/L.28, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Commonwealth of Independent States”.
Throughout its existence the Commonwealth has
frequently demonstrated that it is a useful platform for
dialogue between its member countries on political,
economic, social and humanitarian issues, and today it
is as much in demand as ever with respect to a number
of important topics. It was an important milestone for
the CIS when the General Assembly granted it observer
status in March 1994, while on 3 August of the same
year, the Secretariat registered the CIS Charter as a
multilateral agreement and the Commonwealth was
recognized as a regional international organization.
As such, it participates in all major forums held by the
United Nations and other international organizations.
The new session of the Council of Head of States
of the Commonwealth, held in Dushanbe in September,
was an event of key significance for our organization.
The meeting paid particular attention to issues related

18-3977511/32

A/73/PV.39

to further strengthening cooperation between CIS
member States in the areas of ensuring security and
stability in the Commonwealth, trade and economic
cooperation, energy, transport and communications,
and the development of cooperation in the areas of
science, education, youth policy, health care, sport and
tourism, including issues related to the free movement
of goods, investments and services, and cultural and
humanitarian cooperation. The meeting culminated in
the adoption of 16 decisions and a number of political
statements, one of the most important of which was a
declaration by the Heads of State of the CIS countries
on the occasion of the seventieth anniversary of the
adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights that reaffirmed our unwavering commitment
to promoting and protecting human rights and
fundamental freedoms.
I would like to point out that one of the priority
areas of Tajikistan’s presidency of the CIS is
strengthening cooperation between member States of
the Commonwealth within the framework of the United
Nations. We have accumulated solid experience in that
regard at various levels of cooperation between the
CIS and the United Nations aimed at addressing our
common social, economic and humanitarian challenges.
However, in order to strengthen the practical aspects
of our cooperation and make it more effective, a
systemic foundation for that collaboration that will
help to develop and deepen the ties between the CIS
and the specialized agencies of the United Nations is
essential. That is the purpose of the draft resolution
on “Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Commonwealth of Independent States” that is before
the Assembly today.
In conclusion, I would like to express my gratitude
to all States Members of the United Nations for their
support to this draft resolution, which we hope will be
adopted by consensus.
Mr. Chua (Singapore): I thank the President for
convening today’s important debate. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report on the cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and other organizations (A/73/328). The
activities and achievements outlined in the report
illustrate the depth and breadth of cooperation between
the United Nations and its partners.
Today’s uncertain global landscape is evolving at
a rapid pace. Many of the challenges we face are no
12/32

26/11/2018

longer neatly confined within geographical boundaries.
Terrorism, cybercrime and climate change are just some
examples of the complex issues that are transboundary
in nature. The United Nations cannot deal with
those contemporary threats alone; regional and other
organizations must be meaningfully engaged to
complement the work of the United Nations in addressing
such issues. Given their specialized knowledge,
functional expertise and holistic understanding of
regional contexts, regional organizations will be able
to enhance the work of the United Nations in a manner
that takes into account the specific circumstances and
needs of each Member State.
Singapore therefore welcomes the draft resolutions
before the Assembly on cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and other organizations (A/73/L.17,
A/73/L.21,
A/73/L.22,
A/73/L.23,
A/73/L.25,
A/73/L.26/Rev.1, A/73/L.27, A/73/L.28). The draft
resolutions are testament to the broad outreach and
deep engagement between the United Nations and the
relevant organizations. Critically, the draft resolutions
demonstrate the interest of the United Nations in further
collaboration with these organizations.
Singapore’s view is that the United Nations network
of partnerships should be deepened and expanded.
In addition, cooperation and synergies among the
different regional organizations should be strengthened.
To that end, we welcome the interactive dialogue
meetings between the Secretary-General and heads of
regional organizations as a concrete way to promote
understanding of each region’s unique circumstances.
Singapore would like to highlight our sponsorship
of draft resolution A/73/L.21, entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the International
Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL)”. A
predecessor resolution on this topic was first considered
and adopted two years ago at the seventy-first session of
the General Assembly (resolution 71/19). Important and
timely updates have been made to the draft resolution
to reflect present realities and the constantly evolving
nature of threats, for example, through the prevention
and disruption of foreign terrorist fighter travel and
countering the use of information and communication
technologies for terrorist purposes. It also highlights
INTERPOL’s capabilities that Member States can
leverage, such as the Stolen and Lost Travel Document
Database. Tackling such threats requires greater
cooperation between States Members of the United
18-39775

26/11/2018

Nations and INTERPOL, which is exactly what the
draft resolution calls for.
Since its establishment, INTERPOL has played a
critical role in international law enforcement. Singapore
is proud to play our part in this endeavour. We have
been a member of INTERPOL since 1968 and host the
INTERPOL Global Complex for Innovation, established
in 2015. The Complex aids in the identification of crimes
and criminals using advanced tools and capabilities and
provides capacity training and operational support.
As the Chair of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) this year, Singapore, on behalf of
ASEAN, will submit a draft resolution on cooperation
between the United Nations and ASEAN (A/73/L.71).
We look forward to the support of the international
community for the draft resolution.
The need for greater engagement by regional and
other organizations is increasingly urgent owing to
mounting concerns about the utility of multilateralism
and the propensity of some to resort to unilateral
solutions. Strengthening the symbiotic relationship
between the United Nations and regional organizations
will send a strong signal that greater cooperation,
engagement and trust are the way forward in overcoming
these challenges.
Ms. Alsabah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to associate ourselves with the
statement made by the Permanent Representative of the
State of Qatar on behalf of the Group of Arab States, as
well as with the statement to be made by the Permanent
Observer of the League of Arab States (LAS).
My delegation has carefully reviewed the report
of the Secretary-General on cooperation between the
United Nations and regional and other organizations
(A/73/328), which details the cooperation between the
United Nations and 26 regional and other organizations.
The report stresses the importance of continuing to
deepen existing cooperation arrangements and of
considering new ones, as appropriate, with the aim
of achieving the noble purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations, thereby fulfilling
the aspirations of the peoples of the world towards
achieving security, peace and stability and enjoying
human rights, development and well-being.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations has become a
necessity given the world situations and circumstances,

A/73/PV.39

their variables and enormous challenges, on the one
hand, and the unprecedented growing role of regional
organizations, on the other hand. The objective is to
achieve international peace and security, especially
in the midst of the increase in intrastate and regional
conflicts. By emphasizing the importance of this kind of
cooperation, many regional organizations have sought
to cooperate with the United Nations in accordance with
Chapter VIII of the Charter in order to address security
challenges and settle conflicts throughout the world.
The complex, multidimensional and unpredictable
challenges we face today make multilateral cooperation
increasingly important. Regional organizations often
have a better understanding of the nature of a conflict as
a result of their closer geographic, historic, cultural and
social ties to it. That means that regional organizations
are better able to understand the root causes of conflicts
and identify the best options for resolving them.
The State of Kuwait is a member of two very
important regional organizations: the LAS and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC). Both
organizations have enjoyed a long relationship with the
United Nations for more than three decades. We call for
strengthening and enhancing the ongoing cooperation
in order to achieve peace, security and stability in our
Arab and Islamic worlds. Our brotherly peoples in
Palestine, Syria, Yemen and Libya and the Rohingya
minority all have the right to enjoy peace, development
and prosperity following the tremendous humanitarian
suffering they have experienced as a result of gross and
flagrant violations of international humanitarian law
and international human rights law.
In order to develop cooperation between the
United Nations, the LAS and OIC, the State of Kuwait
deems it important to conclude more memorandums
of understanding and other agreements between
the United Nations and those two organizations,
while taking into consideration the capabilities and
responsibilities of each of them. The aim is to define
a clear and effective framework for the cooperation
and coordination mechanism that could enhance
dialogue and exchange of expertise. It is also useful
to expand cooperation in order to include the areas of
development, economics and sociocultural, as well as
humanitarian and environmental domains. That would
help to address the root causes of crises and conflicts
with a view to resolving them.

18-3977513/32

A/73/PV.39

In conclusion, we reiterate our belief that the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations in maintaining international peace and
security, preventing conflicts and resolving them
by peaceful means could be best achieved through
deepened cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations, in order to energise earlywarning mechanisms, preventive diplomacy and
swift appropriate response to conflicts looming on
the horizon.
Mrs. Ataeva (Turkmenistan) (spoke in Russian):
The delegation of Turkmenistan would like to thank
the Secretary-General for the preparation of his report
(A/73/328) on the implementation of resolution 72/273,
on cooperation between the United Nations and the
International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea.
The situation in the Aral Sea region is one of the
worst global environmental disasters in recent history,
whose consequences are being felt by Central Asia’s
population of more than 60 million people. Today the
effects of the Aral Sea disaster can be perceived all
over the world. According to international experts,
toxic salts from the Aral Sea region have been found on
the shores of the Antarctic, in glaciers in Greenland, in
Norwegian forests and many other parts of the world.
Right now the most crucial task we have is reducing the
destructive consequences of the Aral Sea crisis for the
surrounding environment and the health and existence
of the millions of people living in the Aral Sea basin.
In that connection, at the United Nations Conference
on Sustainable Development in Rio de Janeiro in June
2012, the President of Turkmenistan emphasized that
the problem of the Aral Sea had by then gone far beyond
the boundaries of the region. It had become a truly
global problem and a completely new approach was
therefore needed to address the environmental, social,
humanitarian, economic and other issues resulting
from it. In that regard, the President of Turkmenistan
proposed establishing a separate entity within the
United Nations, in the form of a special programme for
the Aral region. We are grateful to the United Nations
and its bodies, specialized entities and agencies for
their understanding and support of that idea, and we are
continuing to implement the initiative. The Assembly’s
adoption by consensus on 12 April of resolution 72/273,
entitled “Cooperation between United Nations and the
International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea”, established
a sound legal foundation for it.
14/32

26/11/2018

At the Summit of the founding members of the
International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea, held on
24 August 2018 in Turkmenistan, our Heads of State
voiced their support for the importance of creating a
specialized United Nations programme for the Aral
Sea basin and tasked the Fund’s Executive Committee
with carrying out consultations on the subject with the
States of the region, United Nations Member States, the
United Nations itself and its various bodies. That is why
Turkmenistan intends to present for the Assembly’s
consideration during its seventy-third session a draft
resolution of the same title as the previous resolution
that includes provisions reflecting the outcomes of the
Aral Sea Summit. It will specifically call for multilateral
consultations to consider the already drafted concept
for the special programme for the Aral Sea in detail. We
call on Member States to support our proposal.
A model for international cooperation on the
Aral Sea issue that is being drafted by the countries
of Central Asia can be used for study and application
in other regions of the world susceptible to the
negative consequences of similar natural disasters.
We believe the main areas for the special United
Nations programme for the Aral Sea basin could
be the following: mobilizing cooperation between
the Fund and the United Nations on implementing
the Sustainable Development Goals in the Aral Sea
region with regard to water-resource management
in the context of climate change; creating a global
platform for multilateral cooperation in addressing the
problem of internal watercourses based on the Fund’s
experience in improving the water-conservation,
environmental and socioeconomic situation in the
Aral Sea basin; developing and implementing longterm strategic goals for water-resource management
and environmental protection in Central Asia with the
participation of international partners; improving the
water-conservation, environmental and socioeconomic
situation in the Aral Sea basin by implementing projects
and programmes in partnership with international
organizations and financial institutions; and increasing
awareness of the problem of the Aral Sea in today’s
environment. We firmly believe that the special United
Nations programme for the Aral Sea basin will be
an effective platform for multilateral cooperation to
address the Aral Sea issue and a basis for a global
initiative for countries on problems with inland bodies
of water.
18-39775

26/11/2018

Mr. Kickert (Austria): Austria would like to
warmly thank Lassina Zerbo, Executive Secretary of
the Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization (CTBTO), for the
presentation of his report (A/73/111). We also welcome
draft resolution A/73/L.22, on “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the Preparatory Commission
for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty” and
express our gratitude to Italy as its main sponsor.
We note with satisfaction the close and everexpanding relationship between the CTBTO
Preparatory Commission and the United Nations,
dating back to the Assembly’s adoption of the Treaty.
The Relationship Agreement, adopted in 2000, provides
a solid foundation for active cooperation between
the two organizations. We particularly welcomed the
establishment in 2017 of the CTBTO’s New York Liaison
Office, which will contribute to further strengthening
this close partnership.
The Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
(CTBT) has established a universally accepted norm
against nuclear testing, banning all nuclear explosions.
The nuclear tests conducted by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea have demonstrated the CTBTO’s
invaluable role in quickly providing independent and
reliable data enabling the international community
to respond appropriately and swiftly. Following the
positive signals from the recent high-level talks
between the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
and the Republic of Korea and the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and the United States, we urge the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to take concrete
steps towards complete, verifiable and irreversible
denuclearization, comply with its international
obligations and sign and ratify the CTBT without
delay. The fact is that the accession of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to the CTBT must be a
central element in any credible denuclearization process
on the Korean peninsula. The CTBTO Preparatory
Commission’s unique expertise, as established in
its mandate, in verifying the dismantling of nuclear
weapons and nuclear-weapon test sites and in ongoing
remote monitoring, as well as the Treaty Organization’s
own independence, predestines it to engage in such a
denuclearization process.
The CTBT is a key instrument of the global nucleardisarmament and non-proliferation architecture. The
Treaty’s entry into force is enormously important. We
will continue to use every opportunity to advocate for

A/73/PV.39

the ratification and universalization of the CTBT. We
welcome Thailand’s ratification and Tuvalu’s signing of
the Treaty and call on all States that have not yet done
so, in particular the remaining annex 2 States mentioned
by Mr. Zerbo, to sign and ratify it without further delay.
We would also like to take this opportunity to express
our appreciation to Belgium and Iraq for their efforts as
article XIV co-Coordinators.
Mr. Fadhil (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to express my country’s appreciation
to the Executive Secretary of the Preparatory
Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty Organization for the report on its activities in
2017 (A/73/111). My country’s delegation takes note
of that report, and would like to thank Italy, as Chair
of the Preparatory Commission, for its efforts to
facilitate the submission of draft resolution A/73/L.22,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization”.
The Government of my country categorically
believes in the importance of binding international
instrument to address nuclear testing and be an integral
part of the international non-proliferation regime and
the international disarmament system. Based on that,
my Government underscores the need to implement
the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT)
as soon as possible in order to safeguard, without
exception, our common future. In that regard, my
delegation welcomes the ratification of the CTBT
by Thailand, bringing the number of ratifications to
167. We also welcome the signing of the Treaty by
Tuvalu, bringing the number of signatories to 184. We
underscore our support to the two countries and our
readiness to work with them in order to achieve the
CTBT objectives.
My delegation also stresses the importance of
the work carried out by the Preparatory Commission
as it seeks to finalize the verification system. We as
well emphasize the civilian and technical benefits that
result from monitoring technology. We commend the
Commission’s role in encouraging non-signatory and
non-ratifying countries to sign and ratify the Treaty as
soon as possible in order to achieve the ultimate goal of
its entry into force.
My country considers the CTBT to be an extremely
important instrument that plays a fundamental role in
the nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament system.

18-3977515/32

A/73/PV.39

It is crucially important to international peace and
security. The increasing importance of the Treaty is
evident through the efforts aimed at achieving its
universalization, but there is an urgent need to make
it enter into force through the ratification of eight
countries listed in the Treaty’s annex 2.
As a facilitator of article XIV of the Treaty,
alongside the Kingdom of Belgium, we worked with
the Treaty’s Provisional Technical Secretariat to carry
out many activities, the most important of which is the
issuance of a welcoming statement in June concerning
the summit between the Presidents of the United States
of America and the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. That statement included a call addressed to the
latter to sign and ratify the Treaty as soon as possible
so as to ensure its entry into force. My delegation looks
forward to promoting the Treaty in Iraq next year in
coordination with the Executive Secretary of the CTBT
and our friends in Belgium.
In conclusion, my country’s delegation reiterates
its support for the Provisional Technical Secretariat of
the CTBT and underscores the importance of working
together to ensure that the Treaty enters into force as
soon as possible in order to establish a world free from
nuclear testing that would contribute to the maintenance
of international peace and security.
Mr. Horne (Australia): I take the floor to speak
under sub-item (k) of agenda item 128, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization”. I thank the
Executive Secretary for his opening remarks and for his
visit last week to Australia, where we jointly hosted a
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization
(CTBTO) regional workshop in my hometown of
Melbourne for States in the South Pacific.
It was also wonderful to have the Executive
Secretary in Australia last week as he was able to
help us celebrate the completion and certification of
our twenty-first and final monitoring station. As the
Executive Secretary noted, Australia is host to the thirdlargest number of monitoring facilities in the world
and provides data from Alice Springs to Antarctica in
contribution to the International Monitoring System
(IMS). This significant achievement is the product
of more than 20 years of cooperation and partnership
between Australia and the CTBTO.
16/32

26/11/2018

Australia is a strong supporter of the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) and of its verification
regime in particular as a critical element of the
global nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament
architecture. It is particularly important that we further
develop the civil and scientific applications of those
technologies, building on the tangible contribution to
tsunami warnings for countries in our Indo-Pacific
region. That makes a tangible contribution to millions
of lives every day.
It is both reassuring and unfortunate that we know
exactly how effective the IMS has become, as Australian
stations were among those to detect North Korean tests
in recent years. That serves as a clear reminder to us
all of the importance of the CTBT and of our efforts
to further build and strengthen its verification regime.
Australia is committed to complete, verifiable
and irreversible denuclearization by North Korea. We
welcome ongoing dialogue between North Korea and
each of the Republic of Korea and the United States.
We note North Korea’s commitment to halting nuclear
testing and to allowing international inspections of
the Punggye-ri nuclear test site and the Tongchang-ri
missile site. We see those commitments as positive, but
we remain committed to maintaining pressure on North
Korea until it takes concrete steps towards complying
with the relevant Security Council resolutions on its
nuclear and ballistic-missile programmes. We call on
North Korea to sign and ratify the CTBT as part of its
commitment to denuclearize.
Australia calls on all States yet to do so, particularly
those listed in annex 2 and those in our region, to
ratify the CTBT without delay. We welcome Thailand
ratifying and Tuvalu signing the CTBT, both of which
are events we can all celebrate as tangible progress
towards bringing the Treaty into force. Australia
maintains that the entry into force of the Treaty is of
the utmost importance.
In the interim, we maintain our strong support
for the Preparatory Commission for the CTBTO and
welcome the successes of its recently concluded fiftyfirst session and its ongoing cooperation with the United
Nations. We thank Italy, as Preparatory Commission
Chair for 2018, for leading the work on the draft
resolution contained in document A/73/L.22. Australia
is proud to remain a sponsor of the draft resolution, and
we encourage others to join us in doing the same.
18-39775

26/11/2018

Ms. Bassols Delgado (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I am honoured to address the General Assembly with
regard to two of the draft resolutions submitted under
agenda item 128, entitled “Cooperation between the
United Nations and regional and other organizations”.
I wish first to address draft resolution A/73/L.21,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations
and the International Criminal Police Organization
(INTERPOL)”, which my country sponsored. I wish to
thank the Permanent Missions of Brazil and Switzerland
for their excellent work in facilitating the negotiations
on the draft and to recognize the work carried out by the
experts who participated in the negotiations. I should
also like to welcome the presence in the Hall today of
INTERPOL Secretary General Jürgen Stock.
Two years ago, Spain welcomed the Assembly’s
adoption of resolution 71/19, which for the first time
established a formal framework for cooperation
between the United Nations and INTERPOL. That first
resolution set straight the anomalous situation whereby
recognition of the significant cooperation already in
place with INTERPOL was long overdue.
Spain has been a member of INTERPOL since
1956. Our relationship with INTERPOL has been and
is excellent, both bilaterally and within the framework
of the United Nations. We collaborated intensively with
INTERPOL during our term on the Security Council in
the 2015-2016 biennium. We recognize the importance
of INTERPOL’s work in the joint fight against terrorism
and transnational organized crime.
It is clear that those forms of criminality, which
are interrelated and growing in complexity, recognize
no borders and take the form of networks, cannot be
effectively halted without adequate cooperation among
our police forces. For such cooperation to be effective,
we need to equip ourselves with the appropriate tools
and resources. There can be no doubt that INTERPOL,
as the organization dedicated, almost universally, to the
promotion of international police cooperation, is the
key frame of reference in this area.
In fulfilling its mandate, INTERPOL has developed
a wide range of enormously useful tools, including the
I-24/7 secure global police communication system,
databases, notifications and alerts, analytic products,
and training and capacity-building activities. Those
resources are in place, but they are not yet used to their
full potential, which is one of the reasons that this draft
resolution is so important in our view, as it reminds

A/73/PV.39

us of the possibilities of the technical, operational,
analytical and other assistance that INTERPOL puts at
our disposal.
For Spain, the fight against terrorism is a priority
of the highest order. We are therefore particularly
pleased that the new draft resolution has been updated
to include to the most pressing challenges posed by the
current terrorist threats, in particular the phenomenon
of foreign terrorist fighters, including those who return
home or relocate. We therefore reiterate our support
for cooperation between the United Nations and
INTERPOL, which we trust will continue to grow and
contribute to a safer world for all.
I should now like to turn to draft resolution
A/73/L.22, entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Preparatory Commission for the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization”,
which my country is also honoured to sponsor. We
thank Italy for introducing the draft resolution, and
we welcome the presence here today of the Executive
Secretary, Mr. Lassina Zerbo.
The Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty,
which Spain signed in 1996 and ratified in 1998,
constitutes a key element of the global non-proliferation
system and a crucial step towards achieving the goal of
nuclear disarmament. We must recall the urgent need
to ensure its entry into force, and we call once again on
all those States not yet having done so to proceed to its
signature and ratification. This call goes in particular
to the remaining eight annex 2 States, without whose
ratification of a Treaty that has the support of the vast
majority of the international community — let us recall
that 167 States have ratified it — will remain as is,
without entering into force.
We want to express our firm support for the
important work carried out by the Preparatory
Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty Organization and its cooperation with the United
Nations. I also wish to highlight the importance of the
International Monitoring System, whose effectiveness
in detecting tests has already been demonstrated.
Any nuclear test constitutes a threat to international
peace and security and must therefore be condemned.
We request that the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea maintain the declared moratorium on the conduct
of nuclear tests, and we reiterate our call that it sign
and ratify the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
without delay.

18-3977517/32

A/73/PV.39

Ms. Buner (Turkey): Terrorism and organized
crime continue to pose important challenges to
international peace, security and stability. The
interconnectivity between terrorist cells and criminal
organizations is of paramount significance. Our efforts
to suppress them should therefore also have a strong
international dimension.
Based on this understanding, Turkey supports
the adoption of draft resolution A/73/L.21, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and
the International Criminal Police Organization
(INTERPOL)”. We believe that the draft resolution
will provide further useful input for the international
community in tackling those threats.
We would like to take this opportunity to
emphasize our position regarding one particular issue.
As a country that has been fighting against almost all
types of terrorism for more than 40 years, we firmly
believe that it is high time to reaffirm that security
is indivisible. We must apply the universal principle
of “either prosecute or extradite”. We must give the
same message to terrorists: there is no safe haven or
immunity from justice. No act of terrorism should go
unpunished; otherwise, our joint efforts to mitigate and
ultimately defeat this threat are bound to collapse.
Mr. Al Arsan (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation would like to express its position
with respect to sub-item (d) of agenda item 128 and draft
resolution A/73/L.23, entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the League of Arab States”.
As members of the Assembly are aware, my country,
the Syrian Arab Republic, was one of the founding
members of the League of Arab States (LAS) in March
1945, even before the founding of the United Nations.
The LAS founding members decided at that time to
entrust it with many tasks and responsibilities, on top
of which is maintaining the independence of member
States and achieving cooperation among Arab countries
at the economic, cultural, social and health levels, as well
as preserving the independence and interests of Arab
States while liberating non-independent Arab countries
and cooperating with international organizations to
maintain international peace and security.
Notwithstanding the significant developments and
great challenges that have occurred in the world — and in
the Middle East in particular, including the occupation
of Palestine, the displacement of millions of its people
and the occupation of Syrian Arab Golan — the LAS
18/32

26/11/2018

has struggled for decades to preserve its role, status
and credibility as a regional organization that brings
together the Governments of Arab States and defends
the rights and interests of their peoples, who share the
same blood, language and destiny. The League has
continued to be a reflection of the historical Arab role,
civilization and interactivity within the framework of
international relations.
However, the past decade has shown the League’s
real and serious setback as a result of a limited number
of Governments of League member States — that have
enormous economic revenues from oil and gas — which
decided to submit to foreign pressures and schemes that
run counter to Arab national interests and threaten the
concept of collective Arab national security. To that end,
those Governments also decided to control the League
work mechanisms in order to resolve their political
differences with League States and non-League States
by harnessing those mechanisms to serve their political
interests and agendas.
The Syrian Arab Republic is a country of principle.
We do not level false or unfair accusations. We take our
responsibilities very seriously, and when we express
our position, we provide evidence, facts and legal basis.
Therefore, when we assert that the decision taken by
the LAS Council of Ministers of Foreign Affairs at
their meeting on 12 November 2011 to suspend Syria’s
membership in the League was illegitimate, we base our
argument on the LAS Charter, which clearly states that
a Member State may be suspended only by a unanimous
decision of all Member States at a summit meeting.
Based on that legal basis, the Syrian Arab Republic
continues to reject the League’s politicized decision.
We do not recognize any of its legal or political effects.
However, we reiterate that it is the responsibility of
those who breached the LAS Charter in taking that
decision to reverse it.
A second breach by the League of Arab States,
which many in this Hall may not be familiar with, also
took place in November 2011, when the LAS unilaterally
imposed coercive economic measures against the
Syrian people, in violation of the Charter of the United
Nations and relevant General Assembly resolutions.
Those measures amounted to an economic blockade
in many sectors, in particular finance, trade, banking,
investment, transport, aviation and media. They are
punitive measures against Syrian citizens who chose to
stand by their country and their Government in the face
of extremist Wahhabi religious terrorism, regrettably
18-39775

26/11/2018

supported and financed by certain Governments of
LAS member States.
Based on that legal basis, we in the Syrian Arab
Republic continue to reject and condemn the decision
that the LAS was forced to take that imposed an
economic blockade against Syrians. We hold those
who took that decision legally responsible along with
its economic, humanitarian and financial consequences
on the Syrian people, who have been suffering until
now. At the same time, the Syrian Arab Republic will
always remember and highly appreciate the significant
number of members of the LAS that rejected the unjust
economic blockade imposed on the Syrian people.
Thirdly, in December 2011 — many here in this Hall
do know about this fact — the Syrian Arab Republic
responded favourably to the Arab League initiative to
send a team of Arab observers to various parts of Syria,
despite the fact that the Syrian Government knew
the premeditated ill intentions of the Governments of
certain LAS member States. However, some in this Hall
today may not know that, in early 2012, the LAS Chair
and secretariat ignored and buried the report of the head
of the team of Arab observers because it had concluded
that foreign Powers were seeking to negatively interfere
in the situation in Syria.
We can provide a long list of facts related to
decisions and attitudes that were imposed on the LAS
over the past eight years concerning the situation in
Syria. Those decisions and attitudes were imbalanced
and reflected the influence of one or two countries
over the decision-making mechanism of that regional
organization. At the same time, we confidently
underscore from this rostrum that the vast majority
of LAS member States continue to disapprove of the
decisions adopted against Syria, as they run counter to
the majority of those Member States.
Fourthly, the Syrian people will never forget or
forgive Governments of a limited number of LAS
member States for having ominously interfered in
the internal affairs of Syria and for having directly
implicated themselves in support of armed terrorist
groups in Syria. They recruited and financed tens of
thousands of foreign terrorist fighters and sent them to
fight in the ranks of Da’esh, Al-Qaida, the Al-Nusra
Front and other armed terrorist groups, which the
Governments in question have falsely described as
moderate opposition. The truth is that those terrorist
groups subscribe to the same extremist religious-

A/73/PV.39

terrorist ideology that advocates the killing of others,
the expropriation of victims’ funds and property, the
demolition of their homes and the burning of their lands
and sources of livelihood.
In that context, my delegation expresses its
categorical reservation with regard to paragraph 67
of the report of the Secretary-General contained in
document A/73/328, on the existence of communication
and coordination between the United Nations and the
LAS regarding the situation in Syria. My country does
not see a role for the LAS in relation to the situation
in Syria as long as its role continues to be hijacked
and subjected to the policies and practices of a limited
number of financially and economically powerful
Governments. Those are Governments of Member
States of that regional organization, and their policies
and practices remain ongoing and are, as we have
said, premised regrettably on political and military
investments in extremist religious terrorism with a
view to obstruct the prospects for a political solution to
the situation in Syria. They are further premised on the
intention to seriously and destructively interfere in the
internal affairs of Syria.
My country has had to bear unprecedented suffering
in the history of humankind and in terms of inter-State
relations owing to global terrorism, with Syrians having
to pay a high price not only in terms of blood but also
in terms of lost economic, industrial and agricultural
gains after working hard for long decades in order
to realize them. Nevertheless, we in the Syrian Arab
Republic continue to believe that the LAS can restore
its role and credibility if it now undertakes a serious and
comprehensive review of its work over the past decade.
That would enable that regional organization to once
again play its role and shoulder its responsibilities as an
organization that truly serves collective Arab interests
and national security. In that context, we continue to
hope that the Arab League will deal with the situation
in Syria in a constructive and positive manner, while
directly cooperating and coordinating with the Syrian
Government in support of its efforts aimed at defeating
terrorism, ensuring the return of refugees and displaced
persons, reconstruction and ending foreign occupation
of its territories.
In conclusion, my country’s position is not against
the LAS, being one of its founding members. Syria’s Arab
identity and affiliation have always been a principled
position expressed by actions and policies, based on
our keen commitment to a regional organization that

18-3977519/32

A/73/PV.39

we hope will bring Arab States together, protect their
interests, reject interference in their internal affairs
and promote the socioeconomic development of all its
members without discrimination or exception so that no
one is left behind.
For all of those reasons, the Syrian Arab Republic
calls for a recorded vote on draft resolution A/73/L.23.
Mr. Hattrem (Norway): Norway is a consistent
partner in the global multilateral system. Norway
strongly believes that a rules-based international order
is in the interests of all States Members of the United
Nations. Both the institutions and the norms that
underpin this foundation are now under pressure. Only
international cooperation can bring about sustainable
development, mitigate and reduce climate change
and end violent conflict. The United Nations system,
together with regional and subregional organizations,
is the core of the multilateral order. All countries
depend up on the international system to address the
many global challenges we face.
We are now in the process of implementing
important United Nations reforms. At the same time,
countries are joining forces to make regional and other
organizations better prepared to address common
challenges. The consolidated report submitted as
background for today’s discussion (A/73/328) reminds
us about the important work of 26 intergovernmental
organizations and their numerous partnerships with
the United Nations. Through our membership in or
partnership with many of the organizations covered
by the present agenda item, we have first-hand
knowledge about numerous cooperation initiatives of
the United Nations.
We are particularly encouraged to see how the
relations between the United Nations and the African
Union (AU) are maturing and growing stronger. Within
less than two years, the two institutions have signed
and started two important framework agreements,
on peace and security and for the implementation
of the sustainable development agenda for Africa.
Partnerships with regional organizations are quite
rightly given priority in the Secretary-General’s Action
for Peacekeeping initiative.
We cannot say it too often: there can be no
development without security, and vice versa. In
January this year, we therefore applauded the signing
by United Nations and African Union leaders of the
Framework for Implementation of Agenda 2063 and
20/32

26/11/2018

2030 Agenda. We are convinced that this framework
will add important energy to both Agendas, reduce
duplication, accelerate domestic-resource mobilization
and attract support from development partners.
We share the enthusiasm among United Nations
and AU member States, and Norway has launched an
initiative in Addis Ababa to establish a group of friends
of the United Nations-AU partnership. The aim of the
initiative is to support and strengthen additional joint
AU-United Nations efforts for sustainable development,
conflict prevention, preventive diplomacy and
mediation, including enhanced cooperation between
the AU Peace and Security Council and the United
Nations Security Council.
Another area of important progress among many
is the commitment of the United Nations to deepen
its already comprehensive partnership with the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
Cooperation between the United Nations and ASEAN
remains essential to achieving sustainable development
and maintaining peace and security in the region.
Norway is taking a leading global on oceans and
sustainable use of ocean resources. This issue is also
a priority for Norway’s Sectoral Dialogue Partnership
with ASEAN. Norway looks forward to strengthening
its cooperation with the United Nations and ASEAN
in this field, including combating marine litter and
microplastics in the ASEAN region.
Norway fully supports United Nations efforts
to strengthen existing arrangements and seek new
opportunities for cooperation with regional and
other organizations.
Ms. Kaba (Guinea) (spoke in French): My
statement will address sub-item (a) of agenda item 128,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union”.
The past decade has been particularly busy
with the tireless efforts of African countries at the
national, subregional and continental levels to address
the challenges inherent to implementing the United
Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and the African Union 2063 Development Agenda in
a context of peace and stability. Sustained efforts are
being devoted, under the 2063 Agenda and its first
Ten-Year Implementation Plan, to generate structural
socioeconomic transformation, build collective
18-39775

26/11/2018

wealth and prosperity, and expeditiously promote
sustainable development.
Strategic partnership with the African Union
is crucial in all areas, especially peace and security,
in the light of the persistent nature of conflicts, the
proliferation of terrorist activities and other forms
of organized crime. Therefore, to eradicate them by
tackling their root causes, the United Nations must,
under Chapter VII of the Charter, further develop
strategic cooperation with the African Union. Such
cooperation has provided for significant progress
towards lasting solutions to recurrent and emerging
conflicts in some parts of the continent. That support
has produced tangible results in defusing tense relations
in the Horn of Africa. In that regard, the Guinean
delegation welcomes the signing of the Joint United
Nations-African Union Framework for an Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security, in April 2017, by
the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission.
Based on the principle of African ownership
of African problems, it is reassuring to note the
implementation of the African Union Peace Fund at the
Extraordinary Summit of the African Union, held in
Addis Ababa on 18 November. The significant progress
made by the United Nations-African Union Joint Task
Force on Peace and Security, which was established at
the second annual conference of the United Nations
and the African Union, held in Addis Ababa on 9 July,
gives cause for optimism on the future of cooperation
between Africa and this universal Organization.
We commend the commitment of SecretaryGeneral António Guterres and his many initiatives in
support of Africa, particularly with regard to conflict
prevention, the Action for Peacekeeping initiative and
the Declaration of Shared Commitments on United
Nations Peacekeeping Operations, as well as the various
high-level meetings on relevant topics. However, given
the scale and complexity of the challenges we face, it is
essential that United Nations action continue along the
following lines.
First, we must provide United Nations assistance
to the African Union in the mobilization of essential
resources for the implementation of Agenda 2063 of the
African Union and its first 10-year implementation plan.
Secondly, we should support the African Union
road map for the promotion of peace, security and
stability in Africa, with the aim of silencing the guns

A/73/PV.39

by 2020. This goal entails not only conflict prevention,
peacebuilding and post-conflict development, but also
good governance, the rule of law and democracy.
Thirdly, we must improve the cooperation and
coordination of activities in the deployment of
peacekeeping operations through adequate, predictable,
flexible and sustainable funding for human resources,
materials and equipment and capacity-building. In
that context, my delegation welcomes and supports
the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel,
embodied in the United Nations Support Plan for the
Sahel, which requires further resources and better
coordination of the activities of various partners on
the ground.
Fourthly, we must ensure the empowerment of
women and the promotion of young people embarking
along the path of exile in search of greater well-being.
Fifthly, we must manage the impact of climate
change, natural disasters and new technologies.
Sixthly, we must tackle migration issues.
In conclusion, the urgent need to enunciate the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and Agenda
2063 of the African Union, and to take into account the
recommendations of the Addis Ababa Action Agenda
of the third International Conference on Financing
for Development and to mobilize the international
community for the development of Africa, remains
dependent on the goals set by the Charter of the
United Nations, namely, the building of just, equitable,
integrated and peaceful societies.
Mr. Negash (Ethiopia): At the outset, Ethiopia
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report on cooperation between the
United Nations and regional and other organizations
(A/73/328), which clearly demonstrates the efforts
being made to strengthen the partnership between the
United Nations and those organizations. I would like
to make the following observations on cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union
(AU).
Given the unprecedented scale and complexity of
global dynamics, it is evident that the United Nations
cannot handle new and emerging global challenges
alone. Forging effective partnerships with regional
and subregional organizations is not an option, but
rather an absolute necessity for the Organization, as it
remains essential to maintaining international peace

18-3977521/32

A/73/PV.39

and security, upholding human rights and achieving
sustainable development. The role of the United
Nations system focusing mostly on support for peace
and security, good governance and social justice,
human rights protection and humanitarian action, and
initiatives and actions to contribute to addressing the
root causes of conflict in Africa is commendable.
In that regard, Ethiopia appreciates the readiness
and commitment of the Secretary-General to further
deepening the strategic partnership with the African
Union and regional economic communities and
mechanisms, as reflected by collaboration on numerous
fronts, including through more regular exchanges of
information, consultations and coordinated action.
There is a renewed commitment in the leadership of
both organizations to elevating the United NationsAU cooperation and partnership to new heights. The
Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for
an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security,
signed by the leadership of the two organizations
on 19 April 2017, is indeed a clear testament to this
renewed commitment to working together, inter alia,
in addressing the common challenges of peace and
security on the African continent, across the whole
spectrum of the conflict cycle.
However, we recognize that there is room for
more progress, in particular with regard to better
coordinating the decisions of both organizations at
various levels and in many areas of mutual interest, so
as to continue to work towards greater unity of purpose.
This is particularly pertinent in the context of the
discussions on the sustainability of funding to African
Union peace support operations. Of course, we can all
recall the concrete recommendations with respect to
the strategic partnership with the African Union made
by the United Nations High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations in its report (see S/2015/446). The
report did not, in that regard, put the spotlight on the
African Union without reason. Nowhere is it explained
more clearly than in the report of the Secretary-General
on options for authorization and support for African
Union peace support operations, which states,
“Considering the limitations of the United Nations
peacekeeping doctrine with regard to peace
enforcement and counter-terrorism, the African
Union peace support operations are a tool for the
United Nations to better discharge its responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and
22/32

26/11/2018

security in certain situations.” (S/2017/454, para.
61)
African Union member States have also taken important
steps towards greater self-reliance and burden-sharing
since 2015, including through the commitment that its
member States will finance 25 per cent of its peace
support operations, as well as the decision to finance
the African Union Peace Fund.
The role of the United Nations Office to the African
Union is crucial in strengthening the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union, as
the demands on the partnership have grown over the
past few years. Strengthening its capacity would help
to ensure an enhanced ability for effective partnership
with the African Union and the regional economic
communities to address the continent’s challenges.
In conclusion, my delegation wishes to express its
appreciation to the Secretary-General and all United
Nations entities for their continued cooperation
in working with the African Union to advance the
continent’s goals and objectives.
Mr. Mohd Nasir (Malaysia): At the outset, my
delegation wishes to express its appreciation to His
Excellency Mr. Lassina Zerbo, Executive Secretary of
the Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization (CTBTO), for
his briefing and comprehensive report on the extensive
work of the organization. We also wish to thank the
delegation of Italy for introducing draft resolution
A/73/L.22 under sub-item (k) of agenda item 128,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization”.
Consistent with our traditional position, Malaysia
has co-sponsored the draft resolution and reaffirms
its commitment to the Comprehensive Nuclear-TestBan Treaty (CTBT), while welcoming the cooperation
established between the United Nations and the
Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization. Malaysia
welcomes the progress made to facilitate the entry into
force of the Treaty, including maintaining all existing
moratoriums on nuclear-weapon-test explosions.
Nonetheless, those measures do not have the same
permanent and legally binding effect to end nuclearweapon testing and all other nuclear explosions.
18-39775

26/11/2018

While the Treaty’s total number of ratifications
currently stands at 167 and the total number of
signatures stands at 184, we hope that more progress
will be made towards the universalization of the
Treaty. Malaysia strongly believes in the need for the
early entry into force of the CTBT, with the ultimate
goal of eliminating nuclear weapons as well as general
and complete disarmament under strict and effective
international control.
Malaysia will continue to pledge its full support
and cooperation to the CTBTO towards the completion
of all of its tasks in the most efficient and effective way,
which is in line with Malaysia’s long-standing position
of achieving general and complete nuclear disarmament,
including through the verifiable end of nuclear testing.
Malaysia recognizes the benefits of the civil and
scientific applications of the verification technologies
in areas such as the environment, Earth science and
technology, tsunami-warning systems, the detection
of the accidental release of radioactive particles
and gases and other disaster-alert systems. We will
continue to explore possible ways to work closely with
the Preparatory Commission in promoting awareness
on the Treaty so that the benefits resulting from the
verification technologies may be broadly shared among
the members of the international community.
Finally, Malaysia wishes to reaffirm its readiness
to work closely with Member States, the CTBTO
and all stakeholders in exploring concrete steps
and activities to achieve the entry into force and
universalization of the Treaty. We firmly believe that
all efforts should be undertaken to further strengthen
the cooperation between the United Nations and the
Preparatory Commission for the CTBTO, with a view
to strengthening international peace and security.
Mr. Kaganda (United Republic of Tanzania): My
delegation welcomes the report on the cooperation
between the United Nations and the Preparatory
Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty Organization (CTBTO) (A/73/328). We pay
tribute to the Provisional Technical Secretariat under
the able leadership of His Excellency Mr. Lassina Zerbo,
Executive Secretary of the Preparatory Commission
for the CTBTO.
The Government of the United Republic of Tanzania
reaffirms that it attaches the utmost importance to
the application of the principles and objectives of
the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT)

A/73/PV.39

across the globe. We appreciate the support extended
to Tanzania by the Provisional Technical Secretariat
through a number of projects, programmes and
training opportunities.
My delegation is pleased to learn that sufficient
efforts have been made that the Treaty now enjoys the
signatures of 184 States and the ratification of a large
number of countries. We welcome the latest ratification,
by Thailand, and encourage States not yet party to the
Treaty to ratify it as soon as practicable. We particularly
urge the eight remaining annex 2 States to adhere to the
international community’s call by signing the Treaty,
which is necessary for it to become operational.
Furthermore, my delegation continues to
recognize the importance of strengthening the
verification regime through technical support. We
greatly appreciate United Nations efforts to mobilize
international support for the effective strengthening of
the Provisional Technical Secretariat. Moving forward,
the continued and meaningful engagement and support
of all stakeholders remains crucial to achieve the
universality of the Treaty. We call on the Secretariat to
continue to provide the necessary support, particularly
to developing countries, in areas such as climate change
mitigation and the strengthening of early-warning
systems. We are of the view that supporting Member
States in terms of capacity-building and the technical
support of the Provisional Technical Secretariat is of
the utmost importance.
We conclude by reaffirming our commitment to
the fulfilment of the obligations under the Treaty. We
encourage the international community to remain an
active participant in the work of the Treaty, both at the
regional and international level.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the Holy See.
Father Charters (Holy See): The Holy See
delegation welcomes the report of the Preparatory
Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty Organization (CTBTO) on the current status of
the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT)
and the prospects for the future (A/73/328). Having
ratified the CTBT, the Holy See strongly urges all
non-ratifying States, in particular those necessary
for bringing the CTBT into force, to do so promptly.
The present capabilities of the Provisional Technical
Secretariat have been of great value in monitoring the
nuclear tests that have taken place since the Treaty’s

18-3977523/32

A/73/PV.39

International Monitoring System (IMS) was established
and since the IMS, the International Data Centre and
the capabilities for on-site inspection that have been
put in place are potentially available for dealing with
present issues.
The Acting President: In accordance with
resolution 477 (V), of 1 November 1950, I now give the
floor to the observer of the League of Arab States.
Mr. Abdelaziz (League of Arab States) (spoke in
Arabic): Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional arrangements and organizations is of growing
importance given the enhanced pioneering role played
by multilateral diplomacy in consolidating the purposes
and principles of the United Nations at the international
and regional levels and in strengthening the means of
achieving those shared goals and purposes within the
framework of respect for international law, international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
It is on that basis that the scope of cooperation between
the United Nations and the League of Arab States
(LAS) has widened. The Arab League was one of the
first regional organizations to be invited to attend
the meetings of the General Assembly, pursuant to
resolution 477 (V) of 1950. Since then, we have made
many contributions to developing the concept of shared
international efforts and to integrating the perspectives
of the Arab world in the agenda of the United Nations in
the three fundamental areas: maintaining international
peace and security, socioeconomic and political
development and democracy and human rights.
In that context, the LAS wishes to thank SecretaryGeneral António Guterres for his valuable report on
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and other organizations (A/73/328). In his report,
the Secretary-General sets forth a comprehensive
review of the progress made in terms of cooperation
since that item was introduced within the General
Assembly agenda at its seventy-first session. We also
pay tribute to the increased institutional cooperation
with the various departments of the United Nations,
particularly after signing the additional protocol on
the cooperation between the two organizations on
24 September 2016, covering new areas of cooperation
to the cooperation agreement signed by the two
organizations on 6 October 1989. Those new areas of
cooperation included developing cooperative activities
such as meetings consultations, training programmes,
exchange of information and documents enhanced
24/32

26/11/2018

mutual representation and the exchange of personnel,
in line with the mandate of each organization.
Based on the ongoing cooperation, the two
organizations agreed to strengthening their joint
action in several areas, including capacity-building,
the protection of civilians, counter-terrorism, the fight
against all types of drug trafficking and illicit trade,
transnational organized crime, disarmament, human
rights issues, sustainable socioeconomic development,
humanitarian issues and issues related to refugees and
internally displaced persons.
To that end, the two organizations agreed to establish
a United Nations liaison office in Cairo, in order to
strengthen the cooperation between one another. The
Government of the Arab Republic of Egypt approved
the opening of the United Nations office in Cairo, and
it is time for a new phase of joint action for achieving
their common goals, in line with the memorandum
of understanding to be negotiated and signed by the
relevant parties to establish the framework and mandate
of the new office, in accordance with draft resolution
A/73/L.23.
The LAS envisages a new phase of joint Arab
action with the United Nations system whereby their
enhanced cooperation will contribute to achieving
peace and security across the entire Arab region, with
Arab countries contributing to international peace
and security. That would include reaching a just and
comprehensive solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict,
with the creation of an independent Palestinian State
along the 1967 borders and with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as
its capital, as well as ensuring the Israeli withdrawal
from the occupied Syrian Golan and the Lebanese
Shaba’a farm lands. Furthermore, the Arab Peace
Initiative must be fully implemented and the lost
peace in Syria, Libya, Iraq and Yemen must be
re-established while effectively addressing the Iranian
threat to the region and establishing a Middle East
region free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of
mass destruction. Terrorist groups and organizations
that threaten security and stability in the region must
be eradicated, including stopping their funding and
preventing the deployment of foreign fighters, as well
as preventing the return of Da’esh to Iraq or spreading
to other areas in the region and many more. That would
require building on the outstanding outcomes of the
high-level meetings held between the two secretariats,
the last of which was held in Geneva in July.
18-39775

26/11/2018

On sustainable development, the Economic and
Social Council of the LAS plays a leading role in
strengthening the implementation of the Sustainable
Development Goals and supporting the relevant efforts
of Arab States, which recently submitted to the Highlevel Political Forum their annual voluntary national
reviews. During Arab Sustainable Development Week,
held at the headquarters of the LAS in Cairo between
19 and 22 November, we discussed the best means to
implement those objectives and announced, inter alia,
several recommendations to be submitted to the fourth
Arab Economic and Social Development Summit, to be
held in Beirut on 20 and 21 January 2019, with a view
to harmonizing the activities of the United Nations and
the LAS in this domain.
On democracy and good governance, we have
continued our efforts aimed at supporting pioneering
reform steps taken by the countries of the region,
in line with the Arab Charter on Human Rights and
other Arab instruments and resolutions adopted by the
Arab League in ministerial meetings and summits.
Particular attention has been given to women and
young people as fundamental pillars of society, with
the participation of civil society and the private sector.
In addition, the Arab League supported the efforts of
its member States aimed at strengthening health and
education services as well as vocational training. The
League has also participated in overseeing presidential
and parliamentary elections in several Arab States.
In addition, we have participated in training and
capacity-building programmes organized by the
United Nations for Member States and in supporting
activities undertaken by Arab States to apply the
concept of good governance, while taking into account
the cultural specificities of the countries of the region.
Furthermore, we strengthened our cooperation with the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and participated in the periodic reviews
of the Human Rights Council on the human rights
situation in the Arab countries, while following up on
the implementation of the recommendations issued
after the reviews.
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
LAS is not limited to the ongoing relations, but rather
extends to other regional and political organizations,
including the LAS, through sharing of information
and experience. In that regard, the LAS pays tribute
to the United Nations Secretary-General for his
initiative to submit ambitious United Nations reform

A/73/PV.39

plans, especially as they touch upon the maintenance
of international peace and security and restructuring
the development pillar, as well as financial and
administrative reform. Those reforms were thoroughly
discussed at the conference of heads of regional
organizations held in June. The conference issued joint
recommendations that would strengthen cooperation
between our regional organizations and the United
Nations, while giving additional impetus to the
ambitious plans that the LAS is intending to implement
in various areas of reform.
In the same vein, the League is keen to expand
cooperation with all the continents and plans to hold
with the African Union an Arab-African summit in
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in 2019, and with the
European Union an Arab-European summit in the Arab
Republic of Egypt in 2019. We are also planning to hold
a summit with Latin America as part of our initiatives
to open the Arab region to the rest of the world and
strengthen our multilateral approach.
The LAS hopes that the General Assembly will
adopt draft resolution A/73/L.23, introduced by the
Permanent Representative of Qatar at the beginning of
this meeting on behalf of the Group of Arab States. It
also hopes to begin serious work on strengthening the
cooperation between our two organizations, as set forth
in the draft resolution. We are confident that we will
receive the support of the States Members of the United
Nations. All member States of the LAS have endorsed
the draft resolution.
As for the reservations expressed by the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic on the draft
resolution, they will not affect the resolve of the LAS
member States. Syria is an Arab sisterly country whose
membership in the League was suspended in 2011 by a
unanimous decision taken by the League’s Council in
accordance with the legal procedures due to the serious
violations that, regrettably, were committed and are still
being committed by the Syrian Government against the
brotherly Syrian people. Those violations contravene
the Charter of the United Nations, international law,
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. They have been documented in
various resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council. The League did not impose any
economic or financial embargo on the Syrian brotherly
people. On the contrary, the League has supported
and financed our Syrian refugee brothers who have

18-3977525/32

A/73/PV.39

26/11/2018

fled to neighbouring Arab countries as a result of
those violations.

in respect of human rights, which is enshrined in
our Constitution.

Despite Syria’s aggressive position towards the
LAS and its States, we will continue to support the
efforts of the United Nations Special Envoy for Syria
and all other international efforts. We will spare no
effort aimed at regaining the currently lost peace
in Syria, until the country regains its status as an
active member of the LAS following a decision to be
taken by LAS Council in due time. In that context, I
call on all countries present to vote in favour of draft
resolution A/73/L.23, submitted by all Arab States
without exception.

The trust of our nations is just as important as the
success of such cooperation, as is trust in INTERPOL
and its ability to ensure appropriate management of
police data. Based strictly on its neutral mandate and
ensuring full respect for the national sovereignty of
its member countries, INTERPOL practices strict
adherence to its rules on the processing of data and due
diligence — from its General Secretariat in Lyon to
its remote offices to each of the INTERPOL National
Central Bureaux embedded in the criminal justice
structures of the Member States.

The Acting President: In accordance with General
Assembly resolution 51/1, of 15 October 1996, I now
call on the Secretary General of the International
Criminal Police Organization.

That independent and robust cooperation framework
underpins the round-the-clock support that INTERPOL
provides to policing and law enforcement, as well as
the implementation of its three global programmes,
focusing on countering terrorism, organized and
emerging crimes and cybercrime. Through them, on a
daily basis, national law-enforcement agencies receive
tangible operational support at the front lines.

Mr. Stock (International Criminal Police
Organization): Two years ago, I had the privilege of
standing in this Hall to address the General Assembly
on the occasion of the debate on and adoption of
resolution 71/19, the first-ever resolution on cooperation
between the United Nations and the International
Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL) (see A/71/
PV.48). Following the facilitators’ hard work and the
Assembly’s valuable contributions, I am delighted today
to be bestowed again with the honour of addressing the
Assembly, this time to submit the first biennial review
of resolution 71/19, contained in document A/73/L.21.
Since the resolution’s first adoption, in 2016, the
transnational threat landscape has evolved to pose
new and increasingly complex challenges, driven in
large part by unprecedented technological advances
and instability worldwide. However, what remains
a constant variable over time is the determination of
international criminal groups to seek to exploit national
boundaries so as to evade the rule of law. Embracing
and strengthening international law-enforcement
cooperation is the only way for the international
community to stay ahead of the curve.

The relationship between the United Nations
and INTERPOL in tackling these areas of crime
has substantially strengthened since the adoption of
resolution 71/19, two years ago. Cooperation between
our two organizations has especially intensified in
the context of counter-terrorism. Over the past two
years, new cooperation agreements have been signed
between INTERPOL and the United Nations Office
of Counter-Terrorism and the United Nations CounterTerrorism Executive Directorate (CTED), which, in
this context, has led to INTERPOL expert participation
in 17 CTED country-assessment visits. In addition, I
am very pleased to see substantial recognition of
the contribution of INTERPOL to the fight against
terrorism and the organization’s support to Member
States and the United Nations in implementing the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, in
particular through Security Council resolutions 2341
(2017) and 2396 (2017), inter alia.

The mission of INTERPOL is to work towards
making that cooperation as seamless and effective as
possible and to carry out our collective fight against
crime across borders by connecting law enforcement
in our 194 member countries and working together
towards a safer world. That cooperation framework
rests on the apolitical character of INTERPOL, rooted
in the principles of neutrality and independence and

Furthermore, the close convergence of the
respective visions of the United Nations and
INTERPOL is exemplified by the seven global policing
goals launched by INTERPOL, alongside the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in Vienna, just last
month. These goals aim to serve as a framework for the
international community to collectively address today’s
most pressing security threats and have been designed

26/32

18-39775

26/11/2018

to complement and further support the Sustainable
Development Goals set forth in the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. Their overarching purpose
is to provide guidance on which criminal threats the
international law-enforcement community should give
priority to — and commit to — in the years to come, as
part of our common broader efforts to meet objectives
under the 2030 Agenda.
Criminal threats share a common denominator: the
dire effects they have on our public security, long-term
stability, economic systems and governance structures,
which ultimately stifle economic development and
deprive society of a better future. The fight against
international crime is an instrument in bringing
about global peace and stability. Its core lies in law
enforcement, yet its roots and ramifications extend far
beyond the strict boundaries of ministries and agencies
in charge of policing.
In an increasingly complex, fast-evolving and
therefore less predictable threat landscape, political
leadership in international police cooperation is needed
more than ever. Connecting the dots is just the first
step in building a robust cooperation network; relying
on key decision makers to lead it towards a shared
vision is the next. With the reviewed draft resolution
on cooperation between the United Nations and
INTERPOL being brought up for adoption at today’s
meeting, we look forward to marking a new milestone
in our common journey towards a safer world.
In conclusion, allow me to recognize the
outstanding efforts made by the Permanent Missions
of Brazil and Switzerland in co-facilitating the review
of today’s draft resolution and in bringing together
the precious viewpoints and contributions offered by
Member States. As we prepare to further strengthen the
global security architecture with the United Nations
and Member States, INTERPOL expresses its highest
gratitude and appreciation to the General Assembly for
giving us this opportunity today.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on agenda item 128 and its
sub-items (a) to (z).
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolutions
A/73/L.17, A/73/L.21, A/73/L.22, as orally revised,
A/73/L.25, A/73/L.26/Rev.1, A/73/L.27 and A/73/L.28.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of vote or position before we take decisions on the draft

A/73/PV.39

resolutions, may I remind delegations that explanations
are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
I call on the representative of Austria on a point
of order.
Mr. Kickert (Austria): I want to clarify whether
a vote has been called on the draft resolution on
cooperation between the United Nations and the
Council of Europe (A/73/L.27).
The Acting President: I understand that is not yet
the case.
I call on the representative of the Sudan on a point
of order.
Mr. Elnour (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): On behalf
of my country, I would like to request a recorded vote
on operative paragraph 4 of the draft resolution entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Council of Europe” (A/73/L.27). Our steadfast position
on the International Criminal Court, to which there is a
specific reference in paragraph 4 of the draft resolution,
is the basis of that request.
Mr. Ilnytskyi (Ukraine): Before the General
Assembly proceeds with the adoption of draft resolution
A/73/L.28, entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Commonwealth of Independent States”
(CIS), I would like to make the following statement.
Ukraine supports cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and other organizations in the
context of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations. In many cases, such cooperation proves to
be an important tool for the effective settlement of
conflicts and for promoting peace and security, but that
is not the case with the CIS, which, as an institution,
totally ignores the aggressive actions of one of its
member States, namely, the Russian Federation, which
continues to violate the Charter of the United Nations,
the CIS Charter, international law and multilateral
and bilateral agreements. Just yesterday, Russian
Federation military vessels fired at and forcefully
captured three Ukrainian Navy vessels near the Kerch
Strait, thereby committing an act of aggression against
Ukraine, as set out in the definition of aggression
contained in paragraph (d) of article 3 of resolution
3314 (XXIX). Unfortunately, the CIS is not able to
make every effort to achieve the pacific settlement of
disputes as enshrined in Article 52 of the Charter of the
United Nations.

18-3977527/32

A/73/PV.39

The Agreement on the Establishment of the CIS,
the Alma Ata Declaration and the CIS Charter do not
endow the Commonwealth with the status of having
the features of a subject of international law. The CIS
is a special interregional formation that does not only
lack definitive of status but in fact includes a military
and political alliance established on the basis of the
CIS Collective Security Treaty of 15 May 1992, which
binds only some members of the Commonwealth.
Under those circumstances, Ukraine dissociates
itself from the consensus on the adoption of draft
resolution A/73/L.28, exclusively due to our
understanding that the adoption of the draft resolution
should not be interpreted as de jure recognition of
the Commonwealth as a regional organization or
arrangement, as defined in Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations.
Mr. Moraru (Republic of Moldova): I take the floor
to express my delegation’s position on draft resolution
A/73/L.28, entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Commonwealth of Independent States”
(CIS). The Republic of Moldova supports promoting
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations in advancing the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations.
The Republic of Moldova takes note of the activities
outlined in the report of the Secretary-General
(A/73/328) on cooperation between the United Nations
and the CIS, which provides information on the various
exchanges and contacts with the CIS secretariat that
have taken place on matters relating to drug control,
crime prevention and international terrorism in the
context of sustainable development and human security.
While joining the consensus on draft resolution
A/73/L.28, my delegation wishes to reiterate that, due
to reservations on the regulation of the chairmanship
of the Commonwealth of Independent States that were
adopted on 10 October 2008, the Republic of Moldova
does not recognize the international legal personality
of the CIS.
The General Assembly has already been informed
of the fact that the basic documents of the CIS, namely,
the Agreement on the Establishment of the CIS, the
Alma Ata Declaration and the CIS Charter, do not
endow the Commonwealth with the status of having the
features of a subject of international law. We therefore
ask that the adoption of draft resolution A.73/L.28 not
28/32

26/11/2018

be interpreted as deviating from previously expressed
Moldovan reservations.
Mr. Elnour (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): My
country’s delegation would like to clarify its position
with respect to draft resolution A/73/L.27. I speak in
explanation of vote before the voting.
Current practice of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) shows that the Court has become a tool of
international conflicts and a mechanism for political
action. Therefore, the Sudan reiterates its firm and clear
position, which is to reject the Court and its practices.
The Court has become a platform for politicizing
international justice. It targets active African leaders
and threatens peace and security in African countries. It
has become an adversary to, rather than an enhancement
of, the international justice system. Furthermore, we
note the ongoing attempts to turn the General Assembly
into an assembly of States parties to the ICC, in breach
of the Charter of the United Nations and in violation of
established principles of international law.
We would recall that the relationship between the
United Nations and the ICC must take into account the
fact that they are two separate and independent entities.
There is no organic or structural relationship between
them. We are very much concerned by the attempts of
some States parties to the Rome Statute of the ICC to
turn the General Assembly into a de facto assembly
of States parties to the Statute. My delegation has
repeatedly expressed its firm and clear position against
that trend.
Some countries seek to interpret the nature of
the cooperation between the United Nations and the
ICC beyond the letter and spirit of the Relationship
Agreement between the two. The Relationship
Agreement has very clear and specific objective,
namely, that it should not, under any circumstances, be
used to gain new ground at the United Nations for the
ICC, which is supposed to be independent pursuant to
the Agreement, which constitutes a legal framework
The Sudan has clearly expressed its position and
will continue to do so, while we call for adhering to
the Relationship Agreement without expansion in its
interpretation. My country opposes any reference to
the Rome Statute establishing the ICC in paragraph 4 of
the draft resolution on cooperation between the United
Nations and the Council of Europe (A/73/L.27). The
ICC is not the sole institution within the international
18-39775

26/11/2018

justice system, and mentioning it alone only implies
that it enjoys unanimous support. The reality is far
from that, as States parties to the ICC have themselves
attested that the ICC is not universal. Rather, it is a
club with limited membership, limited functions and
limited capabilities, whose independence and integrity
are doubted. Therefore, States that are not party to the
ICC cannot be forced to acknowledge it, and the United
Nations cannot be forced to cooperate with the Court
outside the bounds of the Relationship Agreement
between the two entities.
We hope that our concerns, which are shared
by a number of States that are not parties to the
Rome Statute, will be addressed. That is why we are
requesting a specific vote on operative paragraph 4
of the draft resolution. In explaining our position, we
deem it necessary to defend our sovereignty and our
perspective. We stress that we are not party to the ICC
and we have no obligations whatsoever towards the
Court pursuant to the Vienna Convention on the Law of
Treaties, international law and international customary
law. We do not and will not cooperate with the ICC or
give it any consideration.
The Sudan has a constitutional, legal, cultural and
moral obligation to punish those who have perpetrated
crimes and violations under established international
law, including the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide of 1948, the four
Geneva Conventions of 1949 and the two Additional
Protocols and all other human rights treaties and
conventions. We are committed to fighting impunity.
Additional Protocol II to the Geneva Conventions
provides in article 3 that
“Nothing in this Protocol shall be invoked
for the purpose of affecting the sovereignty of a
State or the responsibility of the government, by
all legitimate means, to maintain or re-establish
law and order in the State or to defend the national
unity and territorial integrity of the State.”
The Sudan has ratified most of the relevant
international conventions and treaties, including
the two Additional Protocols to the four Geneva
Conventions of 1949. Based on what I have said here,
the Sudan does not give any consideration or weight to
paragraph 4 of draft resolution A/73/L.27. We call upon
all Member States to vote against its inclusion in that
draft resolution. My country’s delegation requests that

A/73/PV.39

the statement of the Sudan and its position be included
in the official record of the meeting.
The Acting President: I call on the representative
of Austria on a point of order.
Mr. Kickert (Austria): I have an explanation of
vote to deliver before the vote that was just requested,
but I need some clarification as to what we are voting
on. I would therefore like to ask for a clarification
in that respect. Did I understand correctly that the
representative of the Sudan has called for deletion of
paragraph 4 of draft resolution A/73/L.27? If so, we
would like to know if retention of the paragraph would
then be a vote in favour and deletion a vote against.
Could you provide clarification on this point, Sir,
before I make my explanation of vote.
The Acting President: I understand that the
representative of the Sudan asked for a vote on operative
paragraph 4 of draft resolution A/73/L.27. In paragraph
4 of the draft resolution there is a reference to the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court. A vote in
favour will retain that sentence; a vote against will
delete it.
Mr. Kickert (Austria): I thank the Acting President
for clarifying this point. I have the honour to speak in
explanation of vote before the voting on behalf of the
European Union (EU) and its member States.
We deeply regret that the Sudan has asked for
deletion of operative paragraph 4 of draft resolution
A/73/L.27, which has been in the text for years. The
EU and its member States reiterate their unwavering
support for the International Criminal Court (ICC) as
an important tool of the international community for
fighting impunity and contributing to peaceful societies.
The gross violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights that we witness worldwide are
a clear reminder of the increasing relevance of the
Court, the role of which is to complement — rather
than replace — existing national judicial systems. The
primary responsibility to investigate and prosecute
crimes remains with the individual States. All
perpetrators of such crimes must be held accountable
for their actions.
A key element of the Rome Statute is its equal
application. In that respect, the creation of the ICC has
given millions of victims of atrocity crimes new hope
that justice will be done. States from all over the world
have joined efforts to make this possible. The United

18-3977529/32

A/73/PV.39

26/11/2018

Nations and its Member States consider that the fight
against impunity for the most serious crimes is critical
to guaranteeing fair and just societies by holding
the perpetrators accountable and ensuring justice
for victims.
We also consider peace and justice to be
complementary and not mutually exclusive. For these
reasons, the 28 States members of the European Union
will vote in favour of the retention of paragraph 4 in its
entirety. We call on all other States — in particular all
States parties to the Rome Statute of the ICC — to also
vote in favour of an intact paragraph 4.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote or position before we
take decisions on the draft resolutions.

A/73/L.21, the following countries have become
sponsors of the draft resolution: Albania, Andorra,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Croatia, Cyprus, Equatorial
Guinea, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Hungary, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malta, Montenegro, Papua
New Guinea, Poland, Rwanda, Serbia, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, the Sudan, Sweden, the Syrian
Arab Republic, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and Uruguay.
The Acting President: May I take it the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/73/L.21?
Draft resolution A/73/L.21 was adopted (resolution
73/11).

The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolutions A/73/L.17, A/73/L.21, A/73/L.22, as orally
revised, A/73/L.25, A/73/L.26/Rev.1, A/73/L.27 and
A/73/L.28.

The Acting President: Draft A/73/L.22, as orally
revised, is entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Preparatory Commission for the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization”.

Draft resolution A/73/L.17 is entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Central European
Initiative”.

I give the
the Secretariat.

I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution,
in addition to those delegations listed in document
A/73/L.17, Armenia has become a sponsor of draft
resolution A/73/L.17.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/73/L.17.
Draft resolution A/73/L.17 was adopted (resolution
73/10).
The Acting President: Draft resolution A/73/L.21
is entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations
and the International Criminal Police Organization
(INTERPOL)”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, in
addition to those delegations listed in the document
30/32

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, in addition to those delegations listed in
document A/73/L.22, the following countries have
become sponsors of the draft resolution, as orally
revised: Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Belgium,
Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Burkino Faso, Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, the Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland,
France, Guatemala, Hungary, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Malawi, Malaysia, Malta, Montenegro, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Panama, Poland,
the Republic of Korea, Samoa, San Marino, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovenia, Spain, the Sudan,
Switzerland, Turkey and the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/73/L.22,
as orally revised?
Draft resolution A/73/L.22, as orally revised, was
adopted (resolution 73/12).
18-39775

26/11/2018

A/73/PV.39

The Acting President: Draft resolution A/73/L.25
is entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Black Sea Economic Cooperation Organization”. I
give the floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, in addition to those delegations listed in
document A/73/L.25, the following countries have
become sponsors of the draft resolution: Austria,
China, Georgia, Hungary, Romania, the Republic of
Moldova and the Sudan.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/73/L.25?
Draft resolution A/73/L.25 was adopted (resolution
73/13).
The Acting President: Draft resolution A/73/L.26/
Rev.1 is entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Organization for Democracy and
Economic Development — GUAM”. May I take it
that the Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/73/L.26/Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/73/L.26/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 73/14).
The Acting President: Draft resolution A/73/L.27
is entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Council of Europe”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, in addition to those delegations listed in
document A/73/L.27, the following countries have
become sponsors of the draft resolution: Cyprus,
Denmark, Greece, Iceland, Italy, Mexico, the Republic
of Moldova, Spain, Turkey and Ukraine.
The Acting President: A separate recorded vote
has been requested on operative paragraph 4 of draft
resolution A/73/L.27.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,

Bahamas, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malawi, Maldives, Malta, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint Lucia,
Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Uruguay
Against:
Bahrain, Belarus, China, Oman, Russian
Federation, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Syrian Arab
Republic, Yemen
Abstaining:
Algeria,
Bangladesh,
Brunei
Darussalam,
Cambodia, Central African Republic, Egypt, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Malaysia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nigeria, Papua
New Guinea, Philippines, Qatar, Singapore,
Turkey, United Arab Emirates, Viet Nam
Operative paragraph 4 was retained by 71 votes to
9, with 27 abstentions.
The Acting President: We will now consider the
draft resolution in its entirety. May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/73/L.27,
as a whole?
Draft resolution A/73/L.27, as a whole, was adopted
(resolution 73/15).
The Acting President: Draft resolution A/73/L.28
is entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Commonwealth of Independent States”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution,
in addition to those delegations listed in document
A/73/L.28, the following countries have become

18-3977531/32

A/73/PV.39

sponsors of the draft resolution: Armenia, Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, the Russian Federation, Samoa, the Sudan
and Turkmenistan.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/73/L.28?

32/32

26/11/2018

Draft resolution A/73/L.28 was adopted (resolution
73/16).
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
sub-items (a) to (z) of agenda item 128.
The meeting rose at 1.25 p.m.

18-39775
