General Assembly-Eighteenth Session

gramme for the indigenous people of Territories under
Portuguese administration,
Having considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral submitted in accordance with paragraph 9 of
the aforesaid resolution, 21
Noting with regret that, notwithstanding paragraph
10 of that resolution, the Government of Portugal has
not co-operated in the implementation of the resolution,
Noting with satisfaction that several Member States
have extended offers of scholarships to students from.
Territories under Portuguese administration,
Noting that only a few applicants from Territories
under Portuguese administration have the necessary
qualifications to enable them to enter institutions of
higher education,
Noting further that most of the scholarships offered
by Member States are for nigher education only and
consequently are not accessible to inhabitants of Territories under Portuguese administration whose qualifications cannot meet the requirements set for the use
of such scholarships,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his
efforts to use as fully as possible the existing United
~ ations programmes of technical co-operation and, particularly, to make available to those indigenous inhabitants of the Territories under Portuguese administratio~ who are or who may be temporarily residing in
1972 (XVIII). The situation in Aden
various countries or territories outside the Territories
administered by Portugal the benefits of such proThe General Assembly,
g-rammes, with the consent and co-operation of the host
Recalling its resolution 1949 (XVIII) of 11 DecemGovernments ;
ber 1963 on the question of Aden,
2. Draws the attention of Member States within
Having noted the petitioner's statement on the recent
20
whos_e
1:>oundaries great numbers of refugees from
developments in that Territory,
Terntones under Portuguese administration reside to
Deeply concerned at the critical and explosive situathe possibilities available to them of obtaining assistance
tion obtaining in Aden and the Aden Protectorate as
from the United Nations programmes of technical
a result of the state of emergency, and at the arrest
co_-operation, f?: ~he purpose of providing these refugees
and detention of nationalist leaders and trade-unionists
with more fac1httes for secondary, vocational and techas well as the deportation of others, a situation which
nical education;
constitutes a denial of fundamental rights and endangers
3. Invites the specialized agencies to co-operate in
peace and security in the region,
the_
~stablishment and i1;1plementation of the special
1. Urges the Government of the United Kingdom of
trau~mg pro_gramme mentioned above by offering every
Great Britain and Northern Ireland to take, as a matter
possible assistance and such facilities and resources as
of urgency, measures which would be most effective
they may be able to provide;
to secure:
4. Expresses its appreciation to Member States
(a) The immediate release of the nationalist lea~i:-rs
which hav~ e:i:::tended offers of scholarships to students
and trade-unionists;
from Terntones under Portuguese administration;
( b) An end to all acts of deportation of residents
of the Territory;
5. Invites Member States which have offered scholarships, and those which plan to do so, to consider in
2. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the
the fi~st place offers <;>f scholarships. for secondary
present resolution to the attention of the Government
education and for vocat10nal and techmcal training;
of the United Kingdom with a view to its implementation.
6. Requests Member States to inform the Secretary1281st plenary meeting,
General of any scholarships offered and of awards made
16 December 1963.
and utilized;
7. Further requests Member States to facilitate the
1973 (XVIII). Special training programme for
travel of students from Territories under Portuguese
Territories under Portuguese administration
administration seeking to avail themselves of the educational opportunities offered;
The General Assembly,
8. Reiterates its request to the Government of
Recalling its resolution 1808 (XVII) of 14 December
Portugal to co-operate in the implementation of the
1962 by which it established a special training prospecial training programme for inhabitants of Territories under Portuguese administration ;
19 Ibid., Eighteenth Session, Supplement No. 14 (A/5514),

H a·ving received and considered a report on economic
advancement in Non-Self-Governing Territories prepared by that Committee at its fourteenth session, in
1963. 19
1. Approves the report on economic advancement in
Non-Self-Governing Territories prepared by the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories at its fourteenth session and considers that this
report should be studied in connexion with the other
reports mentioned above ;
2. Jnz,ites the Secretary-General to communicate this
report to the Member States responsible for the administration of Non-Self-Governing Territories, to the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, to
the Economic and Social Council, to the regional economic commissions, to the Trusteeship Council and
to the specialized agencies concerned, for their consideration ;
3. Expresses its confidence that the Member States
responsible for the administration of Non-Self-Governing Territories will bring the report to the attention
of the authorities concerned with economic advancement
in those Territories.
1281st plenary meeting,
16 December 1963.

part two.
20 Ibid.,
meeting.

Eighteenth

Session,

Fourth

Committee,

1515th

21 Ibid., Eighteenth Session, Annexes, agenda items 49 SO
51, 52, 53 and 54, documents A/5531/Rev.1 and Add.1 arut' 2. '
