VII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

resources by taking effective measures which guarantee
the rights of the peoples to own and dispose of those
natural resources and to establish and maintain control
of their future development;
7. Welcomes the positive attitude of the administering Power with respect to the receiving of United
Nations visiting missions in the Territories under its
administration and requests the Chairman of the Special Committee to continue his consultations with a view
to the dispatch of such missions, as appropriate;
8. Requests the administering Power to continue
to enlist the assistance of the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
in accelerating progress in all sectors of the national
life of those Territories;
9. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
seek the best ways and means for the implementation
of the Declaration with respect to Bermuda, Cayman
Islands, Montserrat and Turks and Caicos Islands, including the possible dispatch of visiting missions in
consultation with the administering Power, and to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-second session on the implementation of the present resolution.
85th plenary meeting
1 December 1976

31/53.

Question of Timor

The General Assembly,
Recognizing the inalienable right of all peoples to
self-determination and independence in accordance with
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
Recalling its resolution 3485 (XXX) of 12 December 1975 and Security Council resolutions 384 (1975)
of 22 December 1975 and 389 ( 1976) of 22 April
1976,

Having examined the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Territory, 43
Bearing in mind that part of the Political Declaration adopted by the Fifth Conference of Heads of State
or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at
Colombo from 16 to 19 August 1976, relating to the
question of East Timor, 44
Having heard the statement of the representative of
Portugal, 45
Having also heard the statement of the representative
of the Frente Revolucionaria de Timar Leste Independente,46
Mindful that all States should, in conformity with
Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter of the United
.Nations, refrain in their international relations from
the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity
43 /bid., chap. XII.
44A/31/197, annex I, para. 36.
45 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Session, Fourth Committee, 13th meeting, paras. 1-5.
46 Ibid., paras. 7-23.

125

or national independence of any State, or in any other
manner inconsistent with the purposes of the United
Nations,
Deeply concerned at the critical situation resulting
from the military intervention of the armed forces of
Indonesia in East Timor,
I. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
East Timar to self-determination and independence and
the legitimacy of their struggle to achieve that right;
2. Reaffirms its resolution 3485 (XXX) and Security Council resolutions 384 (1975) and 389 (1976);
3. Affirms the principles stated in that part of the
Political Declaration adopted by the Fifth Conference
of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned
Countries relating to the question of East Timor;
4. Strongly deplores the persistent refusal of the
Government of Indonesia to comply with the provisions of General Assembly resolution 3485 (XXX) and
Security Council resolutions 384 (1975) and 389
(1976);
5. Rejects the claim that East Timor has been integrated into Indonesia, inasmuch as the people of the
Territory have not been able to exercise freely their
right to self-determination and independence;
6. Calls upon the Government of Indonesia to withdraw all its forces from the Territory;
7. Draws the attention of the Security Council, in
conformity with Article 11, paragraph 3, of the Charter
of the United Nations, to the critical situation in the
Territory of East Timor and recommends that it should
take all effective steps for the immediate implementation of its resolutions 384 (1975) and 389 (1976)
with a view to securing the full exercise by the people
of East Timor of their right to self-determination and
independence;
8. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples to keep the situation in the Territory under
active consideration, to follow the implementation of
the present resolution, to dispatch to the Territory as
soon as possible a visiting mission with a view to the
full and speedy implementation of the Declaration and
to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-second
session.
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-second session an item entitled "Question of
East Tim or".
85 th plenary meeting
1 December 1976
31/54.

Question of the British Virgin Islands

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the British Virgin
Islands,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and
all other resolutions and decisions of the United Nations relating to the Territory,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard

126

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peaples, 4 7 including in particular the report of the United
Nations Visiting Mission dispatched to the Territory in
May 1976 at the invitation of the administering Power,
the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern lreland, 48
Having heard the statement of the administering
Power, 49
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the British Virgin Islands;50
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
the British Virgin Islands to self-determination and
rndependence in accordance with the Declaration;
3. Notes with satisfaction the conclusions and recommendations of the United Nations Visiting Mission
dispatched to the Territory in May 197 651 and expresses
its appreciation to the members of the Visiting Mission
for the constructive work accomplished and to the administering Power and the Government of the British
Virgin Islands for the close co-operation and assistance
extended to the Mission;
4. Requests the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as the
administering Power, to continue to take all necessary
measures, in consultation with the Government of the
British Virgin Islands, to expedite the process of decolonization in the Territory in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and the Declaration;
5. Endorses the view of the Visiting Mission that
measures to promote the economic development of the
British Virgin Islands are an important element in the
process of self-determination and expresses the hope
that the administering Power will continue to intensify
and expand its programme of budgetary and development aid;
6. Requests the administering Power, in the light
of the conclusions and recommendations of the Visiting
Mission, to continue to enlist the assistance of the specialized agencies and other organizations within the
United Nations system in the development and strengthening of the economy of the Territory, and requests
those agencies and organizations to respond appropriately to the development needs of the British Virgin
Islands;
7. Further requests the administering Power, in
consultation with the Government of the British Virgin
Islands, to pay particular attention to the training of
qualified local personnel;
8. Requests the Special Committee to continue the
full examination of this question at its next session in
the light of the findings of the Visiting Mission, including the possible dispatch of a further mission to the
47 Ibid., Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/31/23/
Rev.I), chaps. III and XXVIII.
48 Ibid., chap. XXVIII, annex.
49 Ibid., Thirty-first Session, Fourth Committee, 11th meeting, paras. 1-11; and ibid., Fourth Committee, Sessional Fascicle, corrigendum.
50 Ibid., Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/31/23/
Rev.1), chap. XXVIII.
51 Ibid., chap. XXVIII, annex, paras. 154-170.

British Virgin Islands at an appropriate time and in
consultation with the administering Power, and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-second
session.
85th plenary meeting
1 December 1976
31/55.

Question of American Samoa

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of American Samoa,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 52
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
all other resolutions and decisions of the United Nations relating to American Samoa,
Conscious of the need to promote progress towards
the full implementation of the Declaration with respect
to American Samoa,
Bearing in mind the constructive results achieved as
a consequence of previous visiting missions to NonSclf-Governing Territories and reiterating its conviction
that the dispatch of such missions is essential for securing adequate and first-hand information in regard to
the conditions prevailing in those Territories and to the
views, wishes and aspirations of the peoples therein
with respect to their future status,
Mindful that American Samoa requires the continued
attention and assistance of the United Nations in the
achievement by its people of the objectives embodied
in the Charter of the United Nations and in the Declaration,
A ware of the special circumstances of the geographical location and economic conditions of American
Samoa, and stressing the necessity of diversifying its
economy as a matter of priority in order to reduce its
dependence on fluctuating economic activities,
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
American Samoa;na
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
American Samoa to self-determination and independence in accordance with the Declaration;
3. Reaffirms its conviction that questions of territorial size, geographical location and limited resources
should in no way delay the implementation of the
Declaration with respect to American Samoa;
4. Calls upon the Government of the United States
of America, as the administering Power, in consultation
with the freely elected representatives of the people, to
continue to take all the necessary steps to ensure the
full and speedy attainment of the goals set forth in the
Declaration with respect to the Territory;
5. Calls upon the administering Power to take all
possible steps to diversify the economy of American
5 2 Ibid.,

53 Ibid.,

chaps. III and XXII.
chap. XXII.
