A/60/PV.99

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixtieth session

99

th plenary meeting
Friday, 8 September 2006, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Eliasson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Sweden)

The meeting was called to order at 3.25 p.m.
Agenda item 116 (continued)
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
Report of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the
Revitalization of the General Assembly
(A/60/999)
The President: In connection with item 116, the
General Assembly has before it a draft resolution
contained in paragraph 42 of the report of the Ad Hoc
Working Group.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution, entitled “Revitalization of the General
Assembly”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
the draft resolution?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/286).
The President: I should like to express my
sincere thanks to Ambassador Abdullah Alsaidi of
Yemen and Ambassador Solveiga Silkalna of Latvia,
the two Co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working Group, who
so ably conducted the discussions and the complex
negotiations of the Working Group. I am sure the
members of the Assembly join me in extending to them
our sincere appreciation.

I now give the floor to the representative of
Japan, who wishes to speak in explanation of position
following the adoption of the resolution.
Mr. Ozawa (Japan): I would like to express my
appreciation to you, Mr. President, as well as to the
Co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the
Revitalization of the General Assembly —
Ambassadors Alsaidi and Silkalna — for the
outstanding efforts to reach consensus on the adoption
of the report (A/60/999) and now, thanks to your
efforts, Sir, of the draft resolution as well.
Japan believes that a strong and relevant General
Assembly is in our common interests. We have
therefore taken an active part in the discussion of this
agenda item. My delegation is of the view that all
interested parties should be welcome to participate in
such exercises. We feel compelled to mention that we
noticed irregularities at one stage of our discussions.
Allow me also to point out that we have been
discussing this agenda item — “Revitalization of the
work of the General Assembly” — every year for the
past 15 years. We have achieved some real progress
during that process, about which we should feel very
proud. But there is a principle in the field of economics
known as the principle of diminishing returns. We
should admit that, despite the tremendous amount of
time and resources we devote to this matter, the fruits
are becoming more marginal and that we are sending
out a negative image of the General Assembly. My
delegation would therefore like to propose that we

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

06-49343 (E)

*0649343*

A/60/PV.99

begin to consider the biennialization of this exercise in
the next round of discussions.

The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/60/L.63.

The President: The handling of that proposal
will be taken care of by my successor, and by the
representative of Japan. In the meantime, we take note
of your proposal.

I should like to inform the Assembly that the
following countries have become sponsors of draft
resolution A/60/L.63: Angola, Argentina, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile,
Cyprus, the Czech Republic, El Salvador, Fiji, Ghana,
Greece, Guatemala, Iceland, Indonesia, Luxembourg,
Mauritius, Pakistan, the Republic of Korea, the
Republic of Moldova, Slovakia, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Turkey and Zambia.

I again thank the Co-Chairs, who did a great a job
and contributed to a consensus resolution — for which
we are all grateful.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item
116?
It was so decided.
Agenda items 46 and 120 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation of and
follow-up to the outcomes of the major United
Nations conferences and summits in the economic,
social and related fields
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Report of the Secretary-General (A/60/984)
Draft resolutions (A/60/L.62 and A/60/L.63)
The President: We turn first to the report of the
Secretary-General
entitled
“Arrangements
for
establishing the Peacebuilding Fund” (A/60/984) and
to draft resolution A/60/L.63, entitled “The
Peacebuilding Fund”.
Before we proceed, I should like to consult the
Assembly with a view to proceeding immediately to
consider draft resolution A/60/L.63. In that connection,
since the draft resolution was only circulated earlier
today, it will be necessary to waive the relevant
provision of rule 78 of the rules of procedure, which
reads as follows:
“As a general rule, no proposal shall be discussed
or put to the vote at any meeting of the General
Assembly unless copies of it have been circulated
to all delegations not later than the day preceding
the meeting.”
Unless I hear any objection, I shall take it that the
Assembly agrees to that proposal.

The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/60/L.63, entitled “The Peacebuilding
Fund”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/60/L.63?
Draft resolution A/60/L.63
(resolution 60/287).

was

adopted

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey, who wishes to speak in
explanation of position following the adoption of the
resolution.
Mr. İlkin (Turkey): Turkey warmly welcomes the
Secretary-General’s report (A/60/984) on arrangements
for the establishment of the Peacebuilding Fund. One
of the historic achievements of the reform agenda of
the United Nations this year has no doubt been the
establishment of the Peacebuilding Commission.
Coupled with that achievement was the establishment
of a Peacebuilding Support Office and a Peacebuilding
Fund. We all know that effective peacebuilding
requires sound financial support. The Peacebuilding
Fund is expected to generate that support and to ensure
the immediate release of the resources needed to
launch peacebuilding activities. As such the Fund will
play a crucial role in the success of post-conflict
recovery efforts, particularly on the African continent.
Recognizing its critical importance, the Turkish
Government made a voluntary contribution of
$800,000 to the Peacebuilding Fund. Turkey was
indeed pleased to sponsor the draft resolution entitled
“The Peacebuilding Fund”, and will continue to give
its full support to all peacebuilding efforts in the
future.

It was so decided.

2

06-49343

A/60/PV.99

The President: I should like to express my
appreciation for Turkey’s contribution to the
Peacebuilding Fund.

owe to the hundreds of thousands of people who have
through the years, directly or indirectly, suffered the
effects of terrorism in all its forms.

The Assembly will now turn to draft resolution
A/60/L.62, entitled “The United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy”.

I urge members to adopt the Strategy by
consensus. By doing this we would strengthen the
mandate given to the General Assembly. We need to
stand united in the international fight against terrorism.
We are all aware of the contentious issues that have
plagued the terrorism discussion for a long time. The
Strategy is not intended either to avoid or to solve
those controversies, but rather to address them by
building on already agreed language. It recognizes that
these are important and sensitive matters which we
should continue to discuss in relevant forums, not least
the General Assembly.

We are here today to take action on the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. If adopted,
that strategy would reaffirm and strengthen the role of
the General Assembly in the work of countering
terrorism. That is imperative, as the scourge of
terrorism affects us all.
The Strategy forms the basis for a concrete plan
of action to address the conditions conducive to
terrorism, to prevent and combat terrorism, to take
measures to build States’ capacities, to strengthen the
role of the United Nations and to ensure respect for
human rights.
This draft resolution would constitute the
foundation on which the role of the General Assembly
can be further built and further developed. At its sixtysecond session, the Assembly will examine progress
made in the implementation of the Strategy and
consider updating it to respond to a changing
environment.
The Strategy must thus remain a living document.
In considering the Strategy, the Assembly should keep
in mind that many of the measures can be achieved
immediately. Some will require sustained work through
the coming years. Some others are long-term tasks and
objectives.
Two factors have made it incumbent upon us,
members of the General Assembly, to take decisive
action and unite around a United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. One is the clear mandate
given by our leaders in the 2005 World Summit
Outcome (resolution 60/1). The other is the reality of
terrorism — its continued violent and tragic
manifestation in all its forms. By taking decisive action
today and adopting the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, we will once again send a strong
message that the General Assembly, with its members,
is ready to shoulder its responsibility to act in the spirit
of the Charter on a growing global menace. We will
tangibly demonstrate that the General Assembly can
take assertive action on one of the most serious threats
to our common and our individual security. This we

06-49343

There are some important issues related to the
text that I would like once again to underline. First of
all, it is important that we build on our consistent,
unequivocal and strong condemnation of terrorism in
all its forms and manifestations, committed by
whomever, wherever and for whatever purposes, as it
constitutes one of the most serious threats to
international peace and security. Secondly, we have
conceptualized and developed the issue of conditions
conducive to the spread of terrorism. It is vital for our
common endeavour that we address those conditions in
a serious and comprehensive manner.
Thirdly, strong national capacity is a cornerstone
of all global counter-terrorism efforts. We need to bring
together all actors to enhance the capabilities of all
States to secure their own territories. The United
Nations system, other international, regional and
subregional organizations and Member States all have
roles to play. Fourthly, we need to uphold the highest
standards in the promotion and protection of human
rights, while countering terrorism. We have devoted an
entire section to respect for human rights and the rule
of law, at both a national and an international level.
Fifthly, we also need to ensure that any action
taken to combat terrorism will comply with all
obligations under international law. Finally, the plan of
action sets out a number of practical and operational
measures that will enhance our efforts to fight
terrorism. These include the call for Member States as
well as the United Nations system to step up their
efforts and strengthen their counter-terrorism measures
in a number of concrete areas.

3

A/60/PV.99

This draft resolution is my and my Co-Chairs’
best attempt to reach a consensus agreement on a
counter-terrorism strategy. The text is carefully crafted,
and every word has been scrutinized. There is no
delegation in this Hall which got all it wanted. Some
wanted more, some wanted less. But the text is, in our
view, balanced. Let us now unite around this Strategy
and have it launched at a high-level segment of the
General Assembly later this month. And let us then
start implementing it.
I want to conclude by thanking Ambassadors
Menon of Singapore and Yáñez-Barnuevo of Spain and
their great teams for the leadership they have shown.
Without their tireless, skilful and committed efforts we
would never have been where we are today. I also want
to thank the Secretary-General for his support and his
inspiration to our efforts. We know how thoroughly
and intensively the Secretary-General and his
colleagues in the Secretariat have worked with these
difficult issues. Finally, my warm thanks go to you, the
member States. Without your contributions, your
flexibility and your sense of responsibility we would
have no Strategy to adopt today.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/60/L.62. In connection with draft resolution
A/60/L.62, I would like to give the floor to the
representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Chen (Under-Secretary-General for General
Assembly and Conference Management): In connection
with draft resolution A/60/L.62, I wish to put on record
the following statement of financial implications on
behalf of the Secretary-General, in accordance with
rule 153 of the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly.
By paragraph 5 of part III of the annex to the
draft resolution, the General Assembly would
“welcome the intention of the Secretary-General
to institutionalize, within existing resources, the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force
within the Secretariat in order to ensure overall
coordination and coherence in the counterterrorism efforts of the United Nations system”.
To institutionalize the Task Force, a small support
function would be created within the Executive Office
of the Secretary-General. In that regard, it is estimated
that expenditures in the amount of $481,000 would

4

need to be incurred in the year 2007, to provide for
three posts, as well as relevant operating costs.
Paragraph 5 calls for the institutionalization of
the Task Force from within existing resources. In that
regard, it may be recalled that in its resolution 54/249
of the fifty-fourth session, in paragraph 45, the General
Assembly endorsed an observation of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
regarding references to “existing resources”, whereby
the Advisory Committee emphasized the responsibility
of the Secretariat to inform the General Assembly
thoroughly and accurately about whether there are
enough resources to implement a new activity.
Should the General Assembly adopt draft
resolution A/60/L.62, a detailed statement of
programme budget implication would be submitted to
the General Assembly at its sixty-first session
indicating arrangements for absorption of those
requirements.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/60/L.62, entitled “The
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt draft
resolution A/60/L.62?
Draft resolution A/60/L.62
(resolution 60/288).

was

adopted

The President: Before I call on representatives
who wish to speak in explanation of position, may I
remind delegations that explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
I shall now call on those representatives who
wish to explain their position on the resolution just
adopted.
Mr. Jaafari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation wishes to explain its position
on resolution 60/288 on the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
My country, Syria, emphasizes and reaffirms its
condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, regardless of its source or perpetrators,
be they individuals, groups or States. In 1986, Syria
was among the first States to call for the convening of
an international conference to define terrorism and to
distinguish between it and the right of peoples to selfdetermination and independence in order to lay a sound

06-49343

A/60/PV.99

foundation for genuine international cooperation
between all States in the framework of international
legitimacy in the fight against terrorism.
Syria therefore supports the establishment of a
comprehensive international counter-terrorism strategy
based on clear concepts in which there is no ambiguity,
subjective interpretation, or potential for abuse for
political purposes to justify an agenda that has no link
to genuine counter-terrorism efforts.
Since the Ad Hoc Working Group on the
Revitalization of the General Assembly was established
under your presidency, Sir, my delegation has called
tirelessly for the creation of such a comprehensive
counter-terrorism strategy. Our aspirations therefore
aimed considerably higher than the resolution that we
have just adopted. We believe that the resolution, while
apparently positive at the level of international
counter-terrorism, remains far below our hopes for a
genuine fight against terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, including State terrorism. That issue
was not reflected in the text we have just adopted by
consensus.
Furthermore, the resolution’s text is not fully
consensual, since negotiations were not conducted
directly among member States but through mediation,
as we all know. That has made the text unbalanced and
riddled with faults and shortcomings. We will not make
a detailed criticism of the document, but we must refer
to one of its most problematic aspects. It does not
establish, in our opinion and that of many other States,
a clear definition of terrorism, which means that the
implementation of this Strategy will be based on the
interpretations of States, which naturally reflect clear
differences and variations in that regard. We have
repeatedly insisted that creating a legal definition of
terrorism is a precondition for the implementation of
such a Strategy, particularly in formulating the
distinction between terrorism and the legitimate
struggles of people under occupation for selfdetermination and independence.
A few weeks ago, the world witnessed the
barbarity and terrorism of Israel’s aggression against
Lebanon and Palestine, leading to the deaths of
hundreds of innocent people, mostly civilians, children
and women. The document’s credibility will suffer
from its failure clearly to condemn State terrorism and
its deployment. It is essential to address the roots of

06-49343

terrorism if any such counter-terrorism strategy is to be
successful.
Syria sympathizes with the victims of individual
and State terrorism alike. A few amendments were
made to the draft resolution to include victims of State
terrorism among the victims of terrorism in general,
but regrettably they did not find their way into the final
text.
Syria did not call for a vote on resolution 60/288
because we wished to join the consensus under your
presidency, Sir, which all agree has been one of
integrity that has reaped great positive rewards for the
work of the General Assembly in general. Syria did not
call for a vote despite its conviction that the resolution
has many shortcomings that do not reflect the interests
of all States. Our joining in the consensus is intended
to stress our adherence to the struggle against terrorism
through international consensus and comprehensive
international action in that field.
It is our understanding that the implementation of
the Global Strategy laid out in the draft resolution will
not prejudice the right of peoples to self-determination
and to fight for their own independence — a right
guaranteed under international law and by numerous
resolutions of this Assembly, all of which were adopted
by consensus. We also believe that the Strategy will not
be seen as an alternative to the need to define terrorism
or used to justify ending the negotiations on a
comprehensive counter-terrorism treaty.
We continue to believe that the proposal that
Syria has advocated since the 1980s to convene an
international conference to define terrorism and to
distinguish between it and the right of peoples to selfdetermination should be given due attention as soon as
possible in order to reify the concept of a
comprehensive counter-terrorism strategy, which is of
great importance, especially in the current critical
circumstances.
In conclusion, we wish to commend the two
Co-Chairs, the representatives of Spain and Singapore,
for their important work and to thank them for their
patience. As I said earlier, we hope that international
efforts will soon lead to the holding of an international
conference to define terrorism.
Mrs. Núñez Mordoche (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, the Cuban delegation wishes to
commend the Co-Chairs of the process and you

5

A/60/PV.99

personally, Mr. President, for your efforts to complete
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
and bring about its adoption.
The General Assembly — the principal and most
democratic body of the United Nations system — using
its normative powers and reaffirming its role on issues
concerning international peace and security, has
adopted a key instrument that must now guide our
global fight against the scourge of terrorism, which has
claimed so many innocent lives over the years.
For the Government and the people of Cuba, the
fight against terrorism is an issue of crucial interest and
importance. As has been widely documented, for more
than 45 years we Cubans have been the victims of
innumerable terrorist acts conceived out of hatred and
the irrational desires of an international Power that has
not ceased in its attempts to put an end to the
economic, political and social system that we have
chosen in exercise of our right to self-determination
and independence. The cost of the policy of State
terrorism and sabotage that that Power has directed
against my people has been very high in terms of
human lives and economic damage.
Cuba reaffirms its unshakable rejection of all
acts, methods and practices of terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations, by whomsoever and against
whomsoever committed, wherever they occur and
whatever their motivations, including those in which
States participate. Aware of the great responsibility that
we all bear in the fight against terrorism, and
committed to multilateral efforts to put an end to this
scourge, which claims countless human lives every
year, the Cuban delegation participated actively in the
process of consultations to draw up the Strategy we
have adopted today.
However, in the process of its future
implementation, the Strategy must be improved to
overcome a number of deficiencies, controversial
elements and ambiguities remaining in the text,
including the following elements.
My delegation does not agree with the idea
expressed in the first sentence of section IV, paragraph
7, of the annex. In that regard, we wish to reaffirm that
the work of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (UNHCHR) must be
carried out with respect for the mandate established in
resolution 48/141. We recall that reform of the human
rights machinery is still under way and that the issue of

6

UNHCHR’s presence on the ground has yet to be
negotiated — a process that includes reviewing all the
mandates, functions and responsibilities of the new
Human Rights Council.
Likewise, with regard to the invitation in
paragraph 3 of the same section, which urges States to
consider accepting the competence of international and
relevant regional human rights monitoring bodies, the
delegation of Cuba wishes to reiterate that such
acceptance requires the express consent of the State
concerned, in the light of recognized principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and prevailing
international law.
Moreover, we are unhappy that the text as
adopted does not contain a clear and precise definition
of terrorism. That will no doubt serve as an incentive,
spurring us to arrive at a definition of this phenomenon
in the future, which will help put an end to the political
manipulation and the double standards with which it is
interpreted in various contexts. In that connection, we
note with satisfaction the call to resolve the
outstanding issues related to the negotiation of a
comprehensive convention on international terrorism,
including the legal definition of the acts covered by
such an instrument.
Cuba joined in the adoption of resolution 60/288
by consensus as a demonstration of its firm
commitment in the fight against terrorism and in
defence of multilateralism. The Cuban delegation
would like to stress the political value represented by
the following points, which are included in the
Strategy.
The Strategy covers all acts of terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations, including in particular State
terrorism. Cuba believes that section II, paragraph 1 of
the annex, “Measures to prevent and combat
terrorism”, is clear in that regard, because it obviously
includes the commitment of States to refrain from
organizing, instigating, facilitating, participating in,
financing, encouraging or tolerating terrorist activities.
We must pay special attention to the inclusion in this
paragraph of the verb “participating”, which constitutes
a clear recognition of State terrorism, an idea that until
a few days ago was objected to by a number of
States — mainly those that resort to that kind of
practice.
The Strategy refers to the resolve of all States to
uphold the right to self-determination of peoples which

06-49343

A/60/PV.99

remain under colonial domination or foreign
occupation. The exercise of that sacred right — which
is inherent to all peoples without distinction and which
is clearly enshrined in various international
instruments, including the Charter of the United
Nations and the Declaration annexed to resolution
2625 (XXV) — must not be equated with terrorism.
The document represents an appropriate balance
between the role of the General Assembly and that of
the Security Council. The General Assembly is
strengthened as the centre of multilateral efforts in the
fight against terrorism, using the powers conferred on
it in the Charter.
The text we have adopted also includes
references to key documents in the fight against
terrorism, such as resolution 46/51 and the Declaration
on Measures to Eliminate International Terrorism,
contained in the annex to resolution 49/60. Those
instruments are now fully in force, and their universal
implementation is an inherent part of the Strategy we
have adopted.
With regard to the “conditions conducive to the
spread of terrorism”, my delegation notes with
satisfaction the inclusion of conditions such as
discrimination,
socio-economic
marginalization,
political exclusion and prolonged unresolved conflicts.
The latter should be interpreted as requiring the
determination of States to do all they can to resolve
conflict, end foreign occupation and confront
oppression, as expressed in the adopted resolution.
The Strategy clearly refers to the obligation of
States to cooperate in the fight against terrorism in
order to find, deny safe haven and bring to justice, on
the basis of the principle of extradite or prosecute, any
person who supports, facilitates, participates or
attempts to participate in the financing, planning,
preparation or perpetration of terrorist acts. It also
refers to the obligation not to grant asylum or refugee
status to terrorists. Those are particularly important
elements in a fight against terrorism without double
standards and that does not distinguish between “good”
and “bad” terrorists.
The Strategy reaffirms the obligation of States to
ensure that any measures taken to combat terrorism
comply with their obligations under international law,
in particular human rights law and international
humanitarian law. This is a clear message to all those

06-49343

who resort to torture and other inhuman and degrading
practices in their supposed campaign against terrorism.
Cuba totally rejects the use of the combat against
terrorism as a pretext to justify interference in the
internal affairs of other States, aggression and the
undermining of the national sovereignty of States.
Terrorism is a phenomenon that must be fought by the
international community as a whole in a context of
close cooperation and in full respect of the Charter of
the United Nations and international law.
Finally, I should like to state the firm will of the
people and the Government of Cuba to cooperate in the
context of multilateral efforts to put an end, once and
for all, to all terrorist acts, methods and practices, in all
of their forms and manifestations.
Mr. Maqungo (South Africa): We wish to
congratulate the co-Chairpersons, Ambassador YáñezBarnuevo and Ambassador Menon, for the objectivity
that they displayed throughout the informal
consultation process and for having brought us to a
successful outcome.
The process has been difficult, and the current
draft is a reflection of the compromises that have been
made by Member States. It follows that it may not
totally address the concerns raised previously by my
delegation and others. This process was not about
victors and losers; it was about developing a coherent
global counter-terrorism strategy. In that regard, we are
pleased to note that there has been significant progress,
and the adoption of this resolution is an indication
thereof.
My delegation supports the current draft but has
to place on record the fact that we continue to have
concerns regarding the failure of the strategy which we
have adopted to address fully State terrorism,
extrajudicial killings, extraordinary renditions and
illegal detention.
Specifically, we wish to place the following on
record. The first operative paragraph of the plan of
action — a paragraph which is closely based on
language from the World Summit Outcome
document — ought not to be interpreted as a basis for a
definition of terrorism or as an attempt to exclude the
right of national liberation movements to resist foreign
occupation.
Paragraph 4 of section I of the plan of action on
terror refers to our “obligations under international law

7

A/60/PV.99

to prohibit by law incitement to commit a terrorist act
or acts and prevent such conduct”. We wish to put on
record that such an obligation under international law,
if it does exist, does not arise from Security Council
resolution 1624 (2005), as that resolution is not
mandatory, having been adopted under Chapter VI.
Paragraph 5 of section II refers to the need to
curb the illicit trade in man-portable air defence
systems. Ideally, this issue should have been dealt with
under disarmament processes, and our acceptance of
this resolution is without prejudice to our position in
future disarmament discussion regarding this very
same issue.
We are concerned that paragraph 7 of section II
of the plan of action appears to undermine the right of
asylum and would also be practically difficult to
implement. The proposal to create a single
comprehensive database on biological incidents and to
update rosters of experts and laboratories and to bring
together all biotechnology stakeholders should not be
used to undermine the sovereignty of developing
countries or their right to exploit biotechnology for
peaceful purposes. Questions would also need to be
answered as to how this ambitious project would be
funded. Furthermore, this proposal should not be used
to create an enabling platform for intrusive actions by
the Security Council.
We are concerned at the invitation, in paragraph
17 of section II of the plan of action, to the Security
Council to develop guidelines for the necessary
cooperation and assistance in the event of a terrorist
attack using weapons of mass destruction. We are
concerned that this invitation is only to the Security
Council, and therefore we expect that there will be
consultations with the General Assembly on this issue.
Finally, we would want to see a focussed
implementation of section IV on human rights and
international law to ensure that human rights are at the
centre of the counter-terrorism strategy.
We are hopeful that this resolution will be
translated into a practical, cohesive strategy with the
objective of countering — in an effective manner —
the scourge of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. My delegation gives the assurance that
we will support its implementation and assist in the
continued refinement of this strategy.

8

Finally, we wish also to congratulate you,
Mr. President.
Mr. Arias Cárdenas (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I should like to start by
congratulating the co-Chairmen and the presidency for
the work that has led to this document and enabled us
to create this very important instrument in the fight
against the universal scourge of terrorism.
The Mission of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, with the best will possible, joined the
consensus on the adoption of draft resolution
A/60/L.62, because we deem necessary this urgent
response to the scourge of terrorism. However, we
would like to make a statement on specific elements
within the resolution.
It is important to point out that the resolution
does not specifically mention the acts of violence
committed by certain States aimed at ensuring the
submission of other peoples, and that therefore it is
ambiguous with respect to the appalling form of
terrorism that is State terrorism. We hope that this lack
of precision will not also be reflected in the
comprehensive convention against terrorism, because
that convention is going to require much greater
clarity. We must avoid creating a new order that
protects the strong and oppresses the weak.
We wish also to state our reservations as concerns
the preambular paragraph of section I, entitled
“Measures to address the conditions conducive to the
spread of terrorism”, and operative paragraph 7 of that
same section. We cannot ignore foreign occupation as a
cause of terrorism — acts of terrorism that lead to
terrorism. We also have reservations as concerns the
reference to lack of good governance. This term,
because it has no exact definition, always gives rise to
suspicion and doubt.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela warns that
terms such as these could be used to apply double
standards in judging countries of the South. Who
decides what good governance is for other countries? Is
it the most powerful? It is those who practice
unilateralism?
I think that it is useful to recall the conflicts and
acts of aggression resulting from the unilateral use of
power that have led to upheaval in the international
arena in the last few years. Combating terrorism
requires resolve, determination and sincerity. It is on

06-49343

A/60/PV.99

that basis that we joined in the consensus on the draft
resolution.
Mr. Amil (Pakistan): At the outset, I would like
to sincerely thank the two Co-Chairs, Ambassador
Menon of Singapore and Ambassador Yáñez-Barnuevo
of Spain, and their teams for the commendable job that
they have done. By means of their hard work and their
constructive approach, they have successfully given
comprehensive dimensions to an operational strategy.
Let me also thank you, Mr. President, for your
commitment to the role of the General Assembly.
We have taken note of the fact that some aspects
of the Counter-Terrorism Strategy have been stated
clearly and directly in resolution 60/288 and the
annexed plan of action, while others require
explanation or need beefing up. This could involve a
process of redefining some elements of the Strategy.
However, we support this approach, as it helps to
evolve a broader consensus.
For my delegation, the most important aspect of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
is that it is dynamic and will be implemented by the
General Assembly. We appreciate the fact that the
General Assembly will examine progress made in its
implementation and will consider updating it. We also
appreciate the fact that Member States have recognized
that objectives contained in the Strategy could be
achieved in the short, medium or long term. That
means that the process of review and updating would
also be extended until the achievement of the longterm objectives. In this context, you, Mr. President,
rightly concluded yesterday that the Strategy will
remain a living document — and you reiterated that in
your statement today.
We welcome the fact that General Assembly
resolution 46/51 of 9 December 1991 is recalled. That
is an unequivocal acknowledgement of the legitimacy
of national liberation movements, as in the fifteenth
preambular paragraph of that resolution Member States
reaffirmed
“the inalienable right to self-determination and
independence of all peoples under colonial and
racist regimes and other forms of alien
domination and foreign occupation, and [upheld]
the legitimacy of their struggle, in particular the
struggle of national liberation movements, in
accordance with the purposes and principles of

06-49343

the Charter and the Declaration on Principles of
International Law concerning Friendly Relations
and Cooperation among States in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations”.
The Strategy has a full-fledged section on the
conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism. We
believe that the conceptualization and development of
perspectives on the root causes of terrorism would help
to eliminate the motivation for terrorist acts. The list of
conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism given
in the plan of action of the Strategy is not exhaustive;
however, an acknowledgement of the fact that
prolonged unresolved conflicts are among the root
causes of terrorism is a clear reflection of a fact. Such
conflicts arise mainly from foreign occupation and
denial of the right of people to self-determination.
Those root causes will have to be addressed and
overcome vigorously if the Strategy is to succeed in
countering and eliminating terrorism.
The Strategy rightly recalls that in the September
2005 outcome document (resolution 60/1), our leaders
rededicated themselves to supporting all efforts to
uphold the right to self-determination of peoples which
remain under colonial domination and foreign
occupation. We hope that this provides inspiration for
the implementation of General Assembly resolutions
on self-determination, as it has not been possible for
many of those to be implemented to date.
We also welcome the fact that the Strategy
addresses the problem of foreign occupation. The
preambular part of the resolution highlights the support
of world leaders for peoples under foreign occupation.
Elsewhere in the preambular part, the resolution
affirms the determination of Member States to do all
they can to end foreign occupation. We recognize that
in addressing this important root cause of terrorism we
have taken a step forward.
We understand the challenges faced by the
Co-Chairs in the articulation of State terrorism. We
therefore appreciate the strong condemnation, early in
the preambular part of the Strategy resolution, of
terrorism committed by “whomever, wherever”. We
also appreciate paragraph 1 of section II of the plan of
action, which expresses the resolve of States to refrain
from participating in terrorist activities. These are
adequate guidelines to prepare plans for the fight
against State terrorism.

9

A/60/PV.99

The Strategy acknowledges that socio-economic
marginalization creates conditions conducive to the
spread of terrorism. We support your view, Sir, that
these conditions should be dealt with in a
comprehensive manner. However, the General
Assembly will need to develop appropriate strategies to
transform those ideas into actions.
The listing and delisting procedures of the
Security Council sanctions committees lack due
process and the right to effective remedy. These are
recognized as fundamental human rights by jurists. We
appreciate the fact that the Counter-Terrorism Strategy
has taken note of those problems and has asked for fair
and clear procedures for placing individuals and
entities on the sanctions lists, for removing them from
the lists and for granting humanitarian exceptions. We
hope that the relevant Security Council sanctions
committees will address these problems and provide a
statement of case with regard to listed individuals and
entities to concerned States for judicial proceedings.
The United Nations Global Counter-terrorism
Strategy does not address our concerns on some issues.
We would like to explain our position on a few of
them.
Regarding paragraph 2 (a) of the plan of action,
we would like to point out that Pakistan constructively
participated in the process to review the Convention
for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against the
Safety of Maritime Navigation and its Protocol to
ensure the safety and security of maritime navigation
against the threat of terrorism. Those instruments have
obligations
related
to
the Treaty
on
the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). Pakistan
is not a party to the NPT. Therefore, we cannot accept
NPT-related obligations which are reflected in the
amendments to the Convention.
Regarding paragraph 11 of section II of the plan
of action, we consider that control of biological
weapons is primarily a concern in the industrially
advanced States, owing to their extensive use of
biological agents. The Biological Weapons Convection
should therefore be strengthened, in particular by
reviving the initiative for a biological weapons
verification protocol. The process of the Biological
Weapons Convention Review Conference is the best
forum in which to deliberate upon and seek an agreed
solution, including on the threat of bio-terrorism. We
should not, therefore, rely on restrictive regimes in

10

addressing such threats. Treaty regimes take time, but
once they are agreed they command wider respect and
legitimacy.
Regarding paragraph 9 of section III of the plan
of action, we are of the view that the last portion of the
paragraph violates the national implementation
mechanism established by Security Council resolution
1540 (2004).
Mr. Dolatyar (Islamic Republic of Iran): As a
demonstration of its firm support for the struggle
against international terrorism, my delegation joined
the consensus in adopting the draft resolution
contained in document A/60/L.62, despite our many
reservations.
We contributed actively to the consultations on
this document, with a view to enabling the General
Assembly to finalize by consensus its work on the draft
resolution on the United Nations global counterterrorism strategy. We condemn terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations, wherever and by whomever
it is committed. We are convinced that it can never be
justified in any circumstances.
We attach great importance to the mandate
contained in the 2005 World Summit document,
namely, that the General Assembly should develop
without delay the elements for a counter-terrorism
strategy identified by the Secretary-General. At the
same time, we believe that the substance of such a
strategy is of great importance to the key role that the
United Nations should play in combating terrorism.
In the light of the foregoing, it is imperative that
the counter-terrorism strategy just adopted by the
Assembly, which is to lay the groundwork for future
activities, be a comprehensive one that deals with all
the important elements needed to fight the scourge of
terrorism resolutely and effectively. We believe that the
global counter-terrorism strategy contained in the
resolution just adopted falls short of all the necessary
requirements and, rather, will complicate the universal
efforts to combat terrorism. In our view, it is imperfect,
as it fails to appropriately address the situations
conducive to the spread of terrorism that terrorist
groups use to recruit people and receive contributions.
I will give some examples. The resolution fails to
refer to State terrorism, whose upsurge has been
evident in recent months in Palestine and Lebanon;
unilateral military policies that give rise to terrorism

06-49343

A/60/PV.99

are overlooked, and even the question of cooperation is
left out. Iraq and Afghanistan are cases in point. There
is no doubt that the military interventions in those
countries have fuelled terrorism in the region. We
reiterate the importance of resolution 46/51, which
reaffirms the inalienable right to self-determination and
the independence of all peoples under colonial and
racist regimes and other forms of foreign domination
and occupation. That resolution also upholds the
legitimacy of their struggle, in particular the struggle
of national liberation movements, in accordance with
the purposes and principles of the Charter and the
Declaration on Principles of International Law.

can be developed in the absence of a definition of
terrorism.

Given the shortcomings to which I have referred,
we believe that the resolution just adopted does not
satisfy the need to lay the foundations for a truly global
response to the vicious course of global terrorism.

Mr. Malhotra (India): At the outset, I should like
to congratulate the two Co-Chairs, the Permanent
Representatives of Singapore and Spain, who have put
forward several successive draft resolutions since May
of this year in order to produce a final text that we
could all live with.

In conclusion, I would be remiss in not seizing
this opportunity to thank you, Mr. President, as well as
the Co-Chairs and their teams, for your serious efforts
in drafting and finalizing this document.
Mr. Abdelsalam (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, my delegation would like to commend the
sincere efforts made by the two Co-Chairs, the
Permanent Representatives of Singapore and Spain. I
should also like to thank you, Mr. President, for
sponsoring those efforts, as well as for all your own
efforts during your presidency of this session of the
General Assembly, which has produced real and
valuable achievements.
My delegation introduced several substantial
amendments to the draft of the resolution that has just
been adopted. We continue to believe that those
amendments were very important and essential to bring
about balance in the resolution and to produce a global
strategy to combat terrorism effectively and in a
manner in keeping with the principles of international
law. However, those amendments were not taken into
account. The resulting document is therefore weak and
fails to refer to matters without which no counterterrorism strategy can be developed. For example, the
document contains no definition of the term
“terrorism”. That is a clear deficiency. How can a
strategy combat an enemy that it does not know or
define? That loophole will open up the way for varying
interpretations and uses. The same can be said as
regards other vital issues — such as foreign occupation
and State terrorism — with regard to which no strategy

06-49343

It has become clear that this resolution was
adopted in haste owing to the fact that we were
compelled to adopt a counter-terrorism strategy before
the end of this session of the General Assembly. It was
therefore all the more important that we adopt a
cohesive and effective document. For that reason, my
delegation has very serious basic reservations on this
document. However, we did not want to oppose the
consensus that was developed. We nevertheless wish
our comments to be included in the record of this
meeting.

Ideally, my delegation would have liked to have
seen the United Nations convey a far stronger message
directed at countering terrorism. We wanted to send a
clear signal to terrorists that their actions will not be
tolerated, irrespective of the motivations underlying
them. Even today terrorists killed over 35 persons in
Malegaon, India. That kind of senseless slaughter of
innocents reinforces the urgency with which we should
be united and resolute in confronting terrorism
everywhere and at all levels.
We must also firmly reject the notion that any
cause can justify terrorism. Nothing can ever justify
the targeted killing of innocent men, women and
children. In that regard, we would have liked to have
seen the retention of paragraph 11 of the 31 July draft
text, which reiterated what was affirmed in the 1994
Declaration and in various General Assembly
resolutions on measures to eliminate international
terrorism. That paragraph unequivocally asserted that
criminal acts of terrorism intended or calculated to
provoke a state of terror in the general public, a group
of persons or particular persons for political purposes
are, in any circumstances, unjustifiable, whatever the
considerations of a political, philosophical, ideological,
racial, ethnic, religious or other nature that may be
invoked to justify them. That widely accepted principle
should have been reflected in the strategy.
all

The condemnation in the strategy of terrorism in
its forms and manifestations signals the

11

A/60/PV.99

international community’s will to no longer tolerate the
actions of the sponsors and abettors of terrorism or of
those who wilfully fail to prevent terrorists from
utilizing their territories.

partnership have prompted us to support the Strategy,
which, we would emphasize, should be a living
document that can be amended and developed to adapt
it to all contingencies.

A strong response to terrorism requires broadbased international cooperation, reducing the space for
terrorists and increasing the capability of States to
address terrorist threats. It requires sustained and
specific cooperation by a variety of national, regional
and global agencies. We hope that the Strategy will
provide the impetus to unite the international
community in its fight against terrorism via practical
measures that facilitate cooperation by way of
extradition, prosecution, information flows and
exchange, and capacity-building.

I would conclude by expressing our sincere and
profound thanks and appreciation to you, Sir, for your
wisdom and sincerity in realizing many of the world
summit’s objectives.

We have gone along with the present process,
while remaining convinced that the comprehensive
convention against international terrorism that we have
been negotiating would have provided the requisite
legal framework upon which a counter-terrorism
strategy could have been based. The timeline set by the
2005 world summit outcome document envisaged the
adoption of the comprehensive convention at the
sixtieth session of the General Assembly. We continue
to believe that agreement on it is attainable. We must
now work together for the early finalization and
adoption of the comprehensive convention.
Ms. Ziade (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like at the outset to extend my thanks to the presidency
and its staff for their strenuous efforts to develop the
Strategy.
I wish to stress our condemnation of terrorism in
all its forms and regardless of its source. Our
adherence to today’s consensus arises from our
conviction that we should adopt a counter-terrorism
strategy in which the General Assembly would have a
pivotal role to play.
We believe that the Strategy represents a very
important step, but that it is insufficient. We would
have hoped that it would reflect the following
principles: a definition of terrorism, a distinction
between terrorism and resistance, a condemnation of
State terrorism, and the need to address the conditions
from which terrorism emerges.
Our sincere and clear adherence to the principle
of rejecting terrorism and our hope for cooperation
with all States in a genuine counter-terrorism

12

Mr. Carmon (Israel): I thank you, Sir, and your
staff, as well as the Secretary-General for having
honoured us with his presence during the adoption of
the resolution.
Many thanks go also to the co-chairs, the
Ambassadors of Singapore and Spain, who have
worked so hard on this important task that unites us all,
and to the staff of the Secretariat who have spared no
effort during all these months of work.
The initiation of a strategy to counter global
terrorism is an important step forward in the war on
terror. Adopting the Strategy reiterates the international
community’s strong universal condemnation of
terrorism. Terrorism, by whomever, whenever and
wherever practiced, is entirely unacceptable. There can
be no pretext, no explanation and no justification for
terror.
However, the success of the Strategy will be
determined not by consensus today, but by
implementation. Terrorism will be sufficiently
addressed only when Member States fulfil their binding
obligations under Security Council resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001), 1540 (2004), 1566 (2004) and
1624 (2005). Those resolutions define the obligations
of Member States to the international community in
our global fight against terror. Moreover, combating
terrorism requires the full cooperation of Member
States with the counter-terrorism subsidiary bodies of
the Security Council.
While those Security Council resolutions defined
our obligations as Member States, we must ensure that
they are enforced and that measures are taken against
States harbouring or assisting terrorists.
Regrettably, a number of practical proposals
suggested by the Secretary-General’s report, which
could have made a significant contribution to
combating terrorism, were omitted from the Strategy
adopted today. We hope that those proposals and other
practical measures can be incorporated into the

06-49343

A/60/PV.99

Strategy in the future and implemented to better equip
us in the fight against international terror. In that
respect, we support the President of the General
Assembly when he stated yesterday that this Strategy
will remain a living document to be adapted and
updated to respond to a changing world.

Never should we accept the targeting of innocent
civilians as a means of achieving any kind of goal.

There is profound symbolism in today’s adoption
of a Global Strategy against terror. As we are on the
eve of 11 September, the unveiling of the Strategy
represents a culmination of the international
community’s efforts to address the growth of such
global threats as of today.

Terror is terror is terror. Terror must be wholly
eradicated, plain and simple. The adoption of this
Strategy affirms that terrorism cannot be effectively
combated by a handful of States. It is an international
threat and a common enemy that plagues us all. It
remains a moral imperative for us to fight this
dangerous phenomenon and its proliferation.
Cooperation and the implementation of all binding
obligations related to the prevention of international
terrorism are the only way to secure our global future.

We in Israel unfortunately continue to experience
the realities of terrorism daily. In just the past few
months, Israel has been confronted by terrorist attacks
in the North, instigated by Hizbollah and sponsored by
two States Members of this Organization, Syria and
Iran — whose representatives spoke just a few minutes
ago — and terrorist attacks in the South, carried out by
Hamas and fully supported by the same.

Mr. Elmarghani (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)
(spoke in Arabic): I would like to convey my gratitude
to you, Mr. President, for the achievements made
during the sixtieth session under your leadership.
Among them is the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, which we have now adopted. I
would also like to thank the Co-Chairs for their efforts
to develop and finalize the Strategy.

Terrorism remains a serious threat to Israel, and
indeed to the entire world. Although Israel has
developed measures to counter the threat of terror —
more than 125,000 attacks have been thwarted in the
past six years — we remain convinced that only
through international cooperation will terror be
effectively confronted and eventually eliminated.

We joined the consensus in adopting this
important document because it contains elements
crucial for the establishment of a strategy and plan of
action to combat terrorism. However, we believe that
some significant factors have not been dealt with
clearly, most important among which are agreement on
a definition of terrorism, drawing a distinction between
terrorism and the struggle of peoples for freedom and
self-determination, and defining State terrorism in the
same way as terrorism committed by individuals or
groups.

For Israel, and sadly for a growing number of
States, terrorism is not some abstract idea. For those
touched by terrorism, the menace could not be more
real. Everyone in Israel has been struck by terror, be it
a family member, a neighbour or a friend. Some 1,122
Israelis have been killed in terrorist attacks since
September 2000. In five years, there have been more
than 25,000 terrorist attacks against Israel. I know that
to be true because I myself, here representing the State
of Israel, was wounded by terrorism. In 1992, my
immediate family and I were severely and directly
attacked by international terrorism. I lost loved ones to
Hizbollah’s murderous terror, evil promoted and
directly supported by Iran. So may I add, on a personal
note, that I know what I am talking about.
To those who try to justify terror, terrorists and
their supporters, financiers and protectors —
justifications which have been made by some in this
very Hall — I say “no”! There is no justification for
terrorism, be it political, social, religious or cultural.

06-49343

My delegation stresses that those points and
concerns should be taken into consideration at future
negotiations to reach a comprehensive international
counter-terrorism convention.
The President: I shall now give the floor to those
representatives who wish to take the floor in exercise
of the right of reply.
Mr. Saleh (Lebanon): As everyone in the Hall is
aware, we are a country that cherishes peace. We have
always contributed to the development of human
civilization. I also know that the Lebanese people —
and our emigrants in particular — have contributed a
great deal to the development of civilization in every
country represented at the United Nations. We would
have preferred not to take up the General Assembly’s
time, but instead join together with the entire Assembly

13

A/60/PV.99

to counter terrorism in a constructive spirit of
cooperation. We would also have preferred to spare the
General Assembly unwanted discussions, because we
believe that the lives and future of many people depend
upon our efforts and because we want to foster a
constructive and positive spirit in order that we can
together build a better future for our peoples and make
tomorrow a better day than today. But, unfortunately,
one representative has once again not failed to take the
opportunity to offend his neighbour: that is part of their
culture and tradition. It is our responsibility to tell the
truth.
The Irish philosopher Edmund Burke used to say
that all that is necessary for evil to triumph is for good
men to do nothing. The Israeli invasion of my country
in 1972, the Israeli invasion of my country in 1978, the
Israeli invasion of my country in 1982, the Israeli
invasion of my country in 1986, the Israeli aggression
and extensive destruction of my country in 1993, the
Israeli aggression and extensive destruction of my
country in 1996, the carnage at Qana — which every
country represented in the Hall remembers — the
Israeli aggression against my country in 2006 and the
great number of civilian victims and the enormous
level of destruction that has been inflicted on my
country — we bluntly refer to all of that as evil. Our
resistance, and especially that of Hizbollah, was that of
good men who had enough guts to stand up to that evil.
Another thing I would like to say is that
Hizbollah is being blamed today because it dared say
to the Israelis: Stand away from our sunlight! We want
to see the light of the sun. We want to see the light of
liberty.
Everyone knows that, for an entire month, my
country was subjected to harshest aggression to which
a country can be subjected. Everyone one knows that
Hizbollah did not exist during previous instances of
Israeli invasion and acts of aggression against my
country. Everyone knows about, and witnessed, how in
1972 an Israeli tank rolled over a civilian car loaded
with five passengers, crushing them to death. Everyone
has also seen on the news how the Israelis also tried to
crush another car, whose driver was lucky enough to
leave the car, although he was followed and killed.
If we do not call those acts State terrorism, I do
not know how we are going to define State terrorism.
I shall not take up any more of the General
Assembly’s time, so that we can think about issues that

14

can be constructive for our future, the future of this
institution and the future of all peoples.
Mr. Elji (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Israel always tries to paint a false picture. I
believe that it has not truly succeeded in doing so, and
never will. No statement can mask Israel’s own brutal
image of terrorism and evil.
I shall not refer much to the past in my
comments. However, I will say that Israel was founded
on terrorism by Zionist gangs who destroyed the King
David Hotel, killing Count Bernadotte, the eminent
international personality sent by the United Nations to
the occupied Palestinian territories. Israel’s State
terrorism began at that moment, and it continues to this
day. My Lebanese colleague has pointed eloquently to
a number of incidents that reflect this aggression and
evil. I could cite many similar cases, but we would
prefer not to waste the General Assembly’s time at this
moment of international solidarity when we have all
agreed to combat terrorism. Rather, I shall respect this
occasion and emphasize international efforts aimed at
combating and eliminating terrorism.
That brings us to the need to deal with the roots
of terrorism, the most important of which is State
terrorism. We have seen much of that type of terrorism
in our region as a result of Israel’s continued
occupation of Palestinian, Syrian and Lebanese
territories and its deliberate targeting and killing of
innocent civilians, United Nations civil servants and
emergency relief workers of the Red Cross and Red
Crescent, including four United Nations observers
killed in Lebanon.
These crimes continue, and so does terrorism. We
believe that the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
must be implemented immediately. But we should
concentrate on the roots of terrorism and realize that
the most important way to address the roots of
terrorism is to put an end to the occupation. Israel is
trying to hide the sun, but the sun will continue to
shine brilliantly.
Mr. Dolatyar (Islamic Republic of Iran): I did
not intend to take the floor again. But the baseless
allegations made by the representative of the Israeli
regime — they are not new to us, of course — have
caused me to reply.
The delegation always misuses the opportunity of
speaking to direct baseless allegations against my

06-49343

A/60/PV.99

country. It is a very sad irony that a regime which is
rooted in, and continues, unfortunately, to be nourished
by occupation, suppression and aggression, is
complaining about terrorism. It is also a mockery that
the representative of a terrorist war machine is teaching
and lecturing this body on the necessity of
implementing a counter-terrorism strategy. The words
of our colleague from Lebanon, about the history of
Israeli terrorism, aggression and occupation, have
made it unnecessary for me to elaborate on those very
evident facts.
We also hope that by implementing the Strategy
we can come to a time when there are no terrorist
incidents and no manifestations of terrorism on this
earth.
The President: I thank Member States very much
for their important contributions to the issue and to the
debate on the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
I appreciate that, in spite of sometimes serious
reservations and strong emotions, all members have
chosen to join the consensus decision. Thus, the
General Assembly has assumed its responsibility and
has sent a powerful and unified message to the world.
Yes, we have established a strong strategy for fighting
terrorism. Yes, this scourge affects us all. Yes, we must
and shall continue to work together and to deal with
this vital issue, both inside and outside the United
Nations. This is a living document and, as we have all
noted, the debate will continue.
Next, I have to make an announcement
concerning mandate review. I would like to recall for
the members that in paragraph 163 (b) of the 2005
World Summit Outcome (resolution 60/1) the
Assembly called for the review by the Assembly and
other relevant organs of all mandates older than five
years originating from resolutions of the General
Assembly and other organs.
In that connection I invite the attention of the
General Assembly to a letter dated 7 September 2006
addressed to the President of the General Assembly
from the Co-Chairs of the Informal Consultations of
the Plenary on Mandate Review, His Excellency
Ambassador Munir Akram of Pakistan and His
Excellency Ambassador David Cooney of Ireland. The
letter was circulated this afternoon. In it, the Co-Chairs
describe the progress of work by the informal Working
Group and attach a non-paper setting out guidelines

06-49343

and working methods for carrying out the mandate
review.
The Co-Chairs have stated that it is their shared
view, based on extensive consultations with
delegations, that these guidelines and working methods
enjoy a wide measure of acceptance across the
membership of the General Assembly and, they are
convinced, represent the best prospect for moving
forward in the process of mandate review during the
remainder of the year.
I should like to take this opportunity to extend to
the Co-Chairs my deep gratitude for their tireless
efforts in the consultations they have undertaken, as
well as to all Member States for their active
participation in the process. I urge Member States to
support these guidelines as proposed by the Co-Chairs
to enable the mandate review to progress further during
the remainder of the year.
The General Assembly has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of agenda items 46
and 120.
Agenda item 32 (continued)
Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/60/478/Add.2)
The President: Under this agenda item, a third
report of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee) has been issued as
document A/60/478/Add.2.
The Assembly has before it a draft resolution
recommended by the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) in
paragraph 8 of its report.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution, entitled “Comprehensive review of a
strategy to eliminate future sexual exploitation and
abuse in United Nations peacekeeping operations”.
The Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee) adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?

15

A/60/PV.99

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
60/289).
The President: I would like to inform members
that the Group of Legal Experts has submitted its
report for issuance as document A/60/980 in
accordance with Assembly resolution 59/300 of
22 June 2005, which endorsed the recommendation of
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations in
its report (A/59/19/Rev.1). In accordance with General
Assembly resolution 60/263 of 6 June 2006, which
endorsed the recommendations of the Special
Committee contained in its report (A/60/19), the report
of the Group of Legal Experts has been transmitted to
the Chairman of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee), who in
turn is to transmit it to the Chairman of the Sixth
Committee.
In a letter dated 28 August 2006, addressed to me
by the Chairman of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee, I have been informed that
the report will not be available until some time in
October 2006, during the main part of the sixty-first
session of the General Assembly. It will therefore be
necessary for the Assembly to postpone consideration
of the report to the next session, in order to avail the
Sixth Committee, at the sixty-first session, of the
opportunity to take up the report.

16

May I therefore take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to postpone consideration of the
report of the Group of Legal Experts (A/60/980) to the
sixty-first session, in order to avail the Sixth
Committee of the opportunity to consider the report?
It was so decided.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item
32?
It was so decided.
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
its consideration of all the reports of the Special
Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth
Committee).
I should like to say just a few final words. I know
that many representatives will be leaving New York
over the weekend to attend the important meeting of
the Non-Aligned Movement, to be held in Havana. Let
me therefore thank those representatives who will be
leaving for the cooperation and friendship that they
have extended to me during my presidency, which will
end on Monday of next week.
The meeting rose at 5.10 p.m.

06-49343
