58

General Assembly-Thirty-third Ses11Í(IIJ]J

the effectiveness of the Council as the organ bearing
primary responsibility far the maintenance of international peace and security;
3. Reatfirms the legitimacy of the struggle of peoples under colonial and alien domination to achieve
self-determination and independence and urges Member States to increase their support far and solidarity
with them and their national liberation movements
and to take urgent and effective measures far the
speedy completion of the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples85 and of the other resolutions
of the United Nations on the final elimination of
colonialism, racism and apartheid;
4. Also calls far the deepening and extension of
the process of relaxation of international tensions,
which is still limited in both scope and geographical
extent, to all regions of the world in order to help
bring about just and lasting solutions to international
problems with the participation of all States so that
peace and security will be based on effective respect
for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of all States and the inalienable right
of all peoples to determine their own destiny freely
and without outside interference, coercion or pressure;
5. Reatfirms its opposition to any threat or use
of force, intervention, aggression, foreign occupation
or measure of political and economic coercion which
attempts to violate the sovereignty, territorial integrity,
independence and security of States or their right
freely to dispose of their natural resources;
6. Commends the holding of the tenth special session of the General Assembly, devoted to disarmament,
with the active participation of all Member States,
particularly its decisions aimed at strengthening the
role of the United Nations in the field of disarmament,
including those relating to effective machinery for deliberation on, and negotiation of, disarmament measures, and, in this connexion, invites all Member States
to take effective measures for halting the arms race,
particularly the nuclear arms race, and for disarmament, in accordance with the priorities agreed to
during the tenth special session; 86
7. Considers that the implementation of the new
international economic arder, assuring, through the
settlement of urgent international economic problems,
a speedy development of the developing countries,
narrowing and overcoming the existing gap between
the developed and the developing countries and the
democratization of the process of decision-making,
constitutes an inseparable part of the efforts far the
strengthening of international peace and security;

8. Recalls its ninth special session, on the question
of Namibia, supports the efforts for achieving the independence of Namibia and invites all Member States
to contribute towards the successful implementation of
resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly
and the Security Council and to facilitate, within this
framework, the fulfilment of the mandate given to the
Secretary-General with respect to this question by the
Council;
9. Expresses its concern over the worsening of the
critical situation in Zimbabwe and urges Member States
to increase their support to the people of Zimbabwe
85 Resolution 1514 (XV).
86 See resolution S-10/2.

in its legitimate struggle against the minority racist
régime for its continuous attempts to impede the attainment of independence by Zimbabwe and for its
acts of aggression against the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of neighbouring countries;
1O. Commends the decision of the Belgrade meeting of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in
Europe on the continuation of efforts aimed at implementing fully all the provisions of the Final Act of
Helsinki, 87 particularly the agreement on the implementation of the Declaration on the Mediterranean,
supports, bearing in mind the clase relationship between security in Europe and security in the Mediterranean, the Middle East and other regions of the world,
the proposal of the non-aligned countries for the transformation of the Mediterranean into a zone of peace
and co-operation with a view to promoting good neighbourly relations, the settlement of all disputes between
States by peaceful means, and concrete measures of
co-operation among States of the region, in accordance
with their mutual interest to concert their views and
to seize opportunities to contribute to the strengthening
of international peace and security, and, in this context,
takes note of the meeting of experts being held in accordance with the decision referred to above;
11. Reatfirms once again the provisions of the
Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace88
and calls upon the great Powers to co-operate in its
implemen tation;
12. Considers that the dismantling of foreign military bases would contribute to the strengthening of
international security;
13. Takes note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral89 and, having in mind the forthcoming tenth
anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration on the
Strengthening of International Security, requests him
to prepare a report on the implementation of the Declaration and on the views communicated by the Governments of Member States concerning measures to
be taken in order to implement those provisions of
the Declaration which have not yet been put into effect, with a view to considering this problem at the
thirty-fourth session of the General Assembly;
14. Decides to include in the provisional agenda
of its thirty-fourth session the ítem entitled "Implementation of the Declaration on the Strengthening of
International Security".
85th plenary meeting
15 December 1978
33/76.

Situation in Nicaragua

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its obligations with regard to the maintenance of international peace and security and the
promotion of universal respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms,
Bearing in mind the statement of the President of
the Republic of Costa Rica at the current session of
the General Assembly on the violation of his country's
sovereignty by military aircraft of Nicaragua,n°
s 7 Signed on 1 August 1975.
xx Resolution 2832 (XXVI).
R!l A/33/217 and Add.1 and 2.
!JO Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Scssion, Plenary Mectings, 11 th meeting, paras. 75-126.

111.

Reaolutiom adopted on the reports of the Fint Committee

Noting also the message sent to the President of the
General Assembly concerning this matter by the President of the Republic of Colombia and the President
of the Republic of Venezuela on 27 September 1978,91
Considering the extreme gravity of the events that
have taken place and are continuing to occur in Nicaragua, which have caused the death of thousands of
people, incalculable destruction of property and repeated violations of the most basic rights and which
have led sorne countries of the American continent to
attempt to reach a peaceful solution to the interna!
confl.ict in Nicaragua by meaos of a friendly committee
of conciliation,
1. Censures the repression of the civilian population of Nicaragua and the violation of the sovereignty
of Costa Rica by Nicaraguan military aircraft;
2. Expresses deep concern over the serious turn
taken by the domestic situation in Nicaragua and over
its implications for peace and security in the region;
3. Demands that the Nicaraguan authorities stop
military and other activities that endanger the security
of the region, in particular those that threaten the
sovereignty and territorial inviolability of neighbouring countries;
4. Urges the Nicaraguan authorities to ensure respect for the human rights of the citizens of Nicaragua,
in accordance with their international commitments and
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations;
5. Requests all States to adopt the necessary measures, in accordance with their constitutional procedures,
to discourage the recruitment and participation of their
nationals as mercenaries in the confl.ict occurring in
Nicaragua;
6. Urges the continuation of international efforts
to achieve a peaceful settlement of the internal conflict
in Nicaragua;
7. Requests the Secretary-General, through the appropriate channels, carefully to follow developments
in the situation in Nicaragua and provide the assistance
needed to achieve the purposes of the present resolution.

85th plenary meeting
15 December 1978

59

Emphasizing the importance of an effective followup of the relevant recommendations and decisions
adopted at its tenth special session,
Having considered the report of the Disarmament
Commission, 94
l. Endorses the report of the Disarmament Commission and the recommendations contained therein;
2. Requests the Disarmament Commission to continue its work in accordance with its mandate, as set
down in paragraph 118 of the Final Document of the
Tenth Special Session, as well as the recommendations
contained in its report and the decisions that the General Assembly has taken at its current session and
which have a bearing on the Commission's programme
of work in 1979;
3. Requests the Disarmament Commission to submit to the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session
a report on the work of the Commission, including
any recommendations and observations it may deem
appropriate;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
the Disarmament Commission the Final Document,
together with all the official records of the tenth special
session, so that the views and proposals presented by
States during the session will be available for the
implementation of the Commission's programme of
work;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to render to the
Disarmament Commission all the necessary assistance
that it may require for implementing the present resolution;
6. Further requests the Secretary-General to invite
Member States to communicate to him, by 31 March
1979, their views and suggestions on the comprehensive programme of disarmament, for transmission to
the Disarmament Commission;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fourth session an item entitled "Report of
the Disarmament Commission".
86th plenary meeting
16 December 1978

B
CONFJDENCE-BUILDING MEASURES

33/91.

General and complete disarmament92
A

REPORT OF THE DISARMAMENT COMMISSION

The General Assembly,
Having resolved to lay the foundations of an international disarmament strategy which aims at general
and complete disarmament under effective international
control, through co-ordinated and persevering efforts
in which the United Nations should play a more effective role,
Recalling the Final Document of the Tenth Special
Session of the General Assembly, in which it decided
to establish the Disarmament Commission,93

The General Assembly,
Concerned at the fact that the arms race is accelerating and that the world figure for expenditures
on armaments continues to increase,
Convinced that it is possible to develop effective
international methods and procedures to promote general and complete disarmament under strict and effective international control,
Desiring to eliminate the sources of tension by peaceful means and thereby to contribute to the strengthening of peace and security in the world,
Stressing the importance of the statement in the
Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the
General Assembly that it is necessary, in order to
facilitate the process of disarmament, to take measures
and to pursue policies to strengthen international peace

91 A/33/275, annex.

92 See also sect. X.B.2, decision 33/422.
93 Resolution S-10/2, para. 118.

9 4 Official Records of tite General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 42 (A/33/42).
