A/56/PV.96

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-sixth session

96

th plenary meeting
Wednesday, 13 March 20002, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Han Seung-soo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Agenda item 37
The role of diamonds in fuelling conflict
Letters from South Africa transmitting the
report on the Kimberly Process (A/56/502,
A/56/675 and A/56/775)
Draft resolution (A/56/L.72)
The President: I call on the representative of
South Africa to introduce draft resolution A/56/L.72.
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Allow me from the
outset to express my country’s gratitude to you, Sir,
and to thank you for scheduling this plenary meeting of
the General Assembly to consider agenda item 37,
entitled “The role of diamonds in fuelling conflict”.
The provisions of General Assembly resolution
55/56 of 1 December 2000 mandated this body to
remain seized of the matter related to the curtailment of
conflict diamonds. The proceeds of the sale of these
diamonds fuel armed conflict, the activities of rebel
movements aimed at undermining or overthrowing
legitimate Governments and the illicit traffic in and
proliferation of armaments, especially small arms and
light
weapons.
The
negative
humanitarian
consequences of such criminal acts are well known.
Efforts to curtail the trade in conflict diamonds
became an international responsibility when the

(Republic of Korea)

General Assembly unanimously adopted resolution
55/56. We hope that the General Assembly today, as it
did last year, will adopt by acclamation the draft
resolution, which requires us to remain seized of this
matter. I am pleased to say that, in addition to all the
countries listed on the draft resolution as sponsors, a
number of other countries have joined as co-sponsors
since its publication: Brazil, China, Colombia, France,
Guinea, India, Israel, Luxembourg, Madagascar,
Romania, Slovenia, Ukraine, the United Republic of
Tanzania and the United States of America.
Last year, the General Assembly encouraged the
Kimberley Process to move ahead and to develop a
detailed proposal for a simple and workable
international certification scheme for rough diamonds
based on national certification schemes. The purpose of
this scheme is to break the link between the illicit
transaction in rough diamonds and armed conflict as a
contribution to the prevention and settlement of
conflicts. Since the last session of the General
Assembly, the Kimberley Process has issued an interim
report and a full report and its addendum on progress
made. These are contained in documents A/56/502,
dated 24 October 2001; A/56/675, dated 4 December
2001; and A/56/775, dated 17 January 2002.
The Kimberley Process has to date made great
progress towards creating an international certification
scheme for rough diamonds. This is acknowledged in
the draft resolution before the Assembly. A few critical
elements of the scheme remain outstanding. More
meetings of the Kimberley Process will be held this

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

02-28422 (E)

*0228422*

A/56/PV.96

year, starting with one that is scheduled to take place in
Canada from 18 to 20 March 2002 in order to finalize
these issues. The draft resolution encourages
Kimberley Process participants to agree on these
outstanding issues with a view to implementing the
scheme by the end of 2002.

governmental organizations to work together towards
developing proposals for an international certification
scheme for rough diamonds. Only the widest possible
participation in the proposed scheme will achieve the
result we all seek: a reduction of conflict and human
suffering.

The draft resolution contained in General
Assembly document A/56/L.72 is procedural in nature.
It does not contain provisions that have financial
implications. This draft resolution welcomes the
detailed proposals for an international certification
scheme for rough diamonds developed in the
Kimberley Process, which provide a good basis for the
envisaged international diamonds control mechanism.
The draft resolution recognizes that the proposed
international certification scheme could help ensure
effective implementation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions containing sanctions on trade in
conflict diamonds. It also encourages the Kimberley
Process to resolve outstanding issues, such as World
Trade Organization compatibility and definition of
participants. Importantly, it encourages all States
involved in the diamond trade to participate in the
proposed international certification scheme. In
conclusion, the draft resolution requests the Kimberley
Process to report to the General Assembly during its
next session and also makes provisions for the General
Assembly to keep this item on its agenda.

Reaching consensus on the elements of the
proposed international certification scheme has been a
monumental accomplishment. It has required
tremendous dedication on the part of all those
involved. The seriousness of the conflict diamonds
problem has given the expanded number of Kimberley
Process participants the resolve to cooperate with each
other and to work through their differences.

The Kimberley Process complements efforts to
create and maintain peace and security. For this reason,
my delegation would like to encourage unanimous
proclamation of the draft resolution in support of the
Kimberley Process’s efforts reflected therein.
Mr. Siv (United States of America): I am pleased
to speak on this important issue, on which there has
been a great deal of progress in the past year. The
United States remains deeply concerned about the
illicit trade in rough diamonds. Unfortunately, this
illegal trade continues to threaten the very fabric of
numerous communities by fuelling armed conflict. We
remain committed to working jointly with leaders from
the Governments of diamond-producing and -importing
nations, legitimate private diamond enterprises and
non-governmental organizations in fighting this
problem.
In the past year, the Kimberley Process has made
strong progress in getting an expanded number of
Governments, the diamond industry and non-

2

The draft resolution before us on the role of
diamonds in fuelling conflict stands as testimony to the
dedication of all Kimberley Process participants to
working side by side in addressing this problem.
However, our work is not yet done. Next week, a
Kimberley plenary will be held in Ottawa, Canada, to
resolve some remaining issues. Throughout this
process, the support and encouragement of the United
Nations has helped the Process garner growing
international support. It is important that we continue
to encourage all interested parties to become part of the
proposed international certification scheme.
Now more than ever, following the terrorist
attacks of 11 September, the international community
must re-dedicate itself to addressing these global
problems, which have led to armed conflict. We
appreciate that the Kimberley Process has set for itself
an ambitious deadline to put its proposed system into
place by the end of the year.
We applaud South Africa’s continued leadership
in the Kimberley process, as well as in sponsoring
today’s General Assembly draft resolution. We urge all
Member States to continue working to make the
proposed international certification scheme a reality,
thereby taking us one step closer to our mutual goal of
promoting international peace and security.
Mr. Heinbecker (Canada): The Assembly meets
today to signal its continuing deep concern about the
role of the illicit trade in rough diamonds in fuelling
armed conflict in many parts of Africa. It meets also
both to recognize the progress achieved to date through
the Kimberley Process in developing measures to curb
the trade in conflict diamonds, and to encourage the
Process to persevere and to conclude its deliberations

A/56/PV.96

as soon as possible. Our goal is nothing less than the
full implementation of effective measures to eliminate
the role of diamonds as a driver of conflict, and there is
important work yet to be done.
(spoke in French)
Like other countries represented in this Hall,
Canada recognizes that the vast majority of rough
diamonds produced in the world are from legitimate
sources and represent a valuable resource for the
economic and social development of many countries.
At the same time, the small percentage of the trade
represented by conflict diamonds continues to have a
disproportionate and devastating impact on peace and
human security, particularly in Angola, Sierra Leone
and the Democratic Republic of Congo. The Assembly
and the Security Council have played a key role in
identifying and monitoring the trade in conflict
diamonds and in sanctioning its violators.
While the devastation may be concentrated in a
handful of countries, it must be recognized that
resolving this problem is a global responsibility which
demands a continuing commitment by all Member
States, in cooperation with other important
stakeholders. The commitment to solutions has been
demonstrated not only by Governments, but also by the
international diamond industry and by civil society
organizations. Through the World Diamond Council,
the diamond industry has over the past year further
developed and refined its proposals for a system of
voluntary self-regulation of the diamond trade, which
would complement and reinforce the efforts of
Governments. Civil society is of critical importance in
this partnership, not only in generating ideas and
raising public awareness, but also in galvanizing the
political will necessary to deal with this problem.
(spoke in English)
Since the adoption by the Assembly last
December of resolution 55/56, the Kimberley Process
has made significant progress in developing detailed
proposals for an international certification scheme for
rough diamonds. Given the complexity of the
challenge, the importance of this achievement should
not be minimized. However, while we are close to
reaching our goal, we are not there yet. At its
ministerial meeting in November, the Kimberley
Process agreed that the proposals developed provide a
good basis for the envisaged certification scheme.
There are, however, some significant points left to be

resolved, including issues related to verification,
administrative support and the collection, accessibility
and comparability of statistics. It is our hope that the
next meeting of the Kimberley Process, to take place in
Ottawa, will make substantial progress on all those
concerns.
It is important that the Assembly reaffirm its
support for the efforts of the Kimberley Process to
finalize its proposals and to move quickly towards full
implementation of the necessary measures. The Process
must move from deliberations to action at the earliest
possibility to address the urgent humanitarian situation
in affected countries and to ensure that the legitimate
diamond trade, which makes a critical contribution to
the economies of so many countries worldwide,
especially in Africa, is not endangered in the process.
We are pleased to join those others in the
Assembly in sponsoring this draft resolution
(A/56/L.72). We reiterate our commitment to
cooperation with others in order to overcome this
problem. Concerning the future, we remain convinced
that the Kimberley Process must address itself to the
search for solutions that are at once efficacious,
pragmatic, credible and inclusive, and must remain
directly engaged in this course of action.
Such solutions must be effective because those
involved in profiting from and perpetuating armed
conflict must be brought to account and because the
actions of a criminal minority must not be allowed to
undermine an important and legitimate industry.
They must be pragmatic because the progress of
the Kimberley Process and the effectiveness and
efficiency of the proposed certification scheme will be
enhanced over time where and when it is possible to
build upon existing national systems and experiences
and to meet the international minimum standards
identified as necessary for keeping conflict diamonds
out of legitimate markets.
They must be credible because the success of the
proposed certification scheme will depend both on the
confidence that participants and other stakeholders
have in its effective implementation and on its
contribution to the confidence of consumers that the
diamonds they purchase are from legitimate sources.
And they must be inclusive because the
effectiveness of the certification scheme will depend on
the involvement of all key participants and

3

A/56/PV.96

stakeholders in the international trade in rough
diamonds. It is of key importance that maximum
participation in the certification scheme be encouraged
and facilitated, and that gaps through which conflict
diamonds might otherwise flow be closed.
In conclusion, I take this opportunity to express
Canada’s gratitude to the Government of South Africa
for its far-sighted, steadfast and continuing leadership
of the Kimberley Process. Canada is pleased to be
working with South Africa and others in the
preparations for the next meeting, to be held in Ottawa
next week. There we aim to achieve further decisive
progress on the implementation of the certification
scheme. Bearing in mind the importance of our efforts
to the protection of people whose lives have been
devastated by the trade in conflict diamonds, we
strongly encourage the full endorsement by the General
Assembly of the draft resolution before us today.
Mr. Akiba (Japan): Let me say at the outset that
the Government of Japan welcomes draft resolution
A/56/L.72, which was just introduced by His
Excellency Ambassador Kumalo of South Africa.
Indeed, the draft resolution reflects the progress
achieved in the Kimberley Process during the past year.
My Government would like to express its sincere
appreciation to the South African secretariat for its
work in facilitating that progress. We also pay tribute
to those Governments that have hosted meetings of the
Kimberley Process in the course of the past year,
namely the Governments of Angola, Belgium,
Botswana, Namibia, the Russian Federation and the
United Kingdom.
Since it started with the Technical Forum on
Diamonds held in Kimberley, South Africa, under that
country’s chairmanship in May 2000, and in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 55/56,
the Kimberley Process has enjoyed ever greater
participation. Japan has been participating actively in
the discussions since joining the Process at its meeting
in Namibia in February 2001. The Kimberley Process
involves not only representatives of Governments, but
also representatives of regional economic integration
organizations and other relevant international
organizations, the diamond industry and civil society.
At successive meetings of the Process, participants
have focused their discussion on the essential elements
of an international scheme of certification for rough
diamonds with a view to breaking the link between
armed conflict and the trade in rough diamonds.

4

Conflict diamonds are also identified in the G-8
Miyazaki Initiatives for Conflict Prevention as one of
the major issues which must be tackled by the
international community. Although Japan is not a major
rough-diamond-trading country, my Government has
been participating actively in the Kimberley Process
discussions, believing them to be an effective means of
conflict prevention.
The document entitled “Essential elements of an
international scheme of certification for rough
diamonds, with a view to breaking the link between
armed conflict and the trade in rough diamonds” was
adopted by consensus at the ministerial meeting in
Botswana last November. Several parts of the
document, however, need further consideration. The
international scheme was negotiated taking into
account the elements described in General Assembly
resolution 55/56, to which I referred earlier. These
include the recommendations that the envisaged
scheme should be effective and pragmatic, should be
consistent with international law, should not impede
the current legitimate trade in diamonds, should be
based primarily on national certification schemes and
should secure the widest possible participation.
My Government would like to stress in particular
that, in order to ensure the effectiveness of such an
international scheme, the scheme should, first, enjoy
the widest possible participation, and secondly, be in
conformity with international law and not impede the
legitimate trade in rough diamonds. My delegation
earnestly hopes that the importance of these two points
will be recognized at this session of the General
Assembly and will be properly reflected in the draft
resolution to be adopted. At the same time, my
Government would like to call upon those that have not
yet joined the Kimberley Process to do so as soon as
possible.
The Government of Canada will host, in Ottawa,
the next Kimberley Process meeting. My Government
would like to thank the Government of Canada in
advance for hosting the meeting, which, I am sure, will
advance the Process another step. Given the
momentum generated at this General Assembly
session, we look forward to a constructive discussion
in Ottawa and hope that it will lead to the early launch
of the envisaged international certification scheme.
Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union on

A/56/PV.96

agenda item 37, on the role of diamonds in fuelling
conflict. Bulgaria, Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Iceland, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta,
Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia and Turkey align
themselves with this statement.
The trade in conflict diamonds is a matter of
serious concern for the international community
because of its direct links to armed conflict, the
subversive activities of rebel movements and the
proliferation of armaments. The illegal exploitation of
and trade in natural resources — diamonds in
particular — constitutes a serious threat to stability and
security.
The European Union believes that the fight
against trafficking in conflict diamonds is essential to
attempts to resolve current conflicts and is a key
component in preventing the emergence or recurrence
of conflict. Halting the flow of conflict diamonds into
legitimate trade will make a substantial contribution to
peace and development and will enable legitimate
business activities to continue in both developing and
developed countries.
Among the attempts made so far to find effective
ways of dealing with the trade in diamonds, we would
like to refer to the efforts being made by two key
players. First, both the Security Council and the
General Assembly have taken action on this matter, and
the European Union welcomes the initiatives and
measures taken by both bodies.
Secondly, active work has been undertaken within
the Kimberley Process to develop proposals for the
envisaged
international
certification
scheme.
Representatives of the diamond industry and of civil
society have been closely involved in this work. Since
the adoption of resolution 55/56, additional States have
joined the Process, which is thus now known as the
expanded Kimberley Process. Since December 2000,
meetings have been held in Windhoek, Brussels,
Moscow, Twickenham and Gaborone. The European
Union welcomes the steady progress made at those
meetings and, in particular, working document 9/2001,
as amended, dated 29 November 2001, entitled
“Essential elements of an international scheme of
certification for rough diamonds, with a view to
breaking the link between armed conflict and the trade
in rough diamonds”.
The Union believes that the work done by the
United Nations and that of the Kimberley Process are

complementary, since the finalization of the
international certification scheme for rough diamonds
would be very important in ensuring the effective
implementation of
relevant
Security
Council
resolutions. The European Union encourages the
expeditious
finalization
of
the
international
certification scheme and expects further progress to be
made in that direction during the next meeting of the
Kimberley Process, to be held in Ottawa, in order to
meet the implementation deadline set in Gaborone.
The European Union fully supports draft
resolution A/56/L.72, introduced by South Africa for
adoption by the General Assembly, and believes that it
would represent an important step in United Nations
involvement in this matter. The Union intends to
continue to play an active and constructive role on this
issue. We encourage the widest possible participation
in the international certification scheme, including by
all States Members of the United Nations that trade in
diamonds, as that is of the greatest importance for the
successful implementation of the scheme.
Mr. De Ruyt (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Belgium fully endorses the statement just made by the
Spanish delegation on behalf of the European Union.
Nevertheless, I wanted to speak today, given the
importance of the diamond trade for my country and
our active participation in the Kimberley Process since
its inception.
I would first of all very much like to thank South
Africa for its effective chairmanship of the Kimberley
Process and for its conduct of the negotiations on the
draft resolution (A/56/L.72) that is the object of our
discussions today. The result of those negotiations
perfectly meets our desires, and we are therefore proud
to be one of the sponsors of the draft resolution.
The link between the illicit exploitation of natural
resources and the continuation of conflict, with its
devastating effects, has already been illustrated on
many occasions, and I shall not discuss it here. Suffice
it to say that the current environment should prompt us
to combat this traffic more than ever, as such traffic
could also allow terrorist networks to raise funds.
Much progress has been made since the last
session of the General Assembly. Participation in the
Kimberley Process has been expanded; six plenary
sessions have been held; and detailed proposals been
formulated that provide a good basis for an
international certification scheme for rough diamonds.
If we are close to a global agreement it is thanks to the
indefatigable efforts of the participants in the

5

A/56/PV.96

Kimberley Process. I want to thank them for their
courageous and coordinated action. Mention should
also be made of the constructive participation of nongovernmental organizations and of the industry. It is
now important for the international community to
continue to support the Process and proceed as soon as
possible to finalizing the international certification
scheme. We are convinced that the draft resolution
introduced by the delegation of South Africa will
contribute to that goal.
The success of the envisaged certification scheme
will depend on its comprehensive and universal
application. All the parties involved, and in particular
all the diamond markets, will have to apply the
international certification scheme. If not, the system
will be ineffective and will not respond adequately to
the problem of conflict diamonds. I emphasize this
point because the purpose of the Kimberley Process is
to guarantee a diamond trade that is not blemished by
conflict diamonds. There can be no exceptions to such
a guarantee.
I would also like to recall the steadfast position of
Belgium in favour of transparency in the diamond
trade. In particular, that transparency has to be based
on reliable and comparable statistics. We are pleased
that paragraph 7 of the draft resolution endorses that
principle.
I wish to conclude my statement by expressing
the hope that we will be able to endorse the
international certification scheme during the next
session of the General Assembly.
Mr. Mmualefe (Botswana): The Republic of
Botswana, as a co-convener of the Kimberley Process,
welcomes this debate on a matter of crucial importance
to my country and to Africa. The issue of conflict
diamonds has tarnished the image of Africa. It has
tarnished the public perception of a resource that
should be a resource of sustenance and development
for diamond-producing countries.
We have been actively involved in the work of
the Kimberley Process since its inception, and we had
the honour to host the most recent plenary meetings of
the Kimberley group, including the ministerial meeting
that was held on 29 November 2001. At that meeting
the ministers adopted the Kimberley Process working
document entitled “Essential elements of an
international scheme of certification for rough
diamonds, with a view to breaking the link between
armed conflict and the trade in rough diamonds”,

6

which is before the General Assembly today (see
A/56/775, annex VIII), and which we fully support.
My country’s determined involvement in the
Process is driven by two dominant considerations.
First, as an African nation we feel the pain associated
with the bitter conflicts that have been waged on
African soil. We are determined to contribute in
whatever way we can to the de-escalation and
resolution of those conflicts. Secondly, as the world’s
leading supplier of rough gem diamonds, we have a far
greater degree of economic dependence on the diamond
industry than any other State Member of the United
Nations. The diamond industry directly contributes one
third of our gross domestic product, more than half of
all revenues to our State treasury and over 80 per cent
of national export earnings.
For those of us whose economies and democratic
governance structures are sustained by the resources
that flow from diamond mining and diamond
processing, the success of the Kimberley Process is a
matter of life and death. Equally, for those countries
that have fallen victim to the murderous activities of
rebel groups and their illegal trading in diamonds, the
success of the Kimberley Process is also a matter of
life and death. As we have all recognized, the trade in
conflict diamonds does not in any way benefit the
people or the economies of those countries. Rather, it
sustains the greed and selfishness of the rebels and
their collusive buyers in the diamond industry. Every
week that goes by without concrete action to deal with
the issue of conflict diamonds on a global basis
represents more lives lost in civil conflicts and the
further dissemination of negative sentiment about the
role of diamonds in sustaining those conflicts.
During 2001, we have already experienced a
severe decline in the diamond trade. That is despite
international efforts to effectively address the issue of
conflict diamonds. The decline has a major impact on
Botswana’s economic and social development plans.
We therefore cannot remain indifferent or silent while
those conflicts cause greater harm to the diamond
trade.
The draft resolution currently before the General
Assembly incorporates the belief that
“the opportunity for conflict diamonds to play a
role in fuelling armed conflict can be
substantially reduced by introducing an
international certification scheme for rough
diamonds and that such a scheme would help
protect legitimate trade and ensure the effective

A/56/PV.96

implementation of the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council containing sanctions on trade in
conflict diamonds”. (A/56/L.72, ninth preambular
paragraph)
We therefore urge the General Assembly to adopt
this draft resolution. We urge those Member States
whose ministers were present or represented at the
Gaborone meeting of the Kimberley Process to draw
confidence from the unanimous endorsement of the
Kimberley proposals that was expressed at that
meeting. We urge participants in the Kimberley Process
to move swiftly to final agreement on all outstanding
points, including the critical matter of establishing a
credible international monitoring structure for the
proposed certification scheme. And we urge the
international community to insist on urgent action so as
to minimize further loss of life and further economic
damage.
Above all, we urge all parties to show the same
urgency that has been shown in recent months
regarding the war against terrorism. This, too, is part of
the war against terrorism, in which the victims are
innocent parties. The fact that the majority of victims
are also among the poorer populations of the world
should make it more, not less, urgent to address the
problem in a more meaningful way. Lest we forget, it is
imperative that the international community redouble
its efforts to bring about peace and national
reconciliation to these countries, for without peace, the
success of the Kimberley process is in jeopardy.
The President: Before proceeding to take action
on the draft resolution, I should like to announce that,
since the introduction of the draft resolution, the
following countries have become sponsors of draft
resolution A/56/L.72: Colombia and Hungary.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/56/L.72, entitled “The role of diamonds in
fuelling conflict: breaking the link between the illicit
transaction of rough diamonds and armed conflict as a
contribution to prevention and settlement of conflicts”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/56/L.72?
Draft resolution A/56/L.72
(resolution 56/263).

was

adopted

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 37?

Agenda item 24
Review of the problem of human immunodeficiency
virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome in all its
aspects
Draft resolution (A/56/L.73)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/56/L.73.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/56/L.73?
Draft resolution A/56/L.73
(resolution 56/264).

was

adopted

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 24?
It was so decided.
Programme of work
The President: Before adjourning this morning’s
meeting, I should like to inform members that
consultations relating to the timing of the meeting of
the General Assembly devoted to information and
communication technologies for development, under
agenda item 12, are concluded.
As members will recall, in resolution 56/258 of
31 January 2002, the General Assembly decided to
convene a meeting of the General Assembly consisting
of three plenary meetings devoted to bridging the
digital divide and promoting digital opportunities in the
emerging information society. Accordingly, it has been
agreed that the three plenary meetings of the General
Assembly will be held on Monday and Tuesday, 17 and
18 June 2002.
Members will also recall that, by resolution
56/258, the General Assembly also decided that, in
parallel to the plenary meetings, separate informal
panels would be organized.
As the Assembly is aware, preparations for the
plenary meetings and panels are continuing in a
transparent way under the chairmanship of the
facilitator, Mr. Alexandru Niculescu, Permanent
Representative of Romania to the United Nations.
The meeting rose at 11.10 a.m.

It was so decided.

7
