United Nations

S/PV.6101 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6101st meeting
Monday, 6 April 2009, 4 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Heller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Mexico)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Ebner
Mr. Koudougou
Mr. Huang Hongjiang
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Skračić
Mr. Guidée
Mr. Kumagai
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Çorman
Mr. Mugoya
Mr. Williams
Ms. Germain
Mr. Bui The Giang

Agenda
The question concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (S/2009/129)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-29318 (E)

*0929318*

S/PV.6101 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 4.10 p.m.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Jamaica, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Wolfe
(Jamaica) took the seat reserved for him at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I wish to
remind all speakers, as I indicated at the morning
session, to limit their statements to no more than five
minutes in order to enable the Council to carry out its
work expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy
statements are kindly requested to circulate the texts in
writing and to deliver a condensed version when
speaking in the Chamber.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Uruguay.
Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation, on behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti,
would like to congratulate you, Sir, and the delegation
of Mexico for having taken the initiative to organize
this debate on Haiti and in this way to address the
latest report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
(S/2009/129) and the Security Council’s recent visit to
Haiti in March 2009, led by Costa Rica.
Before noting the two main topics to be addressed
by the Council, I would like to reaffirm once again the
Group of Friends of Haiti’s full commitment to and
support for the Haitian Government and people in
rebuilding their country, consolidating peace and
stability, and promoting recovery and sustainable
development.
As the coordinator of the Group of Friends of
Haiti, I would like to express our strong support for
MINUSTAH — and for the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in their efforts to improve the

2

stability and governance in Haiti. The latest report of
the Secretary-General, dated 6 March 2009, underlines
the progress made in implementing the mandate of
MINUSTAH, as set out in resolution 1840 (2008) and
previous resolutions.
The Group of Friends of Haiti welcomes the
progress achieved in four of the five areas considered
critical for consolidating Haiti’s stability: political
dialogue and elections; extension of State authority,
including border management; strengthening of
security; and the rule of law and human rights.
Similarly, we recognize the strong commitment of a
group of Latin American countries that are pooling
their resources to help train the Haitian National
Police. We also underscore the efforts made by the
Meeting of Deputy Ministers for Foreign Affairs and
Deputy Ministers for Defence of the Consultative
Group 2 x 9 on Haiti.
As regards political dialogue and the elections,
our Group believes that establishing the Government of
Prime Minister Pierre-Louis represents an important
step forward and the expression of improved
cooperation among the executive branch, Parliament
and civil society in response to the devastating series
of tropical storms that struck the country. It is
important to consolidate that cooperation in order to
meet the country’s needs.
The Group of Friends of Haiti stresses the need
for free and fair elections and calls on all political
actors to ensure that the upcoming elections for the
renewal of one third of the Senate are held in a
peaceful atmosphere.
Haiti continues to grapple with food insecurity,
significant poverty and a fragile humanitarian
situation. In those areas, unfortunately, there has been a
marked deterioration in the daily living conditions of
the vast majority of the Haitian people. The Group of
Friends of Haiti shares the view of the SecretaryGeneral that stabilization, security and development
are linked, since the current levels of poverty,
deprivation and suffering in the country are clearly
incompatible with long-term stability. Therefore, it is
urgent that the Haitian authorities collaborate closely
with the international community to facilitate the
distribution of humanitarian aid and recovery work and
to lay a foundation for renewed private-sector activity
in the interests of the country’s long-term
reconstruction and development.

09-29318

S/PV.6101 (Resumption 1)

The Group of Friends of Haiti reaffirms the great
importance of the donor conference on 14 April. It will
be an opportunity for donors and partners to improve
coordination and to make available the additional
assistance required by the Government of Haiti to meet
the country’s immediate needs and to lay the
foundations for sustainable economic and social
development.

established by the Secretary-General: political dialogue
and elections; extension of State authority, including
border management; strengthening of security; and the
rule of law and human rights. Likewise, enhanced
patrolling of maritime and land borders should
continue with increased international assistance in
order to mitigate the potential destabilizing effect of
drug trafficking.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Chile.

In particular, we would like to express our
profound concern over the stagnation of Haiti’s
socio-economic development and food security. The
inextricable linkage between security and development
is fundamental to understanding the current situation in
Haiti. Therefore, we believe that appropriate
coordination between all stakeholders involved in
building peace in Haiti, as established in resolution
1840 (2008), must include efforts to improve the socioeconomic indicators for Haitians. Without that, the
achievements of the past five years in Haiti could
rapidly disappear.

Mr. Muñoz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
you, Sir, for giving me the floor as a representative of a
Member
State,
especially given
that some
representatives of the United Nations agencies wanted
to take the floor before us. I would like to thank you in
particular for convening this meeting on the situation
in Haiti, the report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) (S/2009/129) and the recent visit by a
Security Council delegation headed by Ambassador
Urbina of Costa Rica.
While endorsing the statement made by the
Permanent Representative of Uruguay on behalf of the
Group of Friends of Haiti, at the outset I would also
like to reiterate Chile’s commitment to the stabilization
process in Haiti. Since the beginning of the Haitian
crisis in February 2004, my country has joined the
efforts of the international community to avert a civil
war and to contribute to the reconstruction process of
that Caribbean nation. To that end, we participated in
the Multinational Interim Force in Haiti in the first
phase and, since then, we have maintained an active
presence in MINUSTAH throughout its five years of
existence.
We welcome the resolute measures taken by
President René Préval to consolidate democracy in his
country and to strengthen the rule of law and respect
for human rights. We believe that full stabilization
should go hand in hand with an inclusive democratic
process in which everyone feels engaged in the
reconstruction and eventual prosperity of their nation.
In that regard, we value the upcoming elections of
19 April and hope that they take place in the most
normal possible conditions.
While recognizing the improved security
conditions in Haiti, such as the decrease in the number
of kidnappings, we are also encouraged to note the
progress made on four of the five benchmarks

09-29318

The next donor conference for Haiti, to take place
in Washington, D.C., on 14 April, is a positive sign.
Chile, given its position as a country with a bilateral
cooperation policy with Haiti in such areas as
education and the promotion of kindergartens, will
participate and contribute, within its capacity, to the
success of that conference so as to ensure the due
implementation of development programmes for the
Caribbean nation under the key principle of national
ownership. Concurrently, it is urgent to further foster
private investment, which helps to create employment
and an environment favourable to foreign and national
investment.
Allow me to underscore not only the historic
commitment of my country but also the efforts of a
large number of Latin American countries. Those
countries account for nearly 60 per cent of the Blue
Helmets in MINUSTAH and, under such initiatives as
the “2 x 9 Mechanism” and the recently established
Working Group for the Latin American coordination
and cooperation with the Haitian National Police, are
seeking to formulate coherent and sustainable
strategies to optimize the contributions of our troops
and police, both within MINUSTAH and in training
and cooperation programmes with the Haitian National
Police. To cite just one statistic, this year our country
will train more than 70 Haitian National Police officers
in Chile at the Carabineros Police Sciences Academy.
The programme will continue for the next few years.

3

S/PV.6101 (Resumption 1)

I conclude with an appeal that we not forget
Haiti. The recent hurricanes and their devastating
consequences for the population, together with the
food and economic crises, make it more urgent to
continue to work towards the goal that brings us
together today: achieving a lasting peace in Haiti with
full respect for and the promotion of human rights,
strengthening of the rule of law and democracy and
real progress in terms of development and dignity for
its population.
Finally, my country remains committed to Haiti
and, alongside the United Nations, will persevere in the
pursuit of all these humanitarian objectives in that
brotherly Caribbean country.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now call on
the representative of Canada.
Mr. McNee (Canada) (spoke in French): I wish at
the outset to thank you, Mr. President, and the entire
Mexican delegation for having organized this
important meeting. I should also like to thank Mr. Hédi
Annabi, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, for his briefing today and for the work that he
has done in Haiti since he assumed his duties in 2007.
Canada attaches great importance to the Haitian
dossier. Haiti is the second-largest recipient of
Canadian development aid, after Afghanistan. Our total
commitment has risen to $555 million for the period
2006-2011. Furthermore, Canada believes that the
inter-American nature of the efforts in Haiti is a
fundamental aspect of international action in that
country. That regional solidarity also makes
partnerships with the Organization of American States
and the Caribbean Community imperative. In addition,
Canada promotes an approach that includes the whole
island of Hispaniola and recognizes the importance of
the Dominican Republic to the Haitian dossier.
This is the first open debate of the Security
Council on Haiti since March 2006. Much progress has
been made over the past three years. We can be proud
of what has been accomplished by the Haitians and by
the international community. We wish to thank the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) for its work to stabilize Haiti and for its
role in the re-establishment of security. We also
commend the United Nations country team, led by
Mr. Joël Boutroue, for its work in the development and
coordination of humanitarian aid. I should also like to
highlight the exceptional work done by UNICEF and

4

the World Food Programme in response to the damage
caused by the four hurricanes that hit Haiti in August
and September 2008. Their intervention, including in
partnership with the Canadian frigate St. John’s, made
it possible to save many human lives.
Last summer’s hurricanes were a reminder that
all the progress made in Haiti remains fragile.
Consolidating security requires concerted action in the
area of development. On the other hand, truly useful
action in the area of development requires unwavering
political support. To that end, all United Nations actors
in Haiti must support one another. In particular, the
Special Representative must provide the added value of
his political role to the country team’s activities.
(spoke in English)
In a context such as that in Haiti, where
everything must be done immediately, certain priorities
must be set. Progress has been made in Haiti over the
past few years because there was a political consensus
among Haitian authorities. Given the multiple
challenges that the country is facing, it is essential to
maintain that consensus among Haiti’s decision-makers
in order to work for the common good of the Haitian
population. The Special Representative’s role is crucial
in that regard. We know that the great majority of
Haitians want reform in order to develop their country.
Only those who profit from instability and insecurity
have an interest in maintaining the status quo. But
maintaining the status quo would only set the stage for
another crisis. Eight United Nations interventions over
the past two decades should be sufficient proof of that.
We think that MINUSTAH must remain in Haiti
for as long as it takes to guarantee the security and
stability of Haitian institutions. It must continue to be
given appropriate resources and an appropriate
mandate. MINUSTAH’s work must clearly be paired
with progress in reforming the Haitian National Police
and with reforms made to the judicial and correctional
systems.
Canada would also like to point out the
usefulness of the indicators of progress presented by
the Secretary-General last summer, when the future of
MINUSTAH was being considered. We believe that
those indicators must be developed further to allow the
Haitian Government and the international community
properly to measure the impact of their joint
stabilization and reconstruction efforts.

09-29318

S/PV.6101 (Resumption 1)

Resolution 1840 (2008) contains all the elements
needed for appropriate follow-up through the next
renewals of the Mission’s mandate. Haitian leadership
and ownership of reforms are crucial ingredients, but
this must not delay required reform. Inertia cannot be a
response to the complex problems facing Haiti.
The donor conference to be held in Washington,
D.C., in a few days’ time is an important step for Haiti
and its international partners. It will be a good
opportunity to strengthen the coordination of
partnerships with the road map that is the national
growth and poverty reduction strategy paper.
Moreover, we thank the Secretary-General for
commissioning Professor Paul Collier’s report, which
highlighted objective factors specific to Haiti and
provided a boost and needed optimism for the
country’s economic prospects and for the generation of
new jobs.
This July, in the light of the results of the
Washington, D.C., meeting, the Economic and Social
Council Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti, which
Canada has the privilege of chairing, will make
recommendations regarding long-term development
strategies for Haiti. The Senate elections, also being
held in a few days, should help to stabilize
Government institutions there.
In conclusion, Canada will continue to cooperate
with Haiti by fully respecting its Constitution, its
culture, its history and its diversity. We stress the need
to work with a united Haitian people and with national
authorities who are politically inclusive and convinced
of the need to move forward together democratically
towards true political, economic and social
development. The damage inflicted by hurricanes last
year was indeed a setback, but the progress that has
been achieved in other areas gives hope for the future.
The international community has no alternative but to
remain committed to helping Haiti to move ahead to a
better future. That is why, despite the extent of the
challenges, Canada remains determined to continue to
contribute to Haiti’s development.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now call on
the representative of Brazil.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I am
pleased to see Mexico and you, Sir, in the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of April. Your
extensive experience and well-known skill guarantee

09-29318

the productive and effective management of the work
of this organ.
I also wish to express my appreciation to
Ambassador Jorge Urbina, Permanent Representative
of Costa Rica, for having led the Council mission to
Haiti. His report in that connection contains important
items of information.
(spoke in English)
I also wish to express my delegation’s
appreciation for the work that is being done in Haiti by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Hédi Annabi, as well as for Mr. Annabi’s briefing
this morning.
Brazil concurs with the key assessment of the
Secretary-General in his latest report on Haiti
(S/2009/129), that despite progress in areas such as
political dialogue and elections, extension of State
authority, the strengthening of security, rule of law and
human rights, there has been a marked deterioration in
the living conditions of the population. In addition,
achievements in the area of security are still fragile.
That assessment corroborates Brazil’s view that it
is necessary to maintain the present configuration and
mandate of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH), while emphasizing the need for
the international community to support domestic
efforts to improve the socio-economic situation in the
country. Haitians have primary responsibility for and
full ownership of their country’s development.
However, they continue to need our unwavering
solidarity and support.
As is widely known, MINUSTAH and the Haitian
authorities have cooperated to dramatically improve
security in the country. Areas of Port-au-Prince and
other cities that were dominated by gangs are now
under the authority of the State, and their inhabitants
can live without fear of violence. However, the relative
fragility of such gains demonstrates that more work is
needed to make them fully sustainable. A key
component of the strategy to achieve that goal is the
reform and strengthening of the Haitian National
Police (PNH) as well as of the judiciary and the
correctional system. Brazil and several other countries
are assisting or preparing to assist the Haitian
Government in these crucial tasks. There is optimism
that the PNH will reach the quantitative and qualitative
goals that have been established, but for this to happen

5

S/PV.6101 (Resumption 1)

staying the course is essential. These endeavours are
part of a larger effort to continue investing in capacitybuilding so as to endow the country with the
institutional tools it needs to consolidate stability. All
bilateral and multilateral assistance in this regard
should be enhanced at this crucial juncture.
In recent months, the Secretary-General has
redoubled his efforts to attract international attention
and investment to Haiti. His recent visit, alongside
former President Clinton, testifies to the fact that the
Secretary-General fully shares the view that security
measures alone cannot solve the root causes of Haiti’s
problems. As a country that has long maintained that
long-term stability in Haiti needs a combination of
security, national reconciliation and development,
Brazil can only applaud such initiatives.
The sad statistics about poverty in the country are
well known. Reversing them requires that the Haitian
Government and its numerous partners jointly intensify
efforts to overcome the challenges faced by Haitians in
their daily lives. The donor conference to be held in
Washington on 14 April is a unique opportunity for
furthering coordination among stakeholders and for
raising additional resources. The Collier report and the
national strategy document for growth and poverty
reduction provide guidance for formulating and
implementing projects with short-term results.
Financial constraints on donor countries are
currently significant as they themselves struggle with
diminishing revenues. But let us not forget that Haiti’s
needs are pressing and very significant. In a time of
crisis, the poorest within and among nations are the
ones most adversely affected. We must not withdraw
our helping hand precisely when they need it most.
Active leadership will be required on our part to ensure
continued commitment to Haiti and its efforts to
address the basic needs of its population.
For Brazil’s part, President Lula and Minister for
Foreign Affairs Celso Amorim have, time and again,
reaffirmed our commitment to assist Haiti on its path to
stability and development. This approach sustains our
firm engagement with MINUSTAH. Our troops will
remain in Haiti as long as Haitian authorities and the
international community deem it necessary.
We were pleased to hear this morning the
acknowledgement by Security Council members of the
contribution made by the Force Commander,
General Santos Cruz, and by the troops and policemen

6

in MINUSTAH. The new Force Commander, General
Floriano Peixoto Vieira Neto, will assume his functions
shortly. We are confident that he will provide the same
quality of leadership as his predecessors.
Our commitment to Haiti also translates into
bilateral and trilateral cooperation projects in a wide
gamut of areas, such as agriculture, fisheries, education
and energy generation.
The coming elections for the senate are crucial,
not only to consolidate Haiti’s institutions, but also to
facilitate the legislative work in the upper house of
parliament and therefore help to advance the needed
reforms. Brazil contributed $500,000 for the
organization of the electoral process, which we are
confident will be transparent, fair and credible.
The Brazilian Government is closely following
the current efforts by the Haitian Government to
prepare institutional reforms. We trust that an inclusive
process of consultations will allow Haitian society as a
whole to reach the necessary agreements. Effective and
sustainable democratic governance is a goal to be
pursued with great determination and even a sense of
urgency everywhere, Haiti being no exception.
The upcoming senatorial elections and the donor
conference constitute two major opportunities for Haiti
to reaffirm ownership of its political and socioeconomic development processes. We call upon the
Security Council to send an unequivocal message of its
continuous support for Haiti and for the work being
done by MINUSTAH.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Representative of Argentina.
Mr. Argüello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like at the outset to indicate that my delegation
associates itself with the statement of the Permanent
Representative of Uruguay, who spoke on behalf of the
Group of Friends of Haiti. I also wish to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of April and, in
particular, to thank the delegation of Mexico for
convening this open debate on the situation in Haiti. In
addition, I wish to highlight the importance of the
visits by the Security Council mission and by the
Secretary-General to Haiti as a demonstration of the
international community’s commitment with respect to
the situation in the country.

09-29318

S/PV.6101 (Resumption 1)

When, in 2004, the Security Council established
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), the country was sinking into violence
to which the State had no institutional capacity to
respond. For this reason, the Council established an
integrated mission with a strong mandate, focused on
the issue of security. The main objective of
MINUSTAH was to establish a secure, stable
environment, where the political and constitutional
process in the country could develop. In this sense, we
can say that in the current phase of its development,
the Mission has certainly made significant progress.

especially because of the grave damage inflicted by
natural disasters. The situation in Haiti continues to be
fragile owing to persistent poverty and unemployment
and the limited capacity of Haitian institutions to
provide basic services to the population. The close
relationship between security and development
highlights the fact that the action of the international
community cannot and must not be confined to the
presence of MINUSTAH, as any lack of visible
improvement in the living conditions of the Haitian
people could endanger the country’s stability.

Thus, the coming to power of a constitutionally
elected Haitian Government was a first major step in
the political life of the country. Similarly, the
resolution of the political crisis triggered by the fall of
the Prime Minister in April 2008, through the
appointment of a new Prime Minister in September of
the same year, and the call for parliamentary elections,
which will take place in this month of April 2009, are
milestones in the development of the Haitian political
process that we should see in a positive light.

For this reason, the upcoming donor conference
in Washington is an opportunity to move forward on
Haiti’s economic and social development and in its
institution-building, confronting the many challenges
that face us. To this end, the coordination of
international cooperation with Haiti must be improved
and institutional capacity in Haiti must be
strengthened, thus ensuring the dawning of a new age.
We must work for Haiti to take charge, in the mediumterm, of the implementation and coordination of the
assistance it receives.

That is the meaning of what the SecretaryGeneral is saying in his latest report on Haiti
(S/2009/129) when he stresses the progress on the
political dialogue, reflected in the will of Haitian
political leaders to work together to respond to the
country’s situation, and in particular to the crisis
created by the devastating hurricanes and tropical
storms of 2008.

The United Nations has an essential role to play,
since without a real bolstering of the Haitian State, a
political consultation process that ensures governance
and a basic level of human development, the factors
that made it necessary for the Organization to intervene
will never be resolved. The success of the United
Nations will be demonstrated when its presence is no
longer necessary.

As a country participating in MINUSTAH, the
first peace mission with a majority of Latin American
contingents, in terms of both troops and the military
command, Argentina is pleased that the Mission has
become a decisive factor in re-establishing stability
and security in the country and in supporting the
Haitian people in its commitment to democracy. The
recent Security Council mission to Haiti noted the
progress made in the security sphere and stressed the
support that MINUSTAH gives the Haitian National
Police to build its capacity. It also indicated that the
improvements achieved can be seen in the decrease in
the crime rate and in the increasing confidence of the
Haitian people in the police.

We are facing a unique historic opportunity to
align the contributions of the international community
with the priorities established by the Government of
Haiti for its own economic and social development. In
this context, I wish to stress the commitment of the
Latin American countries to Haiti, especially through
technical cooperation projects entailing a substantial
human resources presence and aimed at strengthening
the Haitian State. The cooperation that Argentina
provides to Haiti in the fields of food security and
strengthening the structures of the Ministry of Planning
and Cooperation and the Ministry of Economy and
Finance are carried out in this context.

The progress made in the area of security is
encouraging. However, we note with concern that
Haiti’s opportunities for economic and social
development have been significantly compromised,

09-29318

Before concluding, I would like to return to the
main conclusions of the most recent report of the
Secretary-General on Haiti, where he notes that,
notwithstanding difficulties, we have an opportunity to
advance towards the consolidation of stability in Haiti.

7

S/PV.6101 (Resumption 1)

To this end, the continued commitment of international
community to support Haiti’s security, State
institutions and economic and social development must
be ensured.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Dominican Republic.
Mr. Del Rosario Ceballos (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): First of all, I would like to
congratulate Mexico, a distinguished member of our
region, on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of April and for its
initiative to convene an open Security Council debate
on Haiti. Debates such as this keep the spotlight on the
principle of solidarity and the commitment of the
international community to Haiti.
Likewise, I wish to congratulate the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya for the transparency and good work they
carried out during the month of March at the head of
the Security Council. I also thank Mr. Hédi Annabi,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
head of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) for his valuable briefing this
morning.
Recently, nature has had a harsh impact on what
were already difficult living conditions for the peoples
of our two countries, but we recognize that it has been
even more devastating for the neighbouring people of
Haiti. Recurring hurricanes have cast a shadow and
indeed affected Haiti’s present and its future, at least
its immediate future. In this context, we note the
urgency of responding to the call for solidarity
expressed in many multilateral forums by prominent
leaders in our region. The time has come to actively
help Haiti, and as the Secretary-General has said, this
help should be aimed at reducing Haiti’s dependence
on humanitarian assistance, as recent statistical studies
have observed that Haiti’s economic fundamentals are
strong.
The Dominican Republic views in a very positive
light the work done by MINUSTAH, and believes that
this effort of solidarity, which involves the countries of
our region and other parts of the world, will contribute
to the development and institutional, economic and
social progress of the Haitian people.
The Dominican Republic is currently working
with Haiti, as noted by the Secretary-General in his
report on MINUSTAH (S/2009/129), on the

8

re-establishment of the Haitian-Dominican Joint
Commission, which is aimed at addressing priority
issues in our relations, including immigration issues,
the increasing trade, health, education, border security,
the fight against drug trafficking, the environment and
other questions of interest for both countries.
In this regard, I am pleased to announce that the
Joint Commission will be meeting starting in
mid-April 2009 to commence work on our important
common agenda. Without a doubt, the friendly and
special nature of the personal relations between
President Fernández Reyna of the Dominican Republic
and President Préval of Haiti has contributed
significantly to the progress in strengthening the ties
between the Dominican Republic and Haiti and, above
all, to the readiness to facilitate communication and
better understanding, as befits two peoples destined to
share a geographical border.
With regard to border management, the
Dominican Republic has implemented a professionally
managed programme on its side of the border through
the creation of CESFRONT, or the Specialized Border
Security Force. It is charged with supervising the
border with a view to preventing the trafficking of
drugs, arms and persons and has the specific mandate
of ensuring strict respect for the physical integrity and
health of the persons that cross through it. The results
of that programme were highlighted in the report of the
Security Council mission that recently visited Haiti,
which confirmed the climate of respect and
professionalism that prevails in the border area.
We support the upcoming donor conference that
will be held in Washington, and we trust that it will
stimulate the cooperation of the international
community with Haiti. Recent progress in Haiti has
been noted by the Security Council mission and by the
Secretary-General following his visit to Haiti with
former President Clinton.
We know that the international financial and
economic crisis affects us all, but in our opinion, the
principle of solidarity should be maintained,
particularly in the case of Haiti, since, as the SecretaryGeneral has said, the progress that has been made there
remains very fragile and is subject to reversal.
I conclude by reiterating the readiness of the
Government of the Dominican Republic to continue to
contribute to this effort in favour of Haiti. I trust that
the international community, and in particular donor

09-29318

S/PV.6101 (Resumption 1)

countries as a whole, will continue to adhere to the
sound principle of solidarity.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ecuador.
Ms. Espinosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I would also like to express my
gratitude to your country for its initiative to convene
this special meeting on the report (S/2009/129) of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). This is an issue of
great importance not only to Ecuador but to all of Latin
America and the Caribbean. I also take this opportunity
to congratulate the Permanent Mission of Costa Rica
for its effectiveness and dynamism during its
leadership of the Security Council group to assess this
organ’s resolutions on MINUSTAH.
Showing solidarity with Haiti has been a
permanent feature of Ecuador’s foreign policy. That
has been especially true at times when that sisterly
Caribbean country has suffered the devastating effects
of hurricanes and tropical depressions, which have
increased the vulnerability and affected millions of our
Haitian brothers. My delegation takes this opportunity
to express its support for MINUSTAH and for Mr. Hédi
Annabi, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and head of MINUSTAH, for their efforts to
improve stability and the political situation in Haiti.
The latest report of the Secretary-General, issued
on 6 March 2008, highlights the progress made in
implementing the mandate of the Mission established
by the Security Council and in fulfilling all the relevant
resolutions. My country has joined the international
community and the United Nations in committing itself
to actively cooperate in peacekeeping and the
maintenance of peace and security through an ongoing
rotation of military engineers, resources and equipment
to MINUSTAH. Ecuador’s military contingent in Haiti
is thereby providing support to the Government of
Haiti with a view to establishing a security
environment that will make it possible to sustainably
re-establish democratic institutions, fully restore the
rule of law and put in place the framework necessary to
promoting the economic well-being and development
of that sisterly Caribbean country.
With regard to peacekeeping operations,
Ecuador’s policy is not limited to sending troops. A

09-29318

whole host of measures have been adopted that reflect
a comprehensive policy on security. For instance, five
years ago, Ecuador established a school unit on peace
missions. The education given to Ecuadorian Blue
Helmets helps them to address problems associated
with displaced persons, refugees and humanitarian
disasters. It also trains them to resolve problems that
may arise with civilian populations.
Ecuador is also proud to be part of the
Consultative Group 2 x 9 on Haiti, which supports
achieving the benchmarks that the Secretary-General
conveyed to the Security Council in his August 2008
report (S/2008/586) to strengthen stability in Haiti:
promoting political dialogue and elections, extending
State authority, establishing a sustainable security
mechanism, the rule of law and human rights. We hope
that the social and economic development benchmark
will be met in the near future. Ecuador believes that
social inclusion and ending poverty are among the
major challenges facing the sisterly Haitian country.
Ecuador also welcomes the extension of
MINUSTAH’s mandate. We also commend the Senate’s
confirmation, in December 2008, of Mrs. Michelle
Duvivier Pierre-Louis as Prime Minister at a time of
emergency in order to address the various crises from
which Haiti is suffering. Ecuador very much hopes that
the upcoming elections for the Haitian Senate will take
place in a free, fair and inclusive manner and in an
atmosphere of openness and peaceful debate that
allows for decisive progress on the institutional
reforms that are needed.
Haiti continues to suffer from food insecurity,
high levels of poverty and unemployment, and a fragile
humanitarian situation. My Government hopes that the
Group of Friends of Haiti, donor countries and Haitian
Government officials will succeed in agreeing on a
long-term stabilization programme that will facilitate
and accelerate the reconstruction and development
process of that sisterly country. Ecuador also hopes
that the donor conference to be held on 14 April in
Washington, D.C., will be an opportunity for countries
friendly to Haiti put in place the necessary mechanisms
to lay the foundations for achieving the stable and
lasting economic and social development that the
Haitian people so long for and deserve. My country
reiterates its unwavering commitment to contribute to
building a better future for Haiti, our sisterly Caribbean
country.

9

S/PV.6101 (Resumption 1)

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Peru.
Mr. Chávez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation is pleased to see you, Mr. President, guiding
the work of the Security Council this month. We are
also pleased to participate in this open debate, for
which we are grateful. We would also like to associate
ourselves with the statement delivered by the
representative of Uruguay on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti.
My delegation would also like to express its
gratitude for the Security Council’s mission to Haiti
from 11 to 14 March. We would like in particular,
through you, to congratulate Ambassador Jorge Urbina,
Permanent Representative of Costa Rica, for his
serious and professional leadership on a subject of
particular importance and sensitivity for Latin America
and the Caribbean. We would also like to thank
Mr. Hédi Annabi for his ongoing efforts in Haiti and
for the important information he has given us.
It is clear that the security situation in Haiti has
improved. Areas that were once convulsed by violence,
such as Cité Soleil, today enjoy considerable calm with
regard to daily life. Co-existence and political dialogue
continue to prevail, despite some difficulties. We hope
for the success of the elections to be held this month to
elect a third of the Senate. We also welcome
improvements
in
extending
State
authority,
strengthening the rule of law and respect for human
rights.
However, it is no less true that there are specific
and quite worrisome problems on the socio-economic
front. We are concerned about the deterioration in
people’s living standards as a result of the difficulties
that the country faced in 2008, in particular as a result
of the global food crisis and the damage caused by the
hurricanes that struck the island. In an already
extremely fragile environment, those difficulties have
been exacerbated by the effects of the global financial
and economic crisis. Far from losing hope, we should
face the challenges with renewed vigour. Haiti’s
reconstruction and development are still unfinished
tasks.
Haiti now has a priceless opportunity in the highlevel donor conference that will take place on 14 April
in Washington, D.C.. This is essentially an opportunity
to secure financial and technological support, as well
as to further focus the Government’s effort with regard

10

to planning and the necessary identification of key
objectives in the areas of food security, steps to create
jobs and providing reliable basic services. Addressing
urgent needs, which no doubt exist, does not obviate
the need to think about the long term and about
sustainable economic and social development. The goal
should be not just to secure resources, but also to
improve governance.
Speaking more broadly, it is a priority to support
the progress to which reference has been made in the
areas of security, political dialogue, the extension of
State authority and entrenching the rule of law and
respect for human rights. That should be done through
steps that make it possible to gradually and concretely
raise the standards of living of the average Haitian.
My delegation would like to highlight once again
the important role that is being played by the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti in bringing
stability in Haiti. We would also once again like to
commend the efforts of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in Haiti and of United Nations
development agencies that, along with other
international bodies, are doing commendable work in
that country. Coordination between the Government of
Haiti and all the groups providing advice, cooperation
or assistance should continue to be fine-tuned and
strengthened. Ensuring ownership of the process by the
Government and the people of Haiti is a major
challenge which must be faced with decision, energy
and healthy optimism. It is also a major responsibility:
ultimately, the Government and the people of Haiti
must set the guidelines and decide on their own future,
with the active support of the international community.
Once again, I stress the unwavering commitment
of the Government of Peru to the stabilization and
development of Haiti.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Czech Republic.
Mr. Palouš (Czech Republic): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union. The
candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia, as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align
themselves with this statement.

09-29318

S/PV.6101 (Resumption 1)

First and foremost, let me begin by thanking
Mr. Hédi Annabi, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Haiti, for his comprehensive
briefing and for his leadership of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). I would
also like to welcome the President of the Economic and
Social Council and to thank all those who briefed the
Council and all those who participated in today’s
debate.
The European Union welcomes the recent
mission of the Security Council to Haiti and expresses
its gratitude to the Permanent Representative of Costa
Rica, who led the mission. The European Union
followed with great interest the main achievements and
outcomes of the mission. We also took note of the
recent recommendations of the Secretary-General
presented in his latest semi-annual report on
MINUSTAH (S/2009/129).
The European Union would like to thank
MINUSTAH for its very active and effective work,
shown predominantly through its efforts in reversing
the deteriorating security situation and assisting with
State building and institutional capacity-building. The
European Union also notes the progress in the
professionalization of the Haitian National Police
(HNP), which operates in close cooperation with
MINUSTAH. It underlines the continued need for
increased cooperation with the Haitian national police
with a view to responding more effectively to threats
from organized crime. Justice reform is also one of the
prerequisites for consolidating the security situation.
We share the opinion that the formation of a
Government with Michelle Duvivier Pierre-Louis as its
Prime Minister was an important achievement, and we
encourage the Government to take additional steps
forward in the country’s further political, security and
socio-economic stabilization. The European Union also
commends the leadership of President René Garcia
Préval in stabilizing the economy and restoring
political institutions.
The partial senatorial elections to be held in April
and June 2009, which have been postponed since the
end of 2007, remain a significant challenge for Haiti on
the political front. Those elections will complete the
composition of the upper chamber of the National
Assembly of Haiti. The successful conducting of those
elections will without doubt contribute to further
stabilization of Haiti’s political and security situation.

09-29318

Therefore, support provided by the international
community is crucial in this area. The European
Commission will contribute the amount of €3.3 million
to these efforts.
While tangible progress has been reached in the
areas of political dialogue and elections, the extension
of State authority, security, rule of law and human
rights, there is still much that needs to be done in these
areas. The European Union commends the efforts of
MINUSTAH in assisting the Haitian authorities, in
particular the Haitian National Police, in the areas of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
security sector reform. The European Union believes
that State-building activities and security sector reform
need to be further pursued, as security sector reform is
one of the key challenges that the Haitian Government
faces. The European Union is committed to remaining
part of the international community’s efforts in
supporting Haiti in this critical area, which also
encompasses the rule of law, human rights and
combating armed violence and organized crime.
The European Union remains particularly
concerned about the levels of poverty and the socioeconomic and humanitarian situation in Haiti. In this
regard, the global financial crisis, the food crisis and
the devastating consequences of Hurricanes Fay and
Gustav and the tropical storms, have put additional
pressure on Haiti’s already dire socio-economic
conditions. This deterioration of the socio-economic
situation must be reversed to avoid a potential negative
impact on the overall security situation, which still
remains very fragile. In this context, the continuing
engagement and vigilance of MINUSTAH is important.
The focus of European Union cooperation is
shifting from support for the transition period through
democratic reform and rehabilitation to economic
recovery and basic services. The European Union
indeed
believes
that
strong
socio-economic
development is required to sustain and consolidate the
new-found stability. Furthermore, the capacity of the
State to deliver basic services needs to be enhanced.
The European Union cooperation strategy with Haiti
for 2008 to 2013 is based on those elements. The
strategy, funded with €291 million, will primarily focus
on infrastructure, mainly the building of roads, as well
as on governance. In this context, I would also like to
mention that in February 2009 the European Union,
which is one of the major donors to Haiti, opened a

11

S/PV.6101 (Resumption 1)

local representation of its Humanitarian Aid Office in
Port-au-Prince.
In conclusion, the European Union would like to
express its full support for the high-level international
conference on Haiti that is scheduled for 13 and
14 April in Washington, D.C., to support reconstruction
efforts and the implementation of the Government
growth and poverty reduction strategy. The conference
will also contribute to the establishment of a new
paradigm for cooperation between Haiti and its
financial donors. The European Union stands ready to
play an active part there.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cuba.
Mr. Moreno Fernández (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): First and foremost, Sir, I would like to
express, on behalf of Cuba, our satisfaction at seeing
you, a representative of Mexico, our sister nation,
presiding over the Security Council. We wish you great
success in your work.
The revolution leading to the independence of
Haiti on 1 January 1804 was the first event by which
the Caribbean became known as an actor on the world
stage. The Haitian revolution, which sheltered and
encouraged many revolutionaries of the continent at
crucial moments of the Latin American fight against
colonial domination, also influenced in a special and
powerful manner the destiny and formation of the
Cuban nation.
However, Haiti, cradle of the liberation wars
against colonialism in America and the first
independent republic in Latin America and the
Caribbean, is today a country neglected by the
international community. That Caribbean country is
one of the clearest examples of the evil consequences
of colonialism and neocolonialism, of the unjust and
exclusionary current international order and of the
continuous interventionism that has characterized its
turbulent history.
When addressing the situation of Haiti in the
framework of the United Nations, attention almost
always centers on so-called security matters, which for
all practical purposes minimizes the urgent attention to
the serious structural, economic and social problems of
the country. To achieve peace, security and stability in
that nation requires, first of all, the elimination of
poverty and underdevelopment. Clearly, there can be

12

no development without peace and stability, but it is
even clearer that there can be no peace and stability
without development and that there can be no peace
and security for a people living in hunger, terrible
poverty, ill health and illiteracy.
We recognize that the security situation on the
ground has improved since the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti was established in 2005.
There has not been, however, nor there can be a
military solution to the question of Haiti. Almost 80
per cent of the population of that country lives in
poverty, half of the labour force is unemployed, life
expectancy is below 52 years, and 48 out of every 100
inhabitants are illiterate. The number of people
infected with HIV is the highest of all Caribbean States
and almost half of the population is malnourished.
Last year, Haiti suffered a new, devastating blow
from four consecutive hurricanes and tropical storms
that lashed the country. The death toll was huge and the
damage to the infrastructure and the economy
amounted to approximately 15 per cent of the gross
domestic product, the worst Haiti has faced since early
the early twentieth century.
Cuba, a small blockaded country with limited
resources, has continued and increased its cooperation
with that Caribbean sister nation, mainly in the health
sector, but also in others, such as energy, education,
agriculture and sports. At present, over 400 Cuban
cooperants, mainly from the health sector, are
rendering their services in the most remote places of
Haiti. Almost 200 specialists in comprehensive general
medicine and other specialties are at work in every
department of the country. Since the Cuban
collaboration with Haiti was initiated in 1998, Cuban
doctors have given over 14 million consultations,
assisted over 100,000 childbirths and performed
250,000 surgical procedures.
Almost 300 young Haitian doctors who graduated
in our country are being trained with the Cuban
medical brigade in Haiti. About 50 Haitian doctors are
studying their second specialty in Cuba. Moreover,
over 600 Haitian scholarship holders are studying in
Cuba today totally free of charge. Five hundred of
these students are connected to health specialties. Over
800 Haitian youths have graduated as professionals
from Cuban schools. In the framework of Operation
Miracle, a cooperation programme developed by Cuba
and Venezuela to offer free assistance to patients from

09-29318

S/PV.6101 (Resumption 1)

various countries with eye problems, 32,191 Haitian
patients had undergone surgery as of February 2009,
31,035 of whom were treated in two eye centres and
two mobile surgical units donated by the Republic of
Cuba to that Caribbean country. The implementation of
the Cuban literacy programme “Yo si Puedo” has
taught 160,490 Haitians to read and write.
Cuba’s actions on behalf of Haiti are a modest
example of how much can be achieved in that country
through international cooperation and assistance,
mainly from those States with larger economic and
financial resources. Haiti has very limited resources to
face its many challenges. It is the unshirkable duty of
the international community to contribute massively,
increase its assistance and honour its financial and
human commitments to that Caribbean country.
Without the support of the international community,
even the modest Millennium Development Goals will
remain unattainable for Haiti.
I would like to conclude by reiterating that Haiti
can always count on the assistance and solidarity of the
Cuban people and Government. We are simply
fulfilling a duty and honouring our debt of gratitude to
the Caribbean peoples, which have always showed
their firm and constant friendship and solidarity with
Cuba.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the
floor to the Permanent Representative of Colombia.
Ms. Blum (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, and through
you Mexico, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council this month. We wish you success
in the consideration of the issues on the busy agenda of
the Council that you made public at a press conference
on 2 April.
We welcome your initiative to convene this open
debate and to give special attention to the question of
Haiti. The participation in this debate of
representatives of the Economic and Social Council,
the Organization of American States and the InterAmerican Development Bank, among other important
institutions, emphasizes the comprehensive and
pragmatic focus with which the consideration of this
important matter has been approached.
Colombia recognizes the problems and challenges
that Haiti faces, recently exacerbated by natural
disasters and an international economic and financial

09-29318

crisis, as well as by soaring food prices. We share with
other Latin American and Caribbean countries the
priority and resolve to support Haiti in overcoming the
challenges facing it. To that end, in addition to the
bilateral efforts it has already undertaken, Colombia is
participating in several regional initiatives.
Following the guidelines of the President of
Colombia, we are focusing our participation principally
on the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). Responding to an explicit call by the
United Nations, Colombia recently increased its
contribution to the Mission by contributing police
officers with experience in fighting kidnapping and the
world drug problem.
Colombia will broaden its contribution of police
personnel to MINUSTAH and will continue to work
with the other Latin American countries. Recently, we
initiated our participation as an observer country in the
2 x 9 Mechanism, established by the Deputy Ministers
for Foreign Affairs and Defence of Argentina, Bolivia,
Brazil, Chile, Ecuador, Guatemala, Paraguay, Peru and
Uruguay. We also participate in the Working Group for
the Latin American coordination and cooperation with
the Haitian National Police.
Allow me to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Haiti, Mr. Hédi Annabi, for
the report (S/2009/129) that he presented today for the
consideration of the Council, in which important
considerations, which Colombia shares, are formulated.
We agree with the report to the effect that one of the
greatest short-term challenges facing Haiti is the
upcoming senatorial elections, and with the
recommendation that every effort must be made to
guarantee that this democratic exercise be free, fair and
inclusive. It is likewise important for the Haitian
political leadership to adopt a collaborative approach
that allows the legislative agenda to move forward and
towards longer-term objectives.
Regarding the strengthening of institutions, we
agree with the Secretary-General’s observation in his
report that the impact of bilateral initiatives would be
enhanced through improved coordination within an
overarching, nationally owned framework for State
reform. The donor conference that will shortly be held
in Washington, D.C., will be a good opportunity to
make progress in that respect.
Colombia, aware of the essential role that
security plays in the consolidation of State authority

13

S/PV.6101 (Resumption 1)

and institution-strengthening, welcomes the timely
decision adopted by the Security Council in October
2007 on the enlargement of police personnel in
MINUSTAH.
In March 2009, the Colombian Deputy Minister
of Defence and the Director of the Colombian National
Police undertook a visit to Haiti, where they had the
opportunity to conduct interviews with the highest
authorities of the country, members of the United
Nations team and diplomats of Latin American
countries, with the objective of identifying Haiti’s
primary needs and possibilities for cooperation.
As a result of the visit, greater efforts will be
made towards greater cooperation in the area of
security, providing Haiti and MINUSTAH with
Colombia’s experience in strategic planning, police
organization and the training of commissioned and
non-commissioned officers and specialized teams, such
as judicial police. As mentioned before, cooperation
with the Haitian police will be broadened in the battle
against drugs, kidnapping and common and organized
crime.
The strengthening of the Haitian National Police
is a step in the right direction and a response to the
present challenges, particularly the fight against crime,
the extent of which calls for a comprehensive police
response. As part of Colombia’s contributions to that
process, we have consistently supported the
establishment of institutions with the capacity to
respond to those challenges within the framework of
the protection of human rights.
In the field of natural disasters, which have
affected Haiti’s efforts towards economic and social
development, in 2008 Colombia made a contribution of
six tons of food, medicines and other elements of
emergency humanitarian assistance to address the
emergency situation and mitigate the effects of
hurricane Gustav and tropical storm Hanna. Our
cooperation also includes technical education, food
security and environment protection initiatives.
Colombia hopes that the solidarity and material support
offered by the international community will effectively
contribute to the consolidation of democracy, security
and sustainable development in Haiti. We believe that
all of the efforts channelled through MINUSTAH will
translate into better living conditions for the Haitian
population.

14

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the
Government of Hugo Chávez Frías, Sir, I wish you
resounding success as you lead the work of the
Security Council during the month of April.
Haiti has played a stellar role in the history of
Venezuela. Francisco de Miranda, a forefather in our
fight for independence, created the first flag of
Venezuela in Haiti. Simón Bolívar, the liberator not
only of Venezuela but of other nations of the Americas,
was protected and supported by the illustrious leader
Alexandre Pétion, father of independent Haiti — the
first nation of Latin America and the Caribbean to gain
its independence from colonialism. Haiti has suffered
various invasions and interventions throughout its
history and has been subject to the most despicable
imperial efforts to undermine its sovereignty.
According to a report of the United Nations
Development Programme, Haiti was ranked 146th out
of 177 countries in 2008. Life expectancy at birth was
59.5 years in 2005. That calamitous reality makes it
necessary for Haiti to obtain, on an urgent basis, the
social assistance and investment that will raise its
living conditions. Without such social and economic
cooperation and without setting limits on the perverse
logic of capital that seeks to turn a profit at any cost, it
will be impossible for Haiti to obtain full and selfsufficient development for all its people.
From 1990 onwards, like other countries of Latin
America and the Caribbean, Haiti suffered under the
perverse prescriptions of neo-liberal economists,
imposed under the auspices of the World Bank. Those
prescriptions were totally unsuited to our realities. The
social and human consequences were devastating and
led to the dismantling of an already severely affected
economic base as well as agricultural and livestock
production. That situation created an opportunity for
imported products and voracious international
consortiums. The perversity of such capital was lethal
to the socio-economic structure of Haiti and had
terrible consequences that completely undermined its
food sovereignty. The current international economic
and financial crisis affects not only Haiti, but all poor
countries, increasing poverty and inequality. Haiti is a
warning against the predatory economic models and

09-29318

S/PV.6101 (Resumption 1)

the high social costs a country may have to pay for
them.
Since the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) entered Haiti, some stabilization
objectives for Haiti have been met, but it must also be
recognized that major mistakes have been made,
calling into question cooperation with the military and
police sectors and to prioritizing the strengthening of
security. My country’s experience demonstrates that
this can even be counter-productive if no plan has been
set out for comprehensive economic and social
cooperation. The Bolivarian Government believes that
this is what the people and the Government of Haiti
require.
Mr. René Préval, President of Haiti, has stressed
the fact that MINUSTAH must reinvent itself to open
the door to a new era. He has mentioned the need to
reform Haiti’s judicial system and above all to obtain
socio-economic support. We believe that President
Préval is responding to the social, political and
economic crisis.
The Bolivarian Government of Venezuela, led by
Hugo Chávez Frías, has provided sustained assistance
to the Haitian people in the form of energy cooperation
to help hospitals and clinics to provide treatment.
Together with our sister Government of Cuba, we have
provided food and health care assistance. We are
moved by our desire to overcome poverty through the
use of integration plans based on solidarity between
peoples and Governments. Venezuela has also stepped
up every time devastating natural disasters have struck
the country of Alexandre Piéton.
The people of Haiti are worthy and valiant. They
do not wish to be treated as less able. They have fought
valiantly for their freedom, self-determination and
independence. They do not want handouts from the
international community, but cooperation and
solidarity, the only possible cooperation in the
framework of which the people of Haiti can exercise
their own destiny in sovereignty.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the
floor to the representative of Jamaica.
Mr. Wolfe (Jamaica): May I at the outset, on
behalf of my Caribbean Community colleagues and my
own delegation, extend warmest congratulations to
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency for this
month.

09-29318

When I assure the Council of the honour, the
pride and satisfaction which my delegation feels in
addressing the Security Council in the name of the 14
member States of the Caribbean Community on the
question of Haiti, and express my gratitude for the
invitation extended to do so, I do much more than pay
homage to a convention of this august body. I feel that
I am discharging a family obligation, since Haiti is a
member of the Caribbean family. We sit in the same
regional councils, working together toward the same
regional goals and objectives, and therefore we
naturally share a common view of the importance of
this consideration by the Council of the situation
concerning Haiti and a common expectation regarding
its outcome.
The Secretary-General deserves commendation
for the wide-ranging, frank and substantive
assessments contained in the report he has presented, in
document S/2009/129, on the progress of the effort to
implement resolution 1840 (2008) during the period
from 27 August 2008 to 27 February 2009. In that
report we see clearly the enormous complexity of the
situation in Haiti and the many challenges facing the
effort to consolidate that country’s stability and lay a
foundation for security and sustainable long-term
development.
Those
processes
were
further
complicated by the series of tropical storms and
hurricanes that ravaged the country during the
reporting period, and later by the effects of the global
financial and economic crisis.
While there is certainly no room to minimize or
downplay the seriousness of the factors that still hobble
the stabilization effort in Haiti, in like manner we
should be careful to discern, and give their due worth
to, the creativity, perseverance and sheer grit through
which we see hopeful changes emerging on the Haitian
panorama. I refer to the area of establishing political
dialogue and to the extension and strengthening of the
authority and reach of the State and of the rule of law,
for example.
For sure, these are achievements of the Haitian
authorities and people, who deserve our recognition.
But a great share of the credit also goes to the men and
women of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) for their dedicated, patient and
constructive involvement in providing assistance and
support to the people of Haiti over a wide range of
areas critical to the re-establishment of conditions of
stability, such as the provision of security assistance to

15

S/PV.6101 (Resumption 1)

the electoral process, enhancing institutional capacity,
promoting and strengthening security, reducing
violence, enhancing police capacity and the enjoyment
of human rights, among others. The Caribbean
Community expresses its sincere appreciation to
MINUSTAH for these valuable contributions. May I
add that the Caribbean States are proud of the level of
assistance we have been able to provide with the
dispatch of police units and police officers from two
member States, Grenada and Jamaica.
But however encouraging these improvements
may be, the Secretary-General is careful to note their
fragile nature. While the task of making them more
robust is the responsibility of the Haitian authorities
and people, the international community has a duty to
support them in this effort. In this regard, the
Caribbean Community supports the convening of the
high-level donor conference to lend support to the
implementation of the National Strategy for Growth
and Poverty Reduction. We look forward to
strengthened unity and cooperation among the Haitian
people and to the creation of conditions of greater
security and stability in the country. In our view, these
would offer the best promise of a meaningful and
productive partnership between the Haitian authorities
and the donor community in order to ensure that the
country is helped onto a path of sustained economic
recovery.
Finally, the Caribbean Community wishes to
thank the Secretary-General for his report and for his
recent visit to Haiti. We strongly endorse his appeal for
the international community to continue to focus
attention on the provision of much needed assistance to
Haiti, an appeal that, we note, was strongly endorsed
by his Special Representative today. We also wish to
express sincere appreciation to that Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Hédi Annabi,
for his leadership of MINUSTAH and for the
comprehensive report that he provided to the Council.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to Ambassador Léo Mérorès, Permanent
Representative of Haiti.
Mr. Mérorès (Haiti) (spoke in French): Allow me
first, Mr. President, to congratulate you on Mexico’s
assuming the presidency of the Security Council. As
you know, Mexico is a country friendly with ours.
Also, I would like to congratulate you on the
exemplary manner in which you have been conducting
the work of the Council during your presidency. I wish

16

to thank you too for having taken the initiative to hold
this open debate on the question of Haiti.
I also congratulate the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Annabi, for the briefing he
gave us this morning, which admirably complements
the Secretary-General’s recent report on the situation in
Haiti. On behalf of the Government of Haiti, I wish to
congratulate him on the outstanding job done under his
enlightened leadership by the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
I would like to take this opportunity to express
once again, on behalf of the Government and people of
Haiti, our gratitude to the many countries of the region,
of CARICOM, which, under Brazil, are participating in
MINUSTAH. The positive results of the Mission were
covered at length by many speakers and do not need
any additional comments.
In that regard, before I go on, I wish to make
particular mention of all those workers for peace who,
day and night, are present throughout Haiti and who
are giving the authorities and people of Haiti their
contributions to the renewal of the country. They come
from all continents and from various horizons, but they
are all inspired and united by their desire to help
redress a situation that has gone on all too long. The
Government of Haiti salutes their efforts. I wish to take
this opportunity to humbly pay my respects to those
who have perished on the field of honour.
Once again I should like to thank the members of
the Security Council and the international community
as a whole for the ongoing interest in Haiti. I carefully
noted the various comments, analyses and suggestions
that provided a backdrop to the various statements.
Very sincerely, I would like to thank all speakers, from
CARICOM and the Latin American region or
elsewhere, for the support they have shown with regard
to my country. I convey to them the gratitude of the
Government and people of Haiti.
I need not recall the importance and symbolism
of the recent visit to Haiti by a high-level delegation
led by the Secretary-General, Ban Ki-moon, and the
former United States President, Bill Clinton, a visit
referred to by several speakers. It was followed by the
Security Council’s visit, from 11 to 14 March, under
the leadership of Ambassador Urbina of Costa Rica,
which was very much appreciated by the Haitian
people and Government. They see it as tangible proof
of the international community’s interest in the
situation in Haiti and its commitment to support us in
rebuilding the country. The Government and people of

09-29318

S/PV.6101 (Resumption 1)

Haiti remain fully committed, with the strong support
of regional and international institutions and the entire
international community, to building a new, modern,
democratic society, one geared towards sustainable
development.

Collier recently made to Haiti at the SecretaryGeneral’s request and the resulting report. The needs
and the possibilities were in most cases identified and
are taken up in our national strategy paper for growth
and poverty reduction.

The Secretary-General’s report in document
S/2009/129, before us today, is very timely and
commands our attention. It has come at a crucial time,
when the Haitian people are preparing to cast their
votes on the 19th of this month in order to fill 12
vacancies in the Senate of the Republic. These
elections, as the report says, could help facilitate the
functioning of the upper house and reinforce the bases
of democratic renewal to which the Haitian nation
aspires.

Aligning the interventions of our partners with
the priorities of the Government and the funds to be
released following that conference will, we hope, give
the country a boost and enable it to move forward on a
different, far more stable economic basis. Once again,
our thanks go to delegations that have shown their
interest in the success of the conference and have
already expressed their intention to actively participate.
The Haitian Government has no doubt that, with their
support, the goals that it has set for the economic
recovery of the country and for meeting the basic needs
of the population will be achieved. More than one
speaker has made the point today that Haiti is at a
decisive turning point and that the country and the
international community should seize the moment. We
would like to affirm that, for its part, Haiti stands ready
to do so.

While, as the report stresses, the security
situation has definitely improved thanks to better
coordination between the Haitian National Police and
MINUSTAH, we cannot declare victory, because the
situation clearly remains fragile. The report itself
acknowledges that. I would like to say that the
Government is perfectly aware, just as we all are, that
much remains to be done in that area. That is why we
attach special importance to initiatives to give the
country a 14,000-strong police force by 2011, while
increasing and improving our efforts with regard to the
judicial and correctional systems, to which some
speakers referred today.
Regarding socio-economic development, as many
speakers have acknowledged, Haiti is still struggling to
recover from the adverse effects of last April’s food
crisis and of the storms that struck the country in
August and September 2008, caused considerable
destruction to major infrastructure and almost wiped
out our agriculture sector. As a result, the national
economy is still suffering enormously, which is
compounded by the global economic and financial
crisis affecting the whole world. We know only too
well that 78 per cent of the population still lives below
the poverty line and that the efforts of the Haitian
authorities and the international community to meet the
Millennium Development Goals are being sorely
tested.
That is why my delegation would like, through
this body, to once again thank the Secretary-General
for his active commitment to the success of the donor
conference on Haiti’s social and economic
development that will take place in Washington on
14 April, that is to say next week. In that connection, it
is worth underscoring the trip that the economist Paul

09-29318

It has very often been said that economic
development and security are closely linked and that
no country can escape that linkage. Moreover, in
addition to the efforts that the Security Council is
making through MINUSTAH to stabilize the country,
as various speakers have recalled, it is also clear that
that stabilization is contingent on progress in the area
of socio-economic development. That is why my
Government, aware of that crucial link, attaches great
importance to the success of the Washington
conference next week and affirms that it looks forward
to the strong support the international community at
this conference.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now invite
Mr. Hédi Annabi, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Haiti, to make some final
comments.
Mr. Annabi: I would like to thank the members
of the Security Council for their strong expressions of
support for the performance of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and for
the stabilization process in Haiti in general. I will share
the comments made by the members of the Council
today with the members of our team, who will, I am
sure, find them very encouraging. We hope that this
support can be sustained, including in particular in the
context of the upcoming Washington conference.

17

S/PV.6101 (Resumption 1)

I would also like, especially at a time when
Mexico is presiding over the Security Council, to place
on record my strong appreciation for the critical
contribution that the Latin American countries are
making, with others, to the work of MINUSTAH. In
that connection, I would like to acknowledge in
particular the contribution that our outgoing Force
Commander, General Santos Cruz, has made to the
improvement of the security situation in Haiti and to
acknowledge his highly effective leadership during the
27 months that he has spent with us in MINUSTAH.
I would also like to express my gratitude to the
Organization of American States for its cooperation
and its support to the electoral process through the
registration of voters, as well as for the support that
they are providing to the Haitian authorities in the
printing and distribution of identity cards to eligible
voters.
Finally, Mr. President, I would like to thank you
for organizing this important debate and for your
helpful observations, and those of members of the
Council. We will certainly bear them in mind,
including the comments of Ambassador Urbina on
sustainability, which are clearly very relevant. I believe
that we need to continue to work together to create an
environment in Haiti that is sustainable not only from
the point of security, but also in order to place the
country on a durable development track so that when
the time comes MINUSTAH can leave without having
to return.
The President (spoke in Spanish): After
consultations among members of the Security Council,
I have been authorized to make the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the
progress achieved so far in critical areas for the
consolidation of Haiti’s stability, namely political
dialogue, extension of State authority, including
border management, strengthening of security,
and rule of law and human rights.
“The Council notes with concern the
challenges in the area of social and economic
development, as there has been a marked
deterioration in the living standards of the vast
majority of Haitians. The Council reiterates the
need for security to be accompanied by social and
economic development as a way for Haiti to
achieve lasting stability. In this regard, the
Council calls upon MINUSTAH and the United
Nations Country Team to enhance further their

18

coordination with the Government of Haiti and
international and regional partners, while bearing
in mind the ownership and primary responsibility
of the Government and people of Haiti.
“The Council recognizes the vital
importance of the high-level donor conference on
Haiti to be hosted by the Inter-American
Development Bank in Washington, D.C., on
14 April. The Council welcomes the valuable
continuing support of donors and urges them to
make available the additional technical and
financial assistance required by the Government
of Haiti to meet the country’s immediate
humanitarian, early recovery and reconstruction
needs, while laying the foundations for
sustainable economic and social development.
“The Council urges the institutions of Haiti
to intensify their efforts to meet the Haitian
population’s basic needs, and to work together to
promote dialogue, the rule of law and good
governance.
“The Security Council reaffirms the need
for the upcoming elections for the renewal of one
third of the Senate to be inclusive, free and fair.
The Council calls on all political actors in Haiti
to ensure the elections are held in a peaceful
atmosphere.
“The Security Council reiterates its strong
support for MINUSTAH and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for their
efforts to improve stability and governance in
Haiti, while emphasizing the need for
MINUSTAH to continue to adjust to changing
circumstances on the ground, and expresses its
appreciation to all Member States who support
the stabilization process, in particular the troopand police-contributing countries.”
This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2009/4.
I thank those who participated in today’s rich
debate for their statements.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.55 p.m.

09-29318
