General Assembly -

10

Convinced that it is hoth timely and desirable 1o
undertake such studies,
1. Requests the Secretary-( ;eneral to examine:
(a) The national economic and social consequences
of disarmament in countries with different economic
~ystems and at different stages of economic development, including, in particular, the problems of replacing
military expenditures with altnnative private and public
civil expenditures so as to maintain effective demand
and to absorb the human and material resources released
irom military uses;
( b) The possible development of structural imbalances in national economies as a result of the cessation of capital investment in armaments industries, and
the adoption of possible corrective measures to prevent
such imbalances, including expanded capital assistance
to the uncler-developecl countries;
( c) The impact of disarmament on international
economic relations, including its effect on world trade
and especially on the trade of under-developed countries;
( d) The utilization of resources released by disarmament for the purpose of economic and social development, i11 particular of the under-developed countries;
2. R ccommends that the Secretary-General should
con<luct the proposed examination with the assistance
of expert consultants to he appointed by him with due
regard to their qualifications and to the need of geographical representation and intimate krnm·ledge of countries with different economic systems and at different
stages of economic development ;
3. A/Jpeals to Governments of Member States to give
full co-operation to tlw Scrretary-General in the fulfilment of the task entrusted to him;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a preliminary report on the results of the examination to
the Economic and Social Council at its thirty-third
session;
5. Requests the Econon11c and Social Council to
transmit the report with its views to the General Assembly at its seventeenth ,;('ss10n.
948th plenary meeting,
15 December 1960.

1517 (XV) .

Projection!!

The General Assembly,
Considrring the importance oi projections of certain
major i11ternatio11al economic trends, particularly in
the field of primary produds,
,1warc of the ,-,pecial importance of such projections
to the less developed countries, including those which
have recently achieved their political independence, for
the fornrnlation of their long-term policies and plans for
economic development, including the use of their natural
resources,
Recalling its resolution 14W (XIV) of 5 Dt>cember
19.~9 on world t>rn110111ic development.
Taking note of the activities of the Economic and
Social Council in this field, and in particular of its
resolution 777 (XXX) of 3 August 1960 concerning
the solution of problems relating to methodology, comparability and collation of relevant data,
Believing that the need to accelerate the economic
development of the under-developoo countries calls for
an intensification of all activities conducted in this field,
in order to make available even tentative data on the

1''ifteenth Ses•ion

medium- and long-term prospects for the production
and exports of those countries in the light of the longerterm trends prevailing in the world economy,
1. !'.ndorses Economic and Social Council resolution
777 ( :\XX);
2. Ncquests the Economic an<l Social Council to
intensify its work in the field of economic and social
projections;
3. Ncconimcnds that the regional economic commissions continue and intensify their activities in this field;
4. W elcomcs the decision of the Commission on International Commodity Trade to continue the consideration of this question at its nt>xt session and invites it
to make such recommendations as it deems appropriate;
5. F:equests the Secretary-General, bearing in mind
the recommendations of the Commission on Tnternational
<. ·omrnoditv Trade, to prepare, in consultation with the
Director-(;cneral of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and in co-operation with
the exea1tive secretarie.'i of the regional economic commissions, a study containing tentative medium- and
long-term projections of the prospective international
demand for, and supply of, ~;elected major primary commodities at present exported bv the under-developed
< ountries;
(,. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit this study, together with a detailed note on the
methodology used and the problems encountered, to the
Economic and Social Council for considerati~ at its
1hirtv-fourth session and for transmission, with its observati,;ns, to the General Assembly at its seventeenth
session.
948th plenary meetiny.
15 Decemb,er 7960.

1518 (XV). Decentralization of the United Nations economic anrl social activitic!l and
strengthening of the regional economic commissions
The General Assembly.
F.xpressing its satisfaction that the Economic and
Social Council recognized the value of regional cooperation in the establishment of the United Nations
system of regional economic commissions to which the
Ernnomic Commission for Africa was added in 1958,
Welcoming Economic and Social Council resolution
795 (XXX) of 3 August 1960 on co-ordination in the
fiekl, and being aware of the continuing need for regional
co-ordination which requires liaison and co-operation
between the representatives of the Technical Assistance
Board and the specialized agencies and the executiw
secretaries of the regional economic commissions,
Recognizing that. the regional economic commission.~
are not limited under th.eir terms of reference to studies
and deliberations and are actually performing various
operational functions through their secretariats,
Reaffirming its resolution 1158 (XII) of 26 November 1957 on the activities of the regional economic
commissions,
Bearing in mind particularly resolutions 11 (II) of
5 February 1960 on multilateral economic and financial
assistance to Africa and 19 (II) of 4 February 1960
on concerted action adopted by the Economic Commission for Africa, resolution 31 (XVI) of 18 March
1960 on regional economic co-operation for <levelopnwnt of trade and industries adopted by the Economic
