S/PV.7983

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7983rd meeting

Tuesday, 27 June 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Llorentty Solíz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bolivia (Plurinational State of))

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Moustafa
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Seck
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-18375 (E)
*1718375*

S/PV.7983

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

the European Union. I would like to map this out for the
Council and look to where we can go next.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, to participate
in this meeting.
Mr. De Mistura is joining today’s meeting via video
teleconference from Geneva.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. De Mistura.
Mr. De Mistura (spoke in Spanish): It is a pleasure,
Mr. President, to see you presiding over today’s meeting.
(spoke in English)
I would like to start by giving a summary of what is
our own analysis based on the latest developments and
of some of the possible future steps ahead. As usual in
Syria, we have a mixed picture, and that is what I would
like to refer to.
There have been some interesting technical steps
taken in advance of the seventh round of intra-Syrian
talks, which, as Council members know very well by
now, will take place from 10 to 14 July. In addition,
there are currently serious efforts under way to deliver
further agreements, in particular an implementation
agreement regarding the de-escalation zones, before an
Astana meeting that is planned for 4 and 5 July. But
there have also been some worrying developments that
we cannot ignore and upon which I will elaborate. We
are at the time of testing whether or not the political
will exists for real de-escalation and more meaningful
political talks and for moving beyond preparatory talks.
Throughout this period, the United Nations has
been quite active, convening joint technical meetings
with opposition experts seeking to support the efforts
of the Astana guarantors on de-escalation, consulting
widely, including in Moscow and Paris, and with many
others, laying the basis for a new round of Geneva
talks, and holding consultations with our colleagues in
2/7

27/06/2017

In the latest round of intra-Syrian talks in Geneva, I
announced the establishment of a technical consultative
process, which Council members might remember. It
was the additional layer that we believe could be very
helpful in actually abolishing layers by accelerating
the real talks. This technical consultative process was
meant to develop relevant options on constitutional
and legal issues that would need to be considered and
resolved anyway in relation to any proposal or position
put forward in the formal sessions. This was designed
in fact to help the formal talks make progress more
expeditiously due to better preparation by ensuring that
any negotiated transitional political process would enjoy
solid technical, constitutional and legal foundations.
I can offer an example. Some time ago, as Council
members will remember, we had a moment of truth in
Afghanistan. This was many years ago. I was around
then and some Council members here today were, too.
There was a feeling that nothing was moving forward
until a certain point, when there was a rush for a
conference in Bonn. Much of the preparatory work,
which sometimes appears to be tedious or inconclusive,
I have been told by those who were part of the Bonn
conference, was immediately put into action and
utilized as homework prepared for the conference. In
a certain way, we are doing something similar, doing
our homework as we wait for the real, major Geneva
conference, God willing.
We made it clear that the consultative process
created was technical. It is also true and well known
that everything we do is political, but the particular
emphasis in this case was on the words “technical”,
“experts” and “non-binding in nature”. It was and is
not designed to act as a negotiating forum to take on
the political responsibility of the formal sessions or to
take on itself the Syrian people’s right to determine the
constitutional future of the State of Syria, but it is a
serious process because it does prepare for all of that.
Council members will recall that both the
Government and the three opposition invitees in the
intra-Syrian talks in Geneva all agreed last time,
pursuant to resolution 2254 (2015), to participate in
separate consultations and the consultative process.
We were able to do so separately for at least two days,
but since then we have seen a potentially significant
new development. On 15 and 16 June, a few days ago,
17-18375

27/06/2017

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.7983

opposition experts from the high-level negotiations
committee and the Cairo and the Moscow platforms
jointly convened and sat down together in the same
room in Geneva at the behest of the United Nations,
within the framework of the consultative process. That
was the first time a joint set of United Nations meetings
with the opposition invitees in one room had taken
place — not only according to protocol but in a context
of substantive discussions among them and us, which
lasted the entire day. We believe that we must build on
that.

In my formal invitation to the forthcoming round of
the intra-Syrian talks, I encouraged invitees to prepare
actively. I therefore look forward to their engaging
in an intensified set of discussions on issues across
all four baskets: Governance issues, constitutional
issues, electoral issues and counter-terrorism, securitygovernance and medium-term confidence-building
issues. I hope that it will be possible to accelerate
the peace talks. I am giving consideration, in fact, to
sharing some of my own thinking on certain issues so
as to stimulate discussions among the parties.

The opposition experts worked to develop joint
technical options with regard to the schedule process for
drafting a new Constitution and its popular approval.
They also discussed the principles involved, covering
the substance of what are known as the living 12 points,
which we had put forward in the fourth round of talks.
The experts also discussed those issues in the context
of a negotiated, political transition process within the
framework of relevant Security Council resolutions.

If the environment is propitious, I am also ready
to facilitate direct talks between the Government and
the opposition and hopefully unify the opposition in
those talks, either at the formal or technical level. That
is something that, on more than one occasion, all sides
have stated that they want, and I hope that conditions
are being established that could enable such a scenario.
I also believe that it is important to aim for a further
round of talks near the end of August or the beginning
of September in advance of the seventy-second session
of the General Assembly in September.

While such expert meetings are by nature
exploratory and non-binding, the joint meeting brought
to light welcome similarities and common technical
and perhaps even political understanding of various
issues and could potentially be the beginning of a
greater technical coordination among the three groups.
We hope that the Security Council will help us support
the three groups in that regard so as to show unity. The
participants felt that additional work could yield even
more productive results. My Office has accordingly
invited them to participate next week in a further set of
joint meetings within the framework of the consultative
process on constitutional and legal issues ahead of the
seventh round of formal intra-Syrian talks to take place
in July.
Members will recall that the Government of
Syria — which was, by the way, the first to commit
to the technical process — communicated to me that
it would participate in expert meetings within the
framework of the technical consultations process
during formal sessions of the intra-Syrian talks, but not
outside those formal occasions. I therefore look forward
to experts from my team continuing during the seventh
round the engagement that began with experts from
the Government during the sixth round. Of course,
the United Nations remains ready to engage with the
Government experts at any mutually convenient time,
including before and after formal talks.

Both during and between the upcoming rounds
of formal talks and expert meetings, my team will
continue to closely engage with the members of the
Syrian Women’s Advisory Board and civil society
support groups and listen to their own suggestions and
practical advice. In particular, my team and I continue
to strive to engage and give priority to more women’s
organizations, including those working across and
inside Syria during and between rounds of intra-Syrian
talks. In that context, I should note that, following the
last round of intra-Syrian talks, we initiated our civil
society role, which allowed us to consult with more
than 50 civil society organizations and experts from all
walks of life in various areas of expertise from both
within and outside Syria. The more that we engage with
such interlocutors, the more we are convinced that civil
society will be critical to preserving and regenerating
the social cohesion of a country that for too long has
been torn apart by war.
As we advance the overall political effort unfolding
under the auspices of the United Nations in Geneva, the
efforts of the three guarantors of the Astana process
continue to finalize modalities for the implementation
of the memorandum of understanding on the four
de-escalation zones that they concluded on 4 May.
As mentioned, a meeting of the guarantors is planned
to take place in Astana on 4 and 5 July. I plan to be

17-183753/7

S/PV.7983

The situation in the Middle East

present at that meeting. With every week that passes,
as we know, without a final arrangement to finalize
those zones, the fragility of the ceasefire regime and
the risk posed by that fragility increase. I am aware of
the genuine efforts currently being undertaken to try
to end and overcome the remaining obstacles, as was
witnessed by my own team of experts from my own
Office during the recently held technical-level meeting
of the joint working group on de-escalation in Moscow.
The United Nations team continues to stand ready
to provide technical advice whenever and wherever
needed because we need success in Astana, just as
Astana desperately needs success in the Geneva
political process so as to consolidate what we are all
trying to do. Let us therefore give de-escalation a fair
chance to succeed because that is what people are
asking so as to further decrease the violence and enable
confidence-building. I also expressed the hope that
the discussions aimed at finding a suitable formula for
addressing the difficult situations that have emerged
in the southern part of Syria will also yield positive
results.
As we plan for the Geneva intra-Syrian talks and
as the Astana guarantors work towards de-escalation,
let us recall what has been achieved and some of the
challenges that remain on the ground. Since the three
guarantor States signed the de-escalation memorandum
in Astana on 4 May, the level of violence has clearly
decreased. Hundreds of Syrian lives continue to be
spared every week, and many towns have returned to
some degree of normalcy. That is a good general trend,
but we do not see that same good trend everywhere. In
some areas, the fighting and violence have continued
and, in fact, intensified.
On the other hand, we must recognize that
regrettably, the general significant improvement
of the security situation has not yielded equally
significant progress in providing humanitarian access
to areas where needs are greatest. The support of the
International Syria Support Group (ISSG) co-chairs
and of other members of the ISSG has been helpful and
efforts continue. However, let us be honest — much
more needs to be done and urgently to enable safe,
unimpeded and sustained humanitarian access to all
Syrians, wherever they are, in particular hard-to-reach
areas.
Let me also stress the importance of moving forward
on the issues of detainees, abductees, missing people
4/7

27/06/2017

and on the important issue of humanitarian demining.
In that regard, I would like to thank the United Nations
Mine Action Service for its continuing engagement.
We note that the fight against terrorists appears
to be proceeding with Da’esh under pressure and in
retreat in various locations in Syria. At the same time,
incidents between the international coalition to counter
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant/Da’esh and forces
of the Government of Syria and its allies, including
the downing of a Syrian military plane, have taken
place. As I see it, we hope that the ideal trajectory
over the coming two weeks could be — indeed, would
be — progress in Astana on 4 and 5 July; a further
set of joint technical aspect meetings with opposition
groups during that same week; and continuing
discussion and dialogue among the main international
stakeholders, including at the Group of 20 Summit in
Hamburg on 7 and 8 July, at which the issue of Syria
will most certainly be discussed. That is all in support
of the Astana de-escalation efforts and the intra-Syrian
Geneva-based political process.
I hope that a combination of all those elements will
help shape an environment that is conducive to the next
round of intra-Syrian talks in Geneva in the coming
months and bring us one step closer on the journey to
our shared goal of implementing the relevant Security
Council resolutions and, in particular resolution 2254
(2015). All political efforts of the United Nations are
directed towards that end and, with the guidance of the
Secretary-General, we continue to count on the strong
support of all members of the Security Council, as a
whole.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. de
Mistura for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): There
is no doubt that the crisis in Syria is one of the most
serious topics under consideration by the Security
Council. That is why my delegation, which represents
an elected member of the Security Council, understands
that it has a duty to share its opinion on such a grave
international issue with the Council’s electorate — its
members.
Once again, we thank the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura,
and his entire team for their tireless efforts in the
17-18375

27/06/2017

The situation in the Middle East

quest for a political solution in Syria, and we reiterate
Uruguay’s full confidence in their efforts.
We acknowledge the announcement of the
resumption of intra-Syrian talks in Geneva, which
will begin on 10 July, as well as the intention to
convene successive meetings in the coming months.
We commend Mr. De Mistura on the fact that
representatives of civil society organizations, in
particular women’s organizations, will take part in all
meetings to be held in Geneva. The role played by civil
society organizations and by women’s organizations in
particular is extremely important and could contribute
immensely to the discussions.
Following the conclusion of the sixth round of talks
and ongoing contact and discussions with the parties
since then, maintaining the momentum of the meetings
in Geneva was required in order to work on implementing
agreements made and to allow for tangible progress to
be made on the four baskets of topics highlighted in
the road map provided by resolution 2254 (2015). At
the same time, the meeting that will be held next week
in Astana will provide an opportunity to reinforce
the cessation of hostilities agreement and to draft the
details for the implementation of the safe zones that
were established at the beginning at the beginning of
May by the three guarantor countries.
Almost two months after the signing of the
memorandum establishing the safe zones, which
Uruguay believes was a major step forward in
strengthening the cessation of hostilities agreement
and in reducing extreme violence in the majority of the
country, we still do not have official information on the
implementation of the agreement and we are concerned
about the fact that unhindered access to those areas has
not been granted to the United Nations. We reiterate
that it is crucial for the guarantor countries to ensure
humanitarian access and the free movement of people
wishing to enter and leave those areas at will.
The Geneva and Astana processes are interlinked
and mutually reinforcing. It is for that reason that
tangible results must be achieved in Astana in order
to reduce violence and guarantee the cessation of
hostilities in the four safe zones. In that way, the next
round of Geneva talks will take place in a positive
environment in which further progress can be made.
On previous occasions, we have mentioned that
the United Nations and the Special Envoy are not the
protagonists in the tragedy that has been taking place

S/PV.7983

in Syria since 2011; they merely mediate between the
parties. The primary responsibility for ending the
conflict lies directly with the Syrians themselves — on
the one hand, the Government and, on the other, all
individuals and entities that make up the opposition,
including the almost 100 armed groups that operate in
Syria, many of them with fighters, funding and foreign
military support. The absurd fragmentation of the
Syrian opposition, along with the foreign presence and
military support, exacerbate an already major problem.
We support the efforts of the Special Envoy to guarantee
the inclusiveness of the process of political transition in
Syria and we are pleased to be able to acknowledge the
fact that civil society, including religious leaders and
women’s groups, is taking part.
Another kind of responsibility lies with third
States, in the region and outside of it, that directly or
indirectly take part in the situation in Syria, working
towards objectives that are almost always far removed
from the real goals and aspirations of the Syrian people.
In that regard, Uruguay understands that the Security
Council’s responsibility in this issue is to continue
applying pressure and persuasion to ensure that the
parties to the conflict remain at the negotiating table
in order to make gradual progress on the road map
outlined in resolution 2254 (2015).
It is more important now than ever to strengthen
political will in the three multilateral forums in which the
crisis in Syria is being discussed: the Security Council,
negotiations in Geneva, and the Astana process. A few
days ago marked a year and a half since the adoption
of resolution 2254 (2015). At the time, all of us present
knew that we had a historic opportunity to end the
crisis. Regrettably, despite the good intentions of the
Special Envoy and successive efforts to implement the
resolution’s provisions, little progress has been made
on the road map since then.
In addition to the enormous humanitarian costs of
the crisis in Syria, the conflict has also been a driver
of violent extremism and fundamentalist terrorism and,
consequently, is a key factor in instability in the Middle
East and in the rest of the world.
In conclusion, we reiterate our belief that there is
no place for a military solution to the conflict. Only
through a political transition process, implemented
by the Syrians and mediated by the United Nations,
will we be able to emerge from this web and stop the
humanitarian tragedy.

17-183755/7

S/PV.7983

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. De
Mistura, for his insightful update and commend him
for his exceptional commitment and determination to
pursue peace in Syria. My delegation would like to
share the following observations and recommendations.
On the purely political track, Kazakhstan remains
committed to the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic, and
to ensuring the continuity of State institutions. My
country is pleased to note the gradual progress in the
political settlement of the Syrian conflict during the
Geneva and Astana meetings.
We draw attention to the reduced military activity
and improvement of the humanitarian situation in the
four de-escalation zones. Astana reaffirms its readiness
to further promote the political process to achieve peace
and stability in Syria.
Like others, we call on members of the Security
Council to use their influence in order to consolidate the
national ceasefire regime and contribute to the success
of agreements reached in Astana. We call on Council
members to unanimously support the Geneva and
Astana platforms, as well as the additional mechanisms
developed within them, such as the memorandum on
de-escalation zones. Such a joint approach would
help to produce a ceasefire and to oblige the Syrian
Government and rebel forces to end their battles.
Kazakhstan considers it both useful and relevant
to agree on an additional format for United Nations
interaction with the parties to the conflict through
informal technical meetings of experts, at which issues
related to the Syrian constitution are discussed. We
support Special Envoy De Mistura’s view that these
technical meetings can become an opportunity to unite
the opposing platforms. Let us endeavour to bring
about a new peaceful life in Syria. We welcome and
support the multifaceted diplomacy he is conducting
to resolve the Syrian crisis. We believe that the more
countries are positively involved in the solution of the
Syrian question, the sooner we will see the light at the
end of the tunnel.
Kazakhstan believes that in searching for an exit
strategy, a regional approach should be considered as
a very effective method to mitigate the situation and
prevent further deterioration. We therefore call on all
Middle Eastern/Gulf region States to join the guarantor
countries and do everything possible to ensure that
6/7

27/06/2017

the ceasefire regime is respected and observed by all
parties.
It is clear that to see further progress, there is a
strong need to continue supporting the objectives
and gains made thus far in the Astana and Geneva
negotiations and through the other three guarantors in
order to see further positive outcomes.
On the counter-terrorism track, in our opinion
the inconsistency of the struggle against terrorist
organizations in Syria slows down the political
settlement significantly. Actions based on the “we will
manage ourselves” principle are counterproductive,
and their consequences are predictable and hazardous.
We call on the international coalition forces operating
in the provinces of Raqqa and Deir ez-Zor to exercise
caution in conducting military operations with a view to
averting accidental civilian deaths, including of women
and children. We recognize the need for further joint
international efforts to counter the constant terrorist
and extremist threats, which must be coordinated
between the various sides through a unified strategy.
On the humanitarian track, we emphasize the
importance of expanding humanitarian assistance
to Syria, including an increase in medical assistance
to civilians in areas where the ceasefire is respected.
Rapid, safe and unhindered humanitarian access should
be provided and conditions created to deliver medical
aid to the local population to meet their basic needs.
Aviation targets identified by any party should exclude
such infrastructure facilities as bridges, oil and gas
wells, dams and power plants — in other words, all
critical infrastructure. We have a moral duty not to
drive the future generation of Syrians into burdensome
bondage, requiring them to rebuild every structure that
has been destroyed.
Finally, the focus of the Syrian political track
must now be on establishing sound governance, the
formulation and consolidation of a new constitution, as
well as new, United Nations-supervised elections. It is
therefore important to preserve unity among the Council
members, as demonstrated in the adoption of resolution
2336 (2016). Only then can there be determined action
to speedily alleviate the burden of long-protracted war
on the Syrian people.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
17-18375

27/06/2017

The situation in the Middle East

I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.

S/PV.7983

The meeting rose at 10.35 a.m.

17-183757/7
