UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1995/62
21 December 1995
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3614th meeting of the Security Council, held on 21 December 1995 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Angola", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the Secretary-General’s report of
7 December 1995 (S/1995/1012) on the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission (UNAVEM III) pursuant to paragraph 21 of Security Council
resolution 1008 (1995) of 7 August 1995.
"The Security Council reiterates its concern at the slow progress in
implementation of the provisions of the Lusaka Protocol. The Council
stresses the importance of full implementation of the political and all
other aspects of the peace process. It underlines that several important
tasks that were to have been resolved in the early stages of the peace
process remain incomplete, including the exchange of detailed military
information, the release of all prisoners, the redeployment of those
government troops near UNITA quartering areas, and the final resolution of
the issue of mercenaries. In this respect, the Council welcomes the recent
announcement by the Government of Angola that it will terminate the
contract and repatriate the personnel of the firm involved and will release
all remaining prisoners.
"The Security Council notes that the deployment of UNAVEM III troops
is nearly complete and that four quartering areas are prepared to receive
troops. The Council expresses its disappointment at the slow pace at which
the quartering process has proceeded. It calls upon UNITA and the
Government of Angola to fulfil their commitments regarding the expeditious
quartering and demobilization of former combatants, the quartering of the
rapid reaction police, and the return of the Forcas Armadas Angolanas (FAA)
to the nearest barracks.
"The Security Council expresses deep concern at the delays in
establishing modalities for the integration of the armed forces which is
vital for the process of national reconciliation. The Council notes with
dismay the series of disruptions in the military talks between the parties.

95-41366 (E)

211295

/...

S/PRST/1995/62
English
Page 2

It urges the parties to continue the military talks without interruption
and to conclude an equitable and practicable agreement without further
delay. The Council underlines that such an agreement should give
particular attention to the expeditious completion of the demobilization
and integration of former combatants. It recognizes that the prompt and
complete exchange of military information is vital to the success of these
talks and urges the parties to provide the information required by the
Lusaka Protocol without further delay.
"The Security Council is gravely concerned by continued violations of
the cease-fire and military offensives, in particular events in the northwest. The Council calls on both parties to refrain from military
activities or troop movements which lead to increased tensions and resumed
hostilities and to implement without delay the disengagement plan being
prepared by UNAVEM.
"The Security Council deplores the recent threat to the safety of
UNAVEM III personnel. The Council reminds the parties, in particular
UNITA, that they must take the steps necessary to ensure the safety and
security of all UNAVEM III and other international personnel.
"The Security Council expresses regret that UNAVEM radio is not yet
operational. The Council calls upon the Government of Angola to facilitate
its immediate establishment. It also calls upon both parties to cease the
dissemination of hostile propaganda.
"The Security Council is concerned at delays in implementing mineclearance programmes planned by the United Nations and by Member States,
and calls upon the Government of Angola to facilitate issuance of necessary
authorizations to relevant personnel. The Council calls upon the
Government of Angola and UNITA to intensify their individual and joint
demining efforts. It underlines that the opening of roads within Angola,
including the clearance of mines and the restoration of bridges, is vital
not only to the peace process and the complete deployment of UNAVEM III,
but also to the effective delivery of humanitarian assistance and future
peace-building efforts. The Council is gravely concerned at the reports of
remining in violation of the Lusaka Protocol.
"The Security Council emphasizes that Angolans themselves bear
ultimate responsibility for restoring peace and stability in their country.
The Council stresses that concrete actions are urgently needed from the
parties to put the peace process on an irreversible course. It notes that
continued support for UNAVEM III will depend on the extent to which the
parties demonstrate their political will to achieve a lasting peace.
"The Security Council notes the important role played by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and by the three observer countries
in the promotion of the peace process in Angola and calls upon them to
further contribute appropriately to the implementation of the Lusaka
Protocol within the agreed time framework and to assist UNAVEM III in the
successful fulfilment of its tasks.

/...

S/PRST/1995/62
English
Page 3

"The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to update it on
the progress of the Angolan peace process and the deployment and activities
of UNAVEM III at least on a monthly basis."

-----
