Resolutfons adopted on the reports of the Fourth Commillce

with the terms of paragraph 2 of General Assembly
resolution 1332 (XTII) of 12 lkcemlwr 1958.
9/St/z plenary mcctiny,
15 Dcremher 1960.
1563 (XV).

Petitions relating to the Territory
of South West Africa

The General Assembly,
Having acce/1trd the advisory op1111011 of 11 July
lqSO of the International Court of Justice oil the question
of South \Vest Africa, 13
Having authori:;cd the Committee Oil South \Vest
Africa, by resolution 749 /\ (\'III) of 28 November
1953, to examine petitions in accordance with the
Mandates procedure of the League of Nations,
Having received a report from the Committee dealing
with petitions relating, inter alia, to the status of S(1uth
\Vest Africa and conditions in the Territorv, tlw situation in the Windhoek :\"ative Location, the removal
of the Native Location in \Valvis Bav, conditions in
the Ovamboland Native Reserve, co;1ditions in the
Hoachanas Native Reserve, general conditions in the
Rehoboth Community, the imprisonment of Mr. Toivo
Ja-Toivo, tlw question nf the return of Hereros in
Bechuanaland to South \Nest Africa and a request fnr
a scholarship from a student in South \Vest Africa, 14
Noting that these petitions raise questions relating to
various aspects of the administration of South West
Africa and of conditions in the Territory, uprm which
the Committee has presented a report,
Draws the attention of the petitioners concerned to
the report and observations of the Committee on South
West Africa regarding qmditions in the Territory submitted to the General Assembly at its fifteenth session, 15
and to the action taken by the Assembly on this report.
951th plenary meeting.
18 December 1960.
1564 (XV).

Political freedom
Africa

in South West

The General Assembly,
Having noted, on the basis of the report of the Committee on South West Africa, 16 that leaders of the South
\Vest Africa Peoples Organisation and other Africans
in the Territory of Sou;h \Vest Africa are being subjected to arbitrary imprisonment and deportation,

l. Expresses its deep concern regarding this disturbing development;
2. Urges the Government of the Union of South
Africa to instruct the competent authorities in the
Mandated Territory of South West Africa to cease the
arbitrary imprisoning and deporting of Africans, including the leaders and members of the South West Africa
Peoples Organisation, and to ensure the free exercise
of political rights and freedom of expression for all
sectors of the population.
954th plenary meeting,
18 Dere111ber 1960.
13 Interirational status of South-West Africa, Advisory O f'i11ion: I.CJ. Reports, 1950, p. 128.
14 Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifteenth Se.<sion, Supplement No.12 (A/4464), part I, section IV.
rn Ibid., part II.
16Ibid., Supplement No.12 (A/4464).

31

l 565 (XV). Legal action to ensure the fulfilment
of the obligations m,sumerl by the Union of
South Africa in respect of the T(~rritory
of South West Africa
Fite General Assembly,
Ncralliny its resolution 1361 (XIV) of 17 November
I ()59, in which it drew the attention of Member States
lo ,lie conclusions of the special report of the Committee
011 South \Vest Africa 17 concerning the legal action open
to :\!ember States to submit to the International Court
,if Justice any dispute with the Union of South Africa
relating to the interpretation or application of the
pnll·isions oi the l\landate for the Territory of South
\Vt'st Africa, if such dispute cannot be settled by
11cg-ot iation,
,Votiny with·yrmJC conrcrn that the administration oi
thl' Territory, in recent vears has been conducted in
a ma111H'r cc;ntrary to the· l\1a1;clate, the Charter of the
United Natinns, the Universal Declaration of Human
h'.ights and the resolutions of the General Assemblv,
including resolution 449 A ( \') of 13 Decembt'r 195(),
1,y which :he Assembly accepted the advisory opinion
of 11 July )(J~O oithe lnternational Court of Justict' on
the quc:ition of South \Vest Africa, 13
Notinr; that all negotiations and efforts on the part
<1i the ( ;eneral Assemblv, of its several committees and
organs constitutt'd and ;11thorized for this purpose, and
of .'\krnlwr States acting through such committees and
organs, have failed lo bring about compliance on the
part nf the ( ;overnment of the Union of South Africa
with its obligations under the Mandate, as is evirfenced,
inter a1ia, by the following reports of the said committees
and ()rgans to the Assembly :
(a) Reports of the Ad l Joe Committee on South
\Nest Africa to the General Assembly at its sixth,
,eventh and eighth. sessions, 18
( b) Reports of the Committee on South \Vest Africa
to the General Assemblv at its ninth to fifteenth
sessions, 19
•
( c) Reports of the Good Offices Committee on South
Vv est Africa to the General Assembly at its thirternth
and fourteenth sessions, 20
Noting the aforesaid reports, and in particular the
reports of the Committee on South \Vest Africa concerning the failure of negotiations with the Government
()f the Union of Scuth Africa and the Committee's conclusions that the L: nion has at all times declined to
co-operate in any way with the Committee in the
discharge of its functions,
I. N oil's with appro1.1al the observations of the Committee on South \Vest Africa concerning the administration of the Territory as set out in the Committee's
1 1 Jbid.,

Twelfth Session, Supplement No. 12A (A./3625).
Sixth Session, Aimcxes, agenda item 38, documents
:\/1901 and Add.1-3; ibid., Eighth Session, Annexes, agenda
item 36, doc-uments .\/2261 and Add.I and A/2475 and Add.I
and 2.
19 Jbid., .\"intlz Session, Supplement No. 14 (.'\/266() and
Corr.I); ibid., 1Vinth Session, ,-/nnexcs, agenda item 34, document A/2666/Add.1; ibid., Tenth Session, Supplemmt ,11/0. 1::
( A/2913); ibid., Tenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 30, documents A/2913/ Add.I and 2; ibid., Eleventh Sl'ssion, Supplement
No. 12 (A/3151; ibid., Twelfth Session, Supplemc1it No. 12
( A/3626) ; ibid., Thirteenth Session, Supple-men/ No. 12
( A/3906 and Add.I); ibid., Fourteenth Session, Supplement
No. 12 (A/4191); ibid., Fifteenth Session, Supplement No. 12
(A/4464).
zo Ibid., Thirteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 39, docurnent A/3900; ibid., Fourteenth Sessin11, Annexes, agenda item
JS, document A/4224.
18 Ibid.,

32

General Assembly -

report to the General Assembly at its fifteenth session,
and finds that the Government of the Union of South
Africa has failed and refused to carry out its obligations
under the Mandate for the Territory of South West
Africa;
2. Concludes that the dispute which has arisen between Ethiopia, Liberia and other Member States on
the one hand, and the Union of South Africa on the
other, relating to the interpretation and application of
the Mandate has not been and cannot be settled by
negotiation ;
3. 11/otes that Ethiopia and Liberia, on 4 November
1960, filed concurrent -applications in the lnternational
Court of Justice instituting contentious proceedings
against the Union of South Africa;
4. Commends the Governments of Ethiopia and
Liberia upon their initiative in submitting such dispute
to the International Court of Justice for adjudication
and declaration in a contentious proceeding in accordance
with article 7 of the Mandate.
954th plenary meeting,
18 December 1960.

1566 (XV). Assistance of the specialized agencies and of the United Nations Children's
Fund in the economic, social and educational
development of South West Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling the purposes of Article 55 of the Charter
of the United Nations,
Bearing in mind the international status of the Mandated Territory of South \Vest Africa, the General
Assembly's own obligations and the concern of the
community of nations to promote the well-being and
interest of the inhabitants of that Territory,
Having perused the observations and recommendations contained in part II, sections IV, V and VI, of
the report of the Committee on South West Africa to
the General Assembly, 21
1. Considers that the economic, social, educational
and health conditions prevailing in the Mandated Territory of South West Africa, especially as they concern
the indigenous inhabitants, are unsatisfactory, and that
the need for urgent co-operative action for the improvement of present conditions in these fields is imperative ;
2. Endorses the considered view of the Committee
on South West Africa that assistance should be sought,
and that it should be provided by the United Nations,
the specialized agencies and the United Nations Children's Fund ;
3. Invites the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations, the World Health Organization,
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization and the United Nations Children's Fund
to undertake urgent programmes to assist the indigenous
population of the Territory of South West Africa in
their respective fields;
4. Requests the Government of the Union of South
Africa to seek such assistance and to extend its cooperation to the above-mentioned specialized agencies
and the United Nations Children's Fund in implementing such urgent programmes to improve the economic,
social, educational and health conditions of the indigenous.
population in South West Africa, and to facilitate their
work in the Territory in every possible way;
21 Jbid., Fifteenth Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/4464).

Fifteenth Session

5. Requests the above-mentioned specialized agencies
and the United Nations Children's Fund to report to
the Committee on South vV est Africa and to the
General Assembly at their respective sessions during
1961 on the action taken in implementing the presr11t
resolution.
954th plenary mfftinr1,
18 December 1960.

1567 (XV). The Windhoek Location
Thf General Assembly,
H m1ing r!'aivcd a report from the Committee on
South \Vest Africa with respect to disturbances in the
\Vinclhoek ~ative Location relating to the removal of
the Location residents to a new site called Katutura, 22
Noting with regret that the construction of the new
I .ocatinn at Katutura is part of the plan laid down by
the present Prime Minister in his former capacity as
Minister of Native A ff airs to the effect that Native
I .ocations in urban areas, based on the policy of
apartheid, must be situated in such a manr,er that a
permanent "buffer strip of at least 500 yards" on which
''no development at all is allowed" is maintaine(\ "between the Native residential area and that of anv other
racial group", 23
•
Obsnving with deep concern that on the night of
JO to 11 December 1959, after repeated expressions of
opposition by Location residents to their removal had
failed to obtain the sympathetic consideration of officials
of the Mandatory Power, police and soldiers opene(I
fire on a crowd of Location residents, killing eleven
Africans and injuring at least forty-four others,
l'v' oting the report transmitted to the. United Nations
bv the Government of the Union of South Africa 24 conc;rning an inquiry into the events in Windhoek Location
on 10 to 11 December 1959, and the direct causes
which gave rise thereto,
Tal,iny into account the additional information contained in the report of the Committee on South West
Africa and in oral and written petitions from inhabitants
of the Territory,
1\loting also the many protests received by the Committee during 1959 in petitions and communications
against the impending removal to the new Location site
on the grounds, inter alia, that the removal was part of
the intensified application of the apartheid policy,
Considering that the apartheid policy applied in South
vV est Africa is contrary to the terms of the Mandate,
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations
and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
C onsidcring further that the application of the
apartheid policy, of which the occurrences in Windhoek
have been an unfortunate consequence, is prejudicial to
the maintenance of ·a peaceful and orderly administration
in the Mandated Territory,
1. Expresses deep regret at the action taken by the
police and soldiers in the Windhoek Native Location
on the night of 10 to 11 December 1959 against residents
of the Location, resulting in the death of eleven Africans
and many other casualties;
2 2 Ibid., Fifteenth Session, Supplement Na. 12 (A/4464),
paras. 138-229.
23 Union of South Africa, Seoote Debates, 1956, No. 15, cols.
3884 and 3885.
2 4 For the text of the report, see Official Records of t/ir
Genera[ Assembly, Fifteenth Session, Supplement Na. 12 (A/
4464), annex V.
