UiVITED NATIONS

THIRTY-SECOND

YEAR
th
MEETING:

NEW

23 NOVEMBER 1977

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2048)
Adoption of the agenda

.....,.......,.....,,.....,,..

.. , .,,.. .... .. ., .. , . ..., ,.. ..,.. . ,... .

Complaint by Benin:
Letter dated 4 November 1977 from the Permanent Representative of Benin to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12437) . . . . , . . . . , . . . . . , . . . . , . . . . . . , , . , . . . . . , . . . . . . . .

1

SiPV.2048

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document,
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. , .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2048TH

MEETING

Held in New York on Wednesday, 23 November
t3’cSide/~t: Mr. Mansur R. KIKHIA
(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya).

1977, at 3 p.m.

4. In view of the limited number of places available at the
Council table, I invite the representatives of Algeria, the
Congo, Mali and Viet Nam to take the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber, on the usual
understanding that they will be invited to take a place at
the Council table when they wish to address the Council,

&~rrt:
The representatives of the following States:
Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Bouayad-Agha
(Algeria), Mr. Mondjo (Congo), Mr. Kant& (Mali) and
Mr. Dinh Ba Xhi (Viet Nam) took the places reserved for
fhem at the side of the Council chamber.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2048)
1. Adoption of the agenda

5. The PRESIDENT: The first speaker is the representative of Viet Nam. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

2. Complaint by Benin:
Letter dated 4 November 1977 from the Permanent
Rcprcsentative of Benin to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12437)

6. Mr. DINH BA THI (Viet Nam) (interpretation from
French): Mr. President, I should like to begin my statement
by expressing my sincere thanks to you and to the other
members of the Security Council for having enabled me to
participate in the debate on the complaint of the People’s
Republic of Benin, a debate the importance of which does
not need to be underlined. I should also like to join
previous speakers in congratulating you warmly on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council this month
and to express to you my admiration for the calm and
objective way in which you are conducting our work. I also
have the very special pleasure of greeting in you the
representative of a country whose active contribution to
the cause of the emancipation of peoples is an indisputable
reality and with which my own country maintains relations
of friendship and fruitful co-operation.

Tk mcetitlg was called to order at 4.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Complaint by Benin:
Letter dated 4 November 1977 from the Permanent
Representative of Benin to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 2437)
1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
taken by the Council at its 2047th meeting, I invite the
representatives of Cuba, Guinea and Madagascar to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

7. My delegation listened with special attention to the
statement made yesterday [2047th meeting/ by the representative of the People’s Republic of Benin, Ambassador
Boya, and carefully studied the report assessing the damage
and losses caused to Benin during the armed aggression of
Sunday, 16 January 1977, which has been circulated in
document S/12415.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Alar&n (Cuba),
Mr. Kondc! (Guinea) and Mr. Rabetafika (Madagascar) took
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.
2. The I’RESIDENT: 1 should like to inform the members
of the Council that letters have been received from the
representatives of Algeria, the Congo, Mali and Viet Nam in
which they requested to be invited to participate in the
discussion.

g. The Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, which has shared
with the People’s Republic of Benin a painful past and
which has just emerged from a war of imperialist aggression
that lasted for many years, is particularly aware of the
serious consequences, moral, material and economic, that
the barbarous aggression of 16 January 1977 brought to the
people of this African country, which fought tenaciously
and heroically to preserve its national independence and
which is determined to overcome every difficulty SO that it
may continue on the road of development in dignity and in
keeping with the aspirations of its people.

3. In accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite the representatives of
those States to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in conformity with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure
1

evidence submitted to the Council last February, open
armed aggression was committed against this independent
African State. We have listened carefully here to the
circumstantial statement of the representative of Benin,
Ambassador Boya, who threw additional light on the facts
of this matter.

9. We wish to reaffirm our complete solidarity with the
people and Government of the People’s Republic of Benin.
We ask that Security Council resolution 405 (1977) should
be put into effect, that appropriate measures should be
taken to prohibit international mercenaries and that the
international
community
should furnish the necessary
material assistance to the People’s Republic of Benin to
enable it to make good the damage and losses caused by
this armed aggression.

15. The delegation of the Soviet Union must note too that
the just cause of the People’s Republic of Benin has the
firm support of African and other countries which are
insisting on the creation of conditions in which the very
possibility of the commission of such acts against independent States of Africa and other continents would be
prevented. The representatives of a whole series of countries have already indicated in the Council that they regard
attempts to overthrow the lawful Government of Benin not
only as an attack on that Republic but as aggression against
the whole of Africa.

10. The aggression perpetrated on 36 January this year
against the People’s Republic of Benin is not an isolated
act. It is part of the manoeuvres of international imperialism against the newly independent countries of Asia,
Africa and Latin America which have resolved to put an
end to colonialist and neo-colonialist domination, to
protect their independence and national sovereignty and to
be masters of their natural resources. The imperialists and
reactionaries have stopped at nothing to achieve their evil
ends. In the African continent, apart from Benin, armed
aggression, retaliatory policies, and economic blockades
have been inflicted upon the Republic of Guinea, the
People’s Republic of Mozambique, the People’s Republic of
Angola, Zambia and Botswana, and armed conflicts have
been provoked or stirred up in various regions.

16. It should be recalled that at an earlier time the Council
adopted a resolution [&5 (1977)j
categorically condemning the act of armed aggression committed against
Benin. In that resolution, the Council expressed serious
concern at the violation of the territorial integrity, independence and sovereignty of that country; it condemned the
use of international mercenaries and appealed to all States
not to allow their territory or nationals to be used for the
recruitment, training and transit of mercenaries designed to
overthrow the Government of any Member State.

11. The Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the Co-ordinating
Bureau of the Non-Aligned Countries, at’ their conference at
New Delhi last April, denounced and condemned in the
clearest terms these doings of the imperialists and reactionaries:

17. As the Soviet delegation has already noted, the armed
attack on Benin was the latest link in the chain of criminal
acts of international neo-colonialism and imperialism on
African soil which are designed to get rid of inconvenient
Governments. We see that far from all the obstacles raised
by outside forces to the independent development of Benin
and other liberated countries having been removed and
having become matters of past record, these forces are
having recourse to acts of armed aggression to prevent
African countries from independently controlling their
natural resources and freely developing along the road they
have chosen.

“In their attempts to destabilize African countries and
affect their right to sovereignty, the forces of imperialism
have increasing recourse to interference and intervention,
to the use of mercenaries, political assassinations and
causing conflicts between friendly neighbouring countries.“’
Thus the peoples of Asia, Africa and Latin America must
redouble their vigilance and strengthen the solidarity and
co-operation among themselves and with other forces that
cherish peace and justice in the world so as to thwart the
murky manoeuvres of imperialism.
12. In conclusion, my delegation would express the
earnest hopes that at the end of this debate the Security,
Council will take concerted action that will satisfy the
People’s Republic of Benin.

18. That is why events like those which took pIace in
Benin have caused deep indignation in the Soviet Union. It
is why we, as in the past, consider that the international
community has a duty to take effective measures to ban the
use of mercenaries for crushing national liberation movements and restoring colonial and neo-colonial domination.

13. The PRESIDENT: I should like to thank the representative of Viet Nam for the kind words that he addressed to
me and to my country, and to assure him of the friendship
of my people, who have followed with admiration the
struggle of his people for their liberation, progress and
unity.

19. The efforts made in recent years by the Party of the
People’s Revolution of Benin and by the whole people of
that country are convincing evidence of their firm determination to fight to the end against all forms of exploitation and to build a genuinely democratic society.

14. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): The attention of
the Security Council has again been drawn to events which
have proved to be a serious trial for the People’s Republic
of Benin. As can be seen from the copious documentary
1 A/32/74,

annex I, pa.

20. In August this year, a special session of the National
Council of the Revolution approved a new constitution and
the first development plan of the Republic. The adoption
of those two documents was a turning point in the history
of Benin. The constitution provides for the establishment
of a national State, whose main goal is proclaimed to be the
building of a socialist society.

10.

2

21. We highly value the relations of mutual understanding
and genuine friendship established between the Soviet
Union and Benin. Our country has noted that, in his
statement at the solemn meeting in MOSCOWon 2 November
this year marking the sixtieth anniversary of the Great
October SOCialiSt Revolution, a member of the Politburo of
the Central Committee of the Party of the People’s
Revolution of Benin, the Minister for Internal Affairs
Security and National Orientation of Benin, expressed hii
gratitude t0 the Soviet Union for the vigorous and decisive
support furnished by it to Benin.
’ II

January 1977 [see S/12415]
shows tb- extent of the
damagessufferedby Benin, a peace-lovi] luntry which
has relations of good-neighbourliness
with all its neiehvhours. One shouldtherefore not be surprisedat the fact
that the Council, in its collective wisdom,hasonce again
met in order to evaluatethe extent of the damages
aswell
as their implicationsfor the entire economy of Benin.
However, the harm inflicted on the People’sRepublicof
Benin is not only limited to material damage.Unfor.
tunately, it alsoextendsto lossof humanlives.
28. The consequences
of the armed aggressionof 16
January 1977 are still a problem for the international
conscience:that of the threat to our countrieswhich finds
its mostdangerous
andperniciousform underthe cover and
by meansof attacksby mercenarieswho are sufficiently
well-paid to remainsilent concerningthe name of their
employers.Sucha phenomenon
shouldbeof concernto all
and callsfor vigorousandconcertedaction.This isthe only
wayto guardagainstthe danger.

22. The delegation of the Soviet Union confirms its
support Of the just CaUSeOf the people of Benin, The Soviet
Union has given and will continue to give it appropriate
support within the framework of existing bilateral agree.
ments.
23. In our view, the Security Council must give effective
assistance to Benin in defending its independence and
territorial integrity from attacks from outside and h
binding up the wounds which it suffered as a result of the
armed aggression. We believe that such a decision by the
Council would serve the cause of strengthening the political
and economic independence of the People’s Republic of
Benin and help it to make successful progress on the road
to independence.

29. Membersof the Security Councilwill understandhow
justified our apprehension
is, given the threat posedby
professionalsin subversionwho are ready to serve any
Government which is free from considerationsof international morality, This danger is a real one and Benin
continues to be directly affected by it becausethe same
oneswho organizedand financed the aggression
try to
throw discrediton the State of Benin. In order to do this,
they attempt to stifle its economy and to sabotagethe
realization of its development projects by using their
influence ir, all fields, and particularly with the internationalfinancialinstitutions.

24, The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Algeria. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make a statement.
2.5. Mr. BOUAYAD-AGHA

(Algeria) (interpretation from

Frerlclz): Mr. President,the satisfactionI feel at seeing
you

presideover the Security Council this month is founded
both on the conviction I have of your personalqualifications as a wise and skilful diplomat and on the fraternal
bondswhich unite Libya and Algeria, our two countries,
our two peoples and our Governmentsresolutely committed to one and the samestruggleto establisha world of
justice and progress,I should like also, through you, to
thank all members of the Council for having kindly
authorizedme to take part in this third phasedevotedto a
considerationof the complaint by the People’sRepublicof
Benin.
26. When Benin addressedthe Security Councilaskingit
to assistit in sheddingall possiblelight on the armed
aggression
of which it had been a victim on 16 January
1977, somecountries had doubts asto the nature andthe
purposeof that aggression.
But oneof the first conclusions
found in the report2 of the missionof inquiry in which
you, Mr. President, played an important role, was the
irrefutable proof of aggressionconducted againstthe
People’sRepublic of Benin by other Governments.That
report hastherefore definitively endedthe self-;ntnr:sted,if
not suspect,scepticismof some.

30. Immediatelyfollowingthe armedaggression,
countries
were implicateddirectly or indirectly by the report of the
Security Council missionof inquiry. Benin askedthose
countriesto contributeto a clarification of the situation.In
its resolution405 (1977), the Council alsoaskedall States
to provide it with any information they might have in
connexionwith the eventsat Cotonouon 16 January 1977
likely to throw further light on thoseevents.It wasthe least
we could expect. But the countrieswhich were implicated
continue to lend a deaf ear. Are we to interpret this
reticence on their part as an avowed complicity in an
aggressionwhosescarsand consequences
are still harshly
felt by the peopleof Benin?
31. The revisedevaluationreport estimatesthe damages
sufferedby the People’sRepublicof Beninat $28million.
This is merely an indicative figure and is far from
compensatingfor all the sacrificeswhich the peopleof
Benin will still haveto endureif it wishesto safeguardits
independenceand its sovereigntyin the face of direct or
indirect foreigninterference.

32. Aggressionagainsta smJ1country suchasBeninis not
somethingthat is geographicallylimited and politically
harmless.It is part of a vast plot aimedat destabilizing
27. Today, the revised report on the evaluallon of the
damages
and lossesof various kindscausedto the People’s African States, The Security Council must no doubt be
concerned over the practice of someGovernmentsof
Republic of Benin during the aggressionof Sunday, l6
resortingto mercenaries
for political endsin other countries, International peace,needless
to say, will continue to
2 Officfal Records of the Security Council. Thirty-Second yearp
be jeopadized-we have already stressedthis-as long as
SPdol

Supplement No. 3.

3

to consider the report on the assessment of damages
resulting from that aggression [S/1241.5/. This document
was prepared by the Government of the People’s Republic
of Benin in co-operation with Mr. Aly Assem of Egypt and
Mr. Marcel Kheir of Lebanon, expert consultants appointed
by the Secretary-General in implementation of paragraph 7
of resolution 405 (1977). The methods used in evaluating
and assessing the damages are clearly explained therein.
After 30 days of hard work, the experts drew up this
important report whose objectivity and sincerity cannot be
doubted, We should like to congratulate and thank the
authors for the way in which they fulfilled their mission.

relations between States are affected by these anonymous
elements ready to serve the highest bidder, namely the
mercenaries.
33. The international community must not hesitate to
assume its responsibilities and to come to the aid of the
victim of aggression, to help its economic, social and
political recovery, to identify those responsible for the
aggression against Benin, in short, to shed light on the
events which occurred at Cotonou on 16 January 1977. For
its part, Algeria has given aid to Benin and will continue to
do so.
34. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative of
Algeria for his statement and for his kind words addressed
to me and to my country. I should like to assure him, on
behalf of my people and my country, of our fraternal
sentiments towards our Algerian brothers who were always
in the frontline in the fight against imperialism and
colonialism and who have paid a high price for freedom and
progress.

41. The damage caused by the aggression has been
estimated at $28 million. This can only be an approximate
figure since the moral damages and the long-term implications of that criminal expedition for the economy and the
life of the courageous people of Benin cannot be measured
in figures. The Security Council must, therefore, unanimously approve the report to avoid any delay in the
implementation of the relevant provisions of paragraph 8 of
resolution 405 (1977).

35. The next speaker is the representative of Mali. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make a
statement,

42. As 1 have just said, it is not a question of compensating for losses suffered by the People’s Republic of Benin,
but rather of an expression of solidarity with a State
Member of the Organization, which has been the victim of
armed aggression, for you will undoubtedly agree with me
that much of the harm done cannot be compensated for
materially. I am thinking of the permanent physical
handicaps unfortunately
suffered by many patriots of
Benin, of the shock, the moral anguish, the loss in human
lives and many others.

36. Mr. KANTE
(Mali) (interpretation
porn French).
Mr. President, allow me first of all to convey to you the
warm and fraternal congratulations of my delegation on the
occasion of your accession to the presidency of the
Security Council. We could not be better served at a time
when the Council is dealing with African problems. You
eloquently proved this when you successfully conducted
the debates of the Council on the question of South Africa
at the beginning of this month. One could expect no less
from an intransigent militant in the cause of freedom who
so worthily represents the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, one of
the most prestigious centres of the African revolution.

43. ,This is why the contributions which some will make in
implementation of paragraph 8 of resolution 405 (1977)
can only be symbolic compared with the lasting effort
which the courageous people of Benin must make under the
leadership of its vanguard party, the Party of the People’s
Revolution of Benin, to overcome the serious after-effects
and grave repercussions of the criminal aggression.

37. I should Iike to stress on this auspicious occasion the
excellent fraternal relations between our two countries,
based on strict respect for their sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity. Linked by history as well as by
geography and by their uncompromising commitment to
freedom, the peoples of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and of
the Republic of Mali work hand in hand for the total
liberation of Africa,

44. What the Government of the People’s Republic of
Benin and the peoples of Africa expect of the international
community, represented here by the members of the
Council, is the elimination of the odious phenomenon of
mercenaries whose hordes have since 1960 been continously violating their sovereignty and their existence.

38. My delegation pays a tribute to the exceptional
contribution which your beloved country is making under
the dynamic leadership of its prestigious leader, brother
Muammar Al-Qadhafi, to the cause of the struggle of the
peoples of Africa and the third world in seeking a world of
justice, peace and progress for all.

45. The latest target of these thugs is the peaceful
Republic of Togo, a neighbour of Benin. The People’s
Republic of Angola, for its part, is attacked daily by
mercenaries at the service of international imperiaiism and
of the racist and fascist regime at Pretoria.

39. I should also like, through you, to thank the members
of the Council for having allowed my delegation to take
part in this debate.

46. Despite the relevant United Nations resolutions and
the statements of good intentions by representatives of the
Governments of Western Europe, nothing has been done in
those countries to discourage the soldiers of fortune and
paid killers who threaten the lives of our peoples. Accordingly, the Organization must implement resolution
239 (1967) and paragraphs 6 and 10 of resolution
405 (1977).

40. Under paragraphs 7 and 10 of resolution 405 (1977),
the Security Council was convened to continue its discussion of the armed aggression perpetrated on 16 January last
by a horde of international mercenaries against the People’s
Republic of Benin. This time the members are called upon
4

mania has decisively condemned the brutal act of interference in the internal affairs of Benin. This attitude derives
quite naturally from the position of principle of my
country, which is to condemn all acts of force which
encroach on the sovereignty, national independence and the
territorial integrity of States, and to reject attempts to
prevent the African States and the developing countries
from devoting themselves in complete freedom to their
economic and social advancement in keeping with their
own interests and aspirations,

47. Africa shared with Western Europe the legitimate
emotions which were aroused by the taking of hostages and
air piracy. We therefore expect that continent from which
the mercenaries take off to attack our peoples to show a
greater sense of commitment and determination. On the
basis of what we have seen in the cases of the People’s
Republic of Angola, the People’s Republic of Benin and the
Togolese Republic, the instigators of these criminal forays
can be apprehended and rendered harmless. That, of course,
requires will and determination on the part of the authorities of the countries they live in or come from. Denouncing
them to the Governments of threatened States is not
enough. There must be co-operation under paragraph 10 of
resolution 405 (1977) in order to eradicate this phenomenon. One ,cannot prosecute and punish the terrorists and
air pirates and do nothing about the rise in mercenary
activity, which goes far beyond the crimes of terrorism and
the taking of hostages which so aroused the General
Assembly at the beginning of the current session,

54. We are against the practice and policy of using
international mercenaries to thwart the heroic struggle
waged by the African peoples to consolidate their national
independence, a struggle against colonialism and neocolonialism. We believe that such criminal acts must be
rejected most vigorously by the international community,
The danger inherent in the use of international .mercenaries
must be taken into. consideration by this forum which is
charged under the Charter with the maintenance of
international peace and security.

48. My delegation spoke at length on the question of
mercenaries during the Council debates in April [2005th
meeting], and there is no need to repeat here what we then
said. We venture to hope that during the present meetings
of the Council vigorous decisions will be adopted, with
everyone’s consent, in order to stamp out this modern form
of buccaneering.

55. We are convinced that the African peoples, who after a
long struggle and at great sacrifice have won their independence and their right to a life of freedom and dignity, are
capable of solving their own problems. At the same time, it
is the duty of the Organization and particularly of the
Security Council to act to protect these peoples from all
outside interference and to prevent any pressure or use of
force on the part of imperialism and neocolonialism.

49. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of Mali
for his kind words addressed to me and to my country, I
should like to endorse what he said with regard to the
fraternal relations between our two countries and our two
nations, especially our common struggle for the liberation
and progress of our two countries and our continent.

56. The Romanian delegation has in the past stressed the
need for the Security Council to support Benin’s efforts to
recover the losses it suffered from the act of aggression of
16 January 1977 and to rehabilitate its national economy
following the material damage it sustained. In this spirit the
Romanian delegation joins other States members of the
Council in supporting Benin’s legitimate requests and the
draft resolution to be presented to the Council.

50. Mr. GHEORGHE (Romania) (interpretation
fiorn
French): The Romanian delegation already had an opportunity to state Romania’s position with regard to the
problem that we are again debating in the Council, namely,
the consequences of the act of aggression perpetrated on 16
January 1977 against Benin, an independent and sovereign
African State.

57. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of the People’s Republic of the Congo. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make a statement.

51. We have listened with interest to the statement made
at the last meeting by the representative of Benin,
Mr. Boya. That statement contained a comprehensive analysis of the measures adopted by the Council in its
resolution 405 (1977) and of the political implications and
the losses suffered by Benin as a result of the attack by
mercenaries to which it was subjected.

58. Mr. MONDJO (Congo) (interpretation from French):
Mr. President, first of all allow me to express the apprcciation of my delegation for allowing me to make a statement
during this debate and to address to you our warm
congratulations on the personal contribution which you
have made in a decisive manner to unravel the shameful
case of the aggression perpetrated against the People’s
Republic of Benin. In considering the evidence with all the
objectivity and patience which are characteristics of your
unfailing commitment to the defence of just causes, YOU
imbue the concept of African solidarity once again with its
full worth by replacing words with living reality. That
fearless constancy and militancy do honour to your
country, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, of which you are so
worthy a representative and with which the People’s
Republic of the Congo, my country, has always maintained
relations of fraternal co-operation based on OUT common
ideals.

52. The concern of the Government of Benin and the
problems facing it at present have the complete sympathy
and understanding of my country, which has always
pronounced itself firmly against all acts of interference in
the internal affairs of other States and against any violation
of sovereignty and territorial integrity.
53. Romania fully supports the efforts made by the
people and Government of Benin, which have committed
themselves to a major effort to overcome the state of
underdevelopment inherited from colonial domination, to
ensure the country’s economic and social progress and to
consolidate its national and political independence Ro-

59. But the world we live in is not the one we would like
it to be, Africa in particular, following the infamous period
5

.

of slavery and direct colonialism, now faces a merciless
period of challenge; a multidimensional
nefarious
merciless period of challenge; a multidimensional nefarious
challenge from imperialism in the face of the irresistible
torrent of national liberation revolutions which has led to
the collapse of the great colonial empires and which now
threatens the remaining bastions of colonialism and racism.
International imperialism, reaching the heights of rage, has
attempted to promote tensions in Africa in general, with
the progressive African countries being the main targets of
the criminal plan to destabilize the independent ‘States of
our continent. In that enterprise, international reaction has
increasingly resorted to that particular form of internationa terrorism represented by mercenaries, the blind
vectors of violence who continually threaten the sovereignty of countries whose regimes are considered to be
the foremost enemies of imperialism. And the case of Benin
exists to remind us that this phenomenon is not a remote
abstraction but, rather, a harsh reality which weighs upon
international peace and security. In the evolution of our
time and our world, that phenomenon deserves to be
condemned unequivocally by all States Members of the
Organization because the new nations, born in the darkness
of colonialism, are faced with enormous tasks of national
reconstruction to strengthen their independence without
any vain juggling, manoeuvring or interference from abroad.

mercenaries in Africa. Any other attitude
regarded as vain deception.

can only be

63. Finally, we must recall that the last Summit Conference of the Organization of African Unity, held at
Libreville, adopted a draft convention on the elimination of
mercenaries. That text, at the very least, is significant
because public opinion on our continent has unequivocally
condemned mercenaries, those “angels” of extermination
who have come from across the seas, the executioners of
imperialism who, since the 1960s have constantly haunted
and unsettled our independence.
64. Thus, the danger is not only that of the serious
aggression against Benin which, if I may say so, illustrates
and confnms the continuance of a vast plot directed against
the progressive regimes of Africa and elsewhere, because
those regimes are the most ardent foes of the agents of
neo-colonialism and imperialist exploitation of peoples.
65. The use of mercenaries is a system of reactionary
terror, fashioned and maintained by inconsolable minds
whose major concern is nothing other than taking over the
whole of Africa. In that regard, the symmetry with the
manoeuvres of the same mercenaries, provided by the same
countries in South Africa, Zimbabwe and Namibia is
perfectly clear.

60. My brother and comrade, the representative of the
People’s Republic of Benin, in enumerating yesterday the
long list of African countries which have been the victims
of mercenaries, inadvertently I am sure, omitted the
aggression by mercenaries directed against my country in
January 1977. The People’s Republic of the Congo, need I
recall, was the victim of a barbarous attack aimed at
disorganizing our national economy in order to paralyse the
Congolese revolution. The site of the great project of
realignment of the Congo-Ocean railroad, which as everyone knows is the backbone of our economy and that of
other brother States in central Africa, suffered enormous
material damage estimated at several billions of CFA francs,
thus increasing the initial cost of that project which is so
vital to our economic development, What is more, mercenaries in the pay of imperialism summarily executed 15
courageous railway workers. I must say therefore that the
Congo has known the phenomenon of mercenaries in all its
brutal and subtle manifestations. It was distasteful to us to
bring this matter before international organs for we had
irrefutable proof of the degree of connivance among the
mercenaries and their imperialist masters, the enemies of
our revolutionary cause,

66. At a time when we are all concerned about the daily
increasing extent of terrorism, the “enemy of freedoms”,
we firmly request that measures should be taken without
delay with a view to eliminating this form of international
terrorism which is all the more dangerous because, in its
plan for keeping peoples enslaved and protecting selfish
interests, the mercenary system carries out its criminal
activities against the sovereignty of States Members of the
Organization.
67. In this strategy of the destabilization of progressive
regimes, the mercenaries believe they must take advantage
of the contradictions that set African States against one
another. However, the African peoples never confuse their
true interests with those of adventurers prompted by
motives that have nothing to do with patriotism or total
national liberation. That very often explains the lamentable
failures of these attempts at neo-colonialist reconquest.
68. There is a point to which my delegation would Iike to
draw the Council’s attention: the legitimacy of the obstinate fight of the people of Benin to guarantee its
sovereignty and territorial integrity. By bringing this question before the Council once again, in keeping with
resolution 405 (1977), the delegation of Benin wants to be
assured, and at the same time to assure the delegations of
several Member States, that the Council will adopt effective
measures on at least three points: to prevent mercenary
aggression in order to ensure international peace and
security; to commit the United Nations effectively to an
action against mercenaries as a danger to peace; to make
international public opinion aware once again of the serious
prejudice caused to the nation of Benin and to its
courageous programme of national reconstruction. In brief,
to respond to the request of the people of Benin.

61. The People’s Republic of the Congo furthermore has
had experience with mercenaries through the participation
of a Congolese magistrate in the international trial at
Luanda according to the ruling of which mercenaries were
deemed to be criminals and henceforth to be treated as
such. One remembers the public protest made in the name
of so-called human rights following that historic decision. It
is symptomatic that it should be precisely the countries
where mercenaries are recruited which shouted the loudest.
62. We wish to say here that all those who ask for a more
active search for peace with justice and security must strive
with all their might to stamp out the phenomenon of
6

69. We support any action calculated to deter potential
aggressors from a repetition of their crime because, in the
view of the delegation of the People’s Republic of the
Congo,that is the crux of the problem.

77. The third preambularparagraphexpressesa conviction
“of the necessity of co-operation between all States, in
conformity with paragraph 10 of resolution 405 (1977) of
14 April 1977, to collect more information about the
mercenarieswho operated againstthe People’sRepublic of
Benin on 16 January 1977”.

70. The international community, I am certain, will
support the strugglebeing waged by the people of Benin,
which is so proud, so worthy and so committed to the
idealsof the Charter of the United Nations. The Congo,for
its part, wishesto expressonce again to the delegationof
the People’s Republic of Benin its highest esteem and
militant solidarity.

78. Operative paragraph 1 would reaffirm the previous
resolution, that is resolution 405 (1977).
79. Operative paragraph2 would take note “of the report
on the evaluation of damages contained in document
S/1241S”, which hasbeen circulated to the membersof the
Council.

71. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of the
Congo for the kind words he addressedto me and my
country. I shouldlike on this occasionto assurehim of the
fraternal relationsand solidarity between our two countries
and our two revolutions in our common strugglefor the
good of Africa and the progressof our countries.

80. Operative paragraph 3 would call upon “all States to
work in close co-operation in order to gather all useful
information concerning all mercenariesinvolved in the
events of 16 January 1977, in compliance with paragraph
10 of resolution 405 (1977)“.

72. The representativeof Mauritius has expresseda wish
to speak at this stage in order to introduce a draft
resolution sponsoredby Benin, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
and Mauritius, the three African membersof the Council,
and containedin document S/l 24.54.

81. Operative paragraph4 would take note “of the desire
of the Government of Benin to have the Mercenarieswho
participated in the attacking forces against the People’s
Republic of Benin on 16 January 1977 subjected to due
processof law”.

73. Mr. RAMPHUL (Mauritius): First of all I should like
to express my delegation’s heartfelt condolences and
sympathy to the delegationof India in connexion with the
natural disastercausingextensive destruction and devastation, and especiallythe lossof severalthousandsof lives, of
which southernIndia hasrecently been the victim.

82. Operative paragraph5 would appeal“to all Statesand
all appropriate international organizations, including the
United Nations and its specializedagencies,to assistBenin
to repair the damagecausedby the act of aggression”.
83. Operative paragraph 6 would request the SccretaryGeneral“to provide all necessaryassistance
to Benin for the
implementation of paragraph5 of the present resolution”.

74. I should like now to refer to the document which has
just beendistributed to membersof the Council under the
symbol S/124.54.It is a draft resolution on the subjectwe
are discussingand is, asthe Presidenthas just pointed out,
sponsoredby Benin, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and
Mauritius. It contains three preambular paragraphsand
eight operative paragraphs.I shall go through it rather
quickly.

84. Operative paragraph 7 would further request the
Secretary-General“to follow closely the implementation of
the present resolution, with particular reference to paragraphs3, 4, 5 and 6, and to report to the Security Council
not later than 30 September1978”.
85. Operative paragraph8 would have the Council decide
“to remain seizedof the matter”.

7.5. The first preambularparagraphrefers to the statement
of our colleague Mr. Boya, the representative of the
People’s Republic of Benin, “especially regarding the
threats of aggression
by mercenaries”.I believe that there is
generalagreement,particularly amongmy African brothers,
that the statementof Mr. Boya wasnot at all controversial.
76. The second preambular paragraph would express
concern “over the dangerwhich international mercenaries
representfor all States,in particular the smallerones”.

86. This draft resolution is the result of extensive,
constructive and positive negotiations conducted in a spirit
of understanding and co-operation. It is simple, straightforward, modest and realistic, I strongly commendit to the
considerationof membersof the Council with a view to its
unanimousadoption.
The meetingroseat 5.IO p.m.

7

L-

-

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publications
may be obtained
throughout
the world.
Consult
your bookstore
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES

PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
and distributors
or write
to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
ddpositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire
k : Nations
Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou GenBve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE

LAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
estin
buidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas. Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

Price:

$U.S.

l.OQ(or

equivalent

NACIONES

et les agences
ou adressez-vous

UNIDAS

en venta en librerias
y casas distria su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

in other

currencies)

77-70001-October

1978-2,200
