S/PV.8923 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8923rd meeting

Thursday, 9 December 2021, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Abarry/Mr. Ousman. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Niger)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Liang Hengzhu
Mrs. Leega Piiskop
Ms. Goldstein
Mr. Setia
Mr. Gallagher
Ms. Muigai
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Ms. Tranoey
Mr. Chumakov
Ms. Jones
Mr. Cherif
Ms. Atley
Ms. McElligott
Mr. Ho The Nam Phan

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Security in the context of terrorism and climate change
Letter dated 30 November 2021 from the Permanent Representative of Niger to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2021/988)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-38592 (E)
*2138592*

S/PV.8923 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting resumed at 3.05 p.m.
The President (spoke in French): I wish to remind
all speakers to limit their statements to no more than
four minutes in order to enable the Council to carry out
its work expeditiously. The red light on the collar of the
microphone will begin to flash after four minutes have
elapsed to prompt speakers to conclude their statements.
I now give the floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt): At the outset, allow me to
congratulate my dearest brother Ambassador Abdou
Abarry, Permanent Representative of the Niger, on his
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of December. I would also like express
our appreciation for the initiative of the Niger to hold
today’s open debate.
We are steadfast in our commitment to addressing
the challenges posed by climate change and believe
that the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council, as well as the relevant international
conventions, especially the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change and the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change, remain the platforms
with the original mandate to address the climate crisis
in all its manifestations and the potential for finding the
solutions necessary to do so. However, given that climate
change is widely recognized as a threat multiplier and
a driver of conflict that affects the peace and stability
of several regions globally, it is important to address
the increasing connection between terrorism, climate
change and security.
It is crystal clear that international terrorism
is a threat to international peace and security as per
the relevant Security Council resolutions, notably
resolution 1373 (2001). In that regard, the international
community has undertaken clear and concrete efforts
in the collective response to international terrorism
through the myriad existing Council resolutions
and the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. Cognizant of that fact, Egypt has always
advocated stronger international cooperation to address
this threat.
Both terrorism and climate change are
transboundary key global challenges. Moreover, the
interlinkage between the adverse effects of climate
change and environmental degradation, on the one
hand, and the conditions conducive to terrorism and
extremism, on the other hand, is evident. The nexus
2/33

09/12/2021

between climate change-related repercussions such as
water scarcity, rising sea levels, desertification, land
degradation and biodiversity loss and other conditions
conducive to terrorism, including poverty and
unemployment, provides fertile ground for recruitment
and radicalization by terrorist groups. That results in a
multidimensional human security threat.
Africa is facing unprecedented pressure owing
to various extreme weather events related to climate
change. Those events include flash floods, heavy
rainfalls, forest fires, landslides and severe droughts,
which all cause displacements, migration and the loss of
the lives of thousands. In that context, the recent rise in
terrorist activities in different regions of the continent
can be considered a vivid example of how terrorist
organizations can exploit climate change-induced
challenges to expand their activities and operations.
In the light of that, Egypt believes that efforts to
combat terrorism and address the challenges posed by
climate change should be harmonized in a manner that
strengthens our collective response and consolidated
action to address all of those factors in conjunction
with those grave menaces.
In that connection, addressing the climate adaptation
needs of developing countries will enable a preventive
effect against terrorism. In some complex situations,
purely technical approaches to adaptation will fail to
address the socioeconomic variables that contribute
to conflict. Therefore, conflict-sensitive adaptation
that transcends technical responses should include
multidisciplinary projects to build comprehensive
resilience against the impacts of climate change and the
related security threats.
In conclusion, Egypt remains fully committed
to addressing the issue of security in the context of
terrorism and climate change. Moreover, Egypt looks
forward to hosting the twenty-seventh session of
the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change in 2022,
during which we will continue our global work towards
reaching concrete outcomes in relation to climate change
with a view to achieving sustainable development for
all developing countries while ensuring their peace,
security, stability and prosperity.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Malta.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): Malta thanks the Niger
for convening this high-level debate, which focuses
21-38592

09/12/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

on two phenomena that have distinctly marked the
contemporary world.
Malta strongly condemns the attack against the
convoy of United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali peacekeepers, and we
offer our heartfelt condolences to the families of the
victims. We underline the importance of ensuring
the safety and protection of peacekeepers, who are
operating under difficult conditions.
The threats posed by terrorism and climate change
are multidimensional and have a long-lasting impact on
our societies, economies and surrounding environment.
They threaten international peace and security and
require a concerted global response. The United Nations
system, including the Security Council, has actively
contributed to the establishment of a global framework
that supports the international community’s efforts
in analysing and dealing with the threat of terrorism.
Resolution 1373 (2001) and the establishment of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and its Executive
Directorate have strengthened our capacity to assess
that threat and current trends and tailor our policy
responses. That work helps Member States identify
gaps and implement the relevant Security Council
resolutions. The United Nations Office of CounterTerrorism and the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy are also indispensable tools that
integrate our counter-terrorism efforts across all pillars
of the United Nations.
Recent developments in the field of counterterrorism have underlined the role new technologies
have in spreading violent ideologies. The efforts to
change the trends and patterns of the spread of violent
extremism have also been impacted by the restrictions
brought about by the coronavirus disease pandemic.
We believe that multilateral cooperation remains vital
to enabling Member States to react to those evolving
realities. During the past year, we have seen an increase
in attacks and terrorism activity with an upward trend
in Africa in particular. That is concerning and deserves
the full attention of the international community.
Another issue that concerns us all and requires a
determined and united response by the international
community is climate change. The twenty-sixth session
of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change reinforced
the notion that climate change is a threat multiplier.
Terrorist activity, especially in the Sahel region, can

S/PV. 8923 (Resumption 1)

also be linked to climatic factors. When climate change
is compounded with sustained population growth,
floods or droughts can adversely impact natural
resources, thereby exacerbating competition over
dwindling resources. That often leads to unrest and,
eventually, a vacuum for terrorist groups to exploit. In
turn, that can also subsequently contribute to further
environmental degradation. To fully address the
interplay between climate change and terrorism, we
also need to consider the issues of poverty eradication
and sustained economic growth. Often, individuals
are much more likely to be recruited to join a terrorist
group for a potential alternate source of income.
Climate change impacts everyone, particularly
women and girls disproportionately, and when coupled
with the impacts of terrorism and violent extremism, it
can lead to devastating consequences. To confront such
pressing challenges, women must have their voices
heard. At the heart of ensuring that happens is the
women and peace and security agenda. We must create
conditions on the ground that are conducive to the
full, equal and meaningful participation of women and
girls in addressing such challenges as climate change
and terrorism.
Climate change will remain a security concern if
inaction prevails, and those on the front lines will bear
an unprecedented cost, especially African countries and
small island developing States. That is why, if entrusted
to serve on the Council for the 2023 to 2024 term, Malta
will make climate and security one of our priority
themes. Malta also thanks Ireland and the Niger for
their invaluable work on the draft resolution on climate
and security, which we are pleased to co-sponsor. We
look forward to the adoption of that important draft
resolution by the Security Council next week.
Any strategy to prevent or counter terrorism
should be aligned with our collective efforts to tackle
climate change in a holistic manner and to pre-empt
and mitigate its effects. The interplay between climate
and terrorism should lead us to identify solutions in a
concerted manner to these seemingly separate issues.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Manalo (Philippines): We congratulate
the Niger for assuming the presidency of the
Security Council.

21-385923/33

S/PV.8923 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

As an archipelagic State, the Philippines considers
the climate-security nexus a vital existential issue. We
have numerous low-lying coastal areas and communities
that are constantly threatened by weather disturbances
due to climate change. Addressing terrorism is an
immense challenge by itself. Climate change, combined
with terrorism, can worsen long-existing tensions
and exacerbate traditional drivers of conflict such as
poverty, political instability, ill-conceived domestic
policies and foreign interference. Climate disasters
can weaken States, a situation that terrorists can seize
to advance their goals. I would like to highlight the
following points.
First, developing better risk assessment and
mitigation strategies is important for climate-related
disasters. While the Philippines emits less than half
of 1 per cent of global emissions, we set the boldest
national goal at the recent twenty-sixth session of
the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change by
committing to reduce greenhouse-gas emissions by
75 per cent in 2030. We are also implementing and
continuously improving a comprehensive natural
disaster risk reduction and management plan.
Secondly,
international
cooperation
is
indispensable. Climate change knows no boundaries,
and we have no control of the actions and inaction
beyond our borders. Stronger synergies among
States through deeper international cooperation is
imperative. Regionally, the Philippines participates in
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
humanitarian assistance, which has strengthened
its cooperation in line with the “One ASEAN One
Response” approach. Globally, we are committed to the
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction and the
Paris Agreement on Climate Change.
Thirdly, there is a need to harness international
law. The impact of climate change on statehood and
security is far-reaching. It includes loss of territory,
displacement of populations, and the attendant tensions
over access to resources, livelihoods and services. In
terms of sea-level rise, the Philippines supports the work
of the International Law Commission, especially on the
principle of uti possidetis juris, a doctrine that favours
permanent maritime boundaries. The legal stability,
security, certainty and predictability of international
law makes it a welcome approach.
4/33

09/12/2021

Fourthly, climate-vulnerable countries like the
Philippines should receive the support and resources
they need from those most responsible for the climate
crisis to enable us to allocate more of our national
resources towards addressing the more traditional
drivers of conflicts.
Lastly, there is a need to fortify structures and
correct vulnerabilities that bear the initial impacts of
climate-related events, and which non-State actors such
as terrorists may take advantage of. Counter-terrorism
strategies and plans of action at the national, regional
or global levels must include aspects of climate change.
I wish to emphasize that the Security Council
should focus on considering security issues that result
from climate change and terrorism and refrain from
climate issues already being addressed by forums
such as the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change. There is a need for the Council
to carefully examine the dynamics between climate
change and terrorism. In addressing climate-related
security risks, it is also critical that all Member States
be involved in deciding the mechanisms and legal
frameworks that may eventually be put in place by the
United Nations. Any Security Council action on the
issue under consideration should consider those points.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Switzerland.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland thanks you, Mr. President, for convening
this open debate, and we commend the Niger on its
important contribution to the work of the Security
Council over the past two years.
The challenges of the fight against terrorism and
the impact of climate change on peace and security
in the Sahel are complex and require a concerted
response. The Council’s recent visit to Mali and the
Niger underlined that. Climate-related disasters have
affected nearly 4 billion people around the world over
the past decade. That devastation will only continue to
spread. The Council could create a coherent framework
for action in that regard by adopting a thematic
draft resolution, which Switzerland would welcome.
Switzerland associates itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the Group of Friends on Climate
and Security. In addition, we would like to highlight
three areas of action for the Council.
21-38592

09/12/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

First, natural disasters exacerbated by climate
change are already causing a great deal of turmoil,
including the displacement of persons, which
can cause tension and conflict. Their impacts are
disproportionately felt by women, children and those
who are most vulnerable. The Security Council should
take action based on international law and the rule
of law to address the security implications of climate
change. Broadly speaking, it remains important to
limit the global temperature rise to 1.5°C to reduce the
frequency and intensity of natural disasters and enable
peoples to adapt to climate change.
Secondly, climate change acts as a risk multiplier.
Switzerland welcomes the fact that several peacekeeping
and special political missions, including in the Sahel,
have incorporated the effects of climate change into
their mandates. Climate change-related security
risks should be sufficiently and more systematically
incorporated into peacekeeping operation mandates, as
well as in the context of transitions and withdrawals
of operations. In order to achieve that, the Council
should further leverage the resources available within
the United Nations system, as well as the advisory
role of the Peacebuilding Commission. Working with
academia, civil society and regional organizations
fosters new approaches that can steer the work of
Council. The peace and security agenda of the African
Union, for example, takes into account climate-related
security risks.
Thirdly, the Council has a role to play in breaking the
vicious cycle of conflict and the emergence of terrorism
and violent extremism. Switzerland strongly condemns
terrorism in all its forms. It is crucial that measures
to combat terrorism be developed and implemented in
strict compliance with international law, in particular
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law. When developing such measures, the
Council must ensure in particular that they do not have
a negative impact on humanitarian activities.
As a candidate for the Security Council, Switzerland
remains firmly committed to combating the adverse
effects of climate change on peace and security. We
continue to take an active part in ensuring that people
can live in security and with dignity.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Luxembourg.
Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg thanks the presidency of the Niger for

S/PV. 8923 (Resumption 1)

having organized this important open debate of the
Security Council. We also thank the Secretary-General,
the President of the Niger and the Heads of the African
Union and Lake Chad Basin Commissions for informing
the debate by providing us with their insights.
Luxembourg fully associates itself with the
statements to be delivered by on behalf of the Group of
Friends on Climate and Security, and by observer of the
European Union. Allow me now to add a few elements
in my national capacity.
Increasingly, in-depth scientific studies are
establishing a causal link between the depletion of
natural resources, accelerated in particular by climate
change, and emerging tensions in several regions of the
world. In the Sahel region in particular, in a context
of population growth and increasingly limited access
to natural resources, climate change is exacerbating
the vulnerability of populations. It is estimated that
temperatures are rising 1.5 times faster in the Sahel
than in the rest of the world.
Climate change is contributing to the scarcity
of fertile land and water resources and, in turn, to
increased competition between communities to access
those resources, which is multiplying tensions and the
risk of conflict in an ecologically fragile area. Granting
rural populations access to rights to their agricultural
and pastoral lands so that they can invest in and cultivate
them sustainably, and helping those populations to
restore degraded ecosystems, would contribute not
only to preventing conflict but also to reducing poverty
and achieving sustainable development. Addressing
the root causes of problems is the only way for us to
achieve lasting solutions.
There is consistent evidence that terrorist groups in
the Sahel are targeting the most marginalized segments
of society to recruit young fighters. Addressing this
challenge requires action from the international
community on two levels: first, it must support the
establishment of effective and democratic institutions
to ensure the inclusive and equitable governance of
natural resources; and secondly, it must continue to
commit to the capacity-building of security forces
to enable affected States to combat terrorism more
effectively. Luxembourg is contributing to that dual
effort. As a leading partner in support of the Niger’s
water and sanitation sector, Luxembourg is working
with the Nigerien authorities to strengthen inclusive
public water services in fragile areas through a bottom-

21-385925/33

S/PV.8923 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

up approach by helping to strengthen institutions at the
local level.
In addition, in cooperation with the European
Institute of Peace and several local actors, we plan to
support a project in the Liptako-Gourma region, on the
border between Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger, to
study different models of natural resource governance
and identify critical success factors to support their
application elsewhere.
Given the undeniable link between the adverse
effects of climate change and international peace and
security, we believe it is essential that the Security
Council, peacekeeping missions and special political
missions take into account the security implications of
climate change in their analyses and actions.
Like many Member States, Luxembourg urges
the Council to pay due attention to the link between
climate, natural resources and security. In that respect,
we welcome the draft resolution on climate and security
presented by Ireland and the Niger. Luxembourg has
decided to co-sponsor this important draft resolution,
which we hope the Security Council will soon be able
to adopt.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Ms. Leendertse (Germany): It is my honour
to deliver this statement on behalf of the Group of
Friends on Climate and Security, a group of almost
60 members from all regions of the world united by a
common concern.
Climate change is the defining challenge of our
time. The effects of climate change pose, inter alia,
serious challenges to peace, security, stability and
prosperity; to the effective enjoyment of human rights;
and, in some cases, even to the existence of States and
the physical lives of their citizens. We therefore strongly
welcome the Security Council’s increasing attention to
that threat and are grateful to the Niger, as President of
the Council, for convening this important debate.
The twenty-sixth session of the Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change was a milestone. The world came
together to limit global warming, and we must all now
persevere and redouble our efforts to keep within reach
of the 1.5°C limit. At the same time, it is clear that
the climate is already changing; the effects of climate
change are being felt around the world. Irrespective of
6/33

09/12/2021

our best efforts at mitigation, we also need to prepare
for the negative effects of climate change. In particular,
we must do more to increase countries’ ability to adapt
to the impacts of climate change and prevent its effects
from contributing to the destabilization of countries
and entire regions, which risks contributing, in specific
contexts, to new armed conflicts, worsening existing
conflicts and helping to create breeding ground for
violent extremism and terrorism. The Security Council
has a crucial role to play in that regard.
Building climate-resilient systems that support
peace and stability urgently requires a much more
concerted international effort and, in that regard, we
welcome the African Union’s strong engagement and
the recent landmark decision on climate change of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe. The entire United Nations system must address
this challenge in all relevant forums and within all
relevant mandates. The United Nations is already doing
important work to achieve that. The Climate Security
Mechanism enhances the capacity of the United Nations
system to analyse and address the adverse impacts of
climate change on peace and security through effective
inter-agency cooperation. The Secretary-General’s
report Our Common Agenda (A/75/982) rightly calls for
an increased focus on the effects of climate change on
peace and security.
The Security Council has the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
We welcome the progress made in that regard, including
the recognition of the effects of climate change
when considering a growing number of mandates for
peacekeeping and special political missions. The work
of the Informal Expert Group on Climate and Security,
comprised of Council members, has proved invaluable
in informing the Council’s work. Yet more needs to
be done to ensure a more structured and systematic
approach and to create the tools necessary to enable the
United Nations to do its part in preventing and resolving
conflicts that are, at least in part, driven by the effects
of climate change.
We therefore strongly welcome the thematic draft
resolution that has been put forward. We urge the
Council to adopt it swiftly. It would provide the muchneeded framework to translate proposals repeatedly
made by the Group of Friends into tangible action
that would enhance the United Nations risk analysis,
capacity-building and operational response.
21-38592

09/12/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

Climate change is a threat to international peace
and security that no nation can face alone. We must act
together, and we must act now. The Security Council
must live up to its primary responsibility under the
Charter of the United Nations to address threats to
international peace and security. It should adopt a draft
resolution that will allow the Council to address threats
to peace and security that climate change poses and
will increasingly pose.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the European Union, in its
capacity as observer.
Mr. Gonzato: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States. The
candidate countries the Republic of North Macedonia,
Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the country of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine,
the Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves
with this statement.
(spoke in French)
Allow me to thank the Niger for organizing this
open debate and giving us the opportunity to contribute
to this complex discussion.
(spoke in English)
As highlighted in the report of the Secretary-General
Our Common Agenda (A/75/982), climate change is
contributing to instability and is affecting livelihoods,
access to resources and human mobility trends. For an
effective response, the human rights, development and
peace and security pillars of the United Nations must
work closer together at all levels. Moreover, we must
not forget the linkages between those issues and gender
inequality, or the imperative to continue to include
young people in the discussions and decision-making
processes, given that they will feel the effects of
climate change the most. We continue to encourage the
development of a comprehensive information basis to
fully integrate climate and environmental risk factors
in the assessment and management of threats to peace
and security, including radicalization to terrorism and
violent extremism.
We would like to reiterate our support for the
adoption of a Security Council draft resolution on climate
and security. That is an opportunity for the Council
to strengthen its ability to understand and address
climate-related security risks, within its mandate. In

S/PV. 8923 (Resumption 1)

that context, we also applaud the work of the Informal
Expert Group on Climate and Security and of the Group
of Friends of Climate and Security. The United Nations
system has been making important strides through its
Climate Security Mechanism towards the integration
of climate and security considerations in its analysis,
planning and implementation in field missions. We
encourage the United Nations to continue working on
ambitious mitigation and adaptation measures in its
field missions.
Hazards can be prevented from turning into
disasters by building resilience. As part of the European
Green Deal, the EU is enhancing adaptive capacity,
strengthening resilience and reducing vulnerability
with a new, more ambitious EU strategy on adaptation
to climate change, which was adopted earlier this year.
In that regard, the EU and its member States reiterate
their commitment to continuing to take into account
climate and environmental factors and risks in our
strategic engagement with partner countries and work
on preventive measures such as early-warning systems.
That is particularly relevant to our work with African
partners, in line with our strategies for regions such as
the Sahel, the Lake Chad basin and the Horn of Africa.
The EU is working closely with African countries
to support their efforts to achieve peace, security and
development. A good example of our activities in the
nexus of climate and security is our “FREXUS” project,
on improving security and climate resilience in a fragile
context through the water-energy-food security Nexus
in Mali, the Niger and Chad. The European Union will
continue to explore ways of enhancing cooperation
with the African Union (AU) and trilateral cooperation
among the EU, the AU and the United Nations in order
to tackle those crucial challenges.
Finally, we must ensure that our policymaking
is based on evidence. We emphasize the importance
of further analysing the correlation between climatic
factors and terrorism to ensure that our policies account
for the experiences of the communities most at risk and
that are not counterproductive. We must be equipped
with the most appropriate tools to face the challenges
ahead of us. The European Union and its member States
express our readiness to contribute further to this
important topic.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.

21-385927/33

S/PV.8923 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Massari (Italy): First of all, I would like to
express my solidarity and support to the Niger and to the
Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel in the light
of the terrorist attacks perpetrated this past Sunday. I
also offer my deepest condolences to the families of the
peacekeepers who were victims of yesterday’s terrorist
attack against the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali.
Italy thanks the Niger for convening this timely
debate and aligns itself with the statements delivered by
the representative of Germany, on behalf of the Group
of Friends on Climate and Security, and by the observer
of the European Union.
The adverse effects of climate change are posing
a serious threat to international peace and security.
We all need the redouble our efforts to heighten the
Security Council’s attention to the climate-security
nexus and its implications on terrorism. Climate change
is a threat multiplier that has negative environmental
and economic impacts, which aggravate existing
social vulnerabilities. More intense and frequent
extreme weather events in many parts of the world are
reducing the capacity of populations, especially those
in situations of armed conflict, violence or fragility,
to cope with the climate shocks that carry dramatic
humanitarian consequences. Furthermore, climate
change often exacerbates internal conflicts and induces
part of the population to migrate. Those phenomena,
even when they are not directly linked to international
terrorism, contribute to creating fertile ground for
violent extremism.
There is therefore an undeniable link between
climate change and rising insecurity. In many areas of the
African continent and the Middle East, climate change
already has serious security implications. Terrorist
activities are becoming more frequent in countries
experiencing desertification and environmental
degradation. To counter the root causes of terrorism
and its ever-growing negative consequences in regions
affected by climate change, it is vital to strengthen
international corporation, particularly in areas of
conflict or post-conflict situations, to support the
provision of essential services to local populations.
Italy contributes to several international
programmes aimed at building the resilience of
communities affected by terrorism, such as the Global
Community Engagement and Resilience Fund, which
supports local initiatives to address the drivers of violent
8/33

09/12/2021

extremism. Moreover, we strongly believe that the role
of United Nations peacekeeping missions cannot be
limited to a military perspective. In formulating the
mandates for peacekeeping missions, we must pursue
a holistic approach that ensures that they are carried
out in the field in an efficient and sustainable way,
including in terms of their environmental impacts. For
that reason, in February 2018, together with Bangladesh,
we launched the Group of Friends on Leading
Environmental Management in the Field, which focuses
on mitigating the environmental footprint of United
Nations peacekeeping missions.
In conclusion, I wish to express Italy’s support for
strengthened cooperation on climate change, security
and counter-terrorism within all the organs of the with
United Nations, starting with the Security Council,
which has the primary responsibility for international
peace and security.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Portugal.
Mr. Duarte Lopes (Portugal): At the outset, allow
me to thank you, Mr. President, for convening us in
such a timely manner.
Like Italy, we also align ourselves with the
statements delivered by the representative of Germany,
on behalf of the Group of Friends on Climate and
Security, and by observer of the European Union.
The climate-security nexus has been gaining
prominence in the global agenda. Higher sea levels,
more severe floods, longer periods of drought and the
increasing scarcity of resources are already taking their
heavy toll in many countries. That is most evident in
small island developing States and in Africa, including
in the regions of the Sahel, the Lake Chad basin and the
Horn of Africa.
When climate hazards hit, vulnerable groups
suffer disproportionate losses. As such, those
phenomena are at the root of growing inequality and
migration movements, hindering food and water
and security and tensions among communities. All
those factors are risk multipliers. When poverty and
unemployment are exacerbated by competition for
acquiring scarce resources, those conditions can be
exploited by terrorist organizations for recruitment and
radicalization. Climate change therefore contributes
to the perpetuation a vicious circle and can be fully
addressed only with the contribution of every country
21-38592

09/12/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

and by ensuring cooperation at the multilateral level.
The Secretary-General’s report Our Common Agenda
(A/75/982) rightly calls for an increased focus on the
effects of climate change on peace and security.
Portugal is in favour of more systematic
involvement by the Security Council with regard to the
climate-security nexus. We therefore strongly support
the adoption of a cross-cutting draft resolution on climate
and security, as put forward by Ireland and the Niger.
In that context, peacebuilding efforts should include in
their design the strengthening of countries’ capacities
to adapt to the adverse impacts of climate change. The
mandates of United Nations peacekeeping operations
and special political missions should continue to assess
climate-related security risks and devise appropriate
responses, including conflict prevention tools, and
take into account climate risks across United Nations
early-warning and planning processes. We should
pursue efforts to reduce the environmental footprint
of peacemaking operations, and we also encourage the
inclusion of the climate-security nexus in the horizontal
agendas of the Council, with a particular focus on the
women and peace and security and the youth, peace and
security agendas.
In conclusion, tackling the adverse impacts of
climate change and preventing and combating terrorism
to safeguard international security will demand a
broad and innovative perspective, both by individual
countries and by the United Nations system as a whole.
Given its historical role and concrete responsibilities,
the Security Council should take a decisive lead in
this effort.

S/PV. 8923 (Resumption 1)

and terrorism together creating pockets of unstable
territory that are springboards for terrorist attacks and
knock-on effects, like resource competition, on a wide
range of countries. Given that transnational threat, we
would like to highlight two potential actions for the
Security Council.
First, enhanced data collection and analysis on
climate security would help to guide Council members
and other actors in their response to threats, including
in improving early-warning capabilities. The relatively
modest steps of standardized reporting to the Council
and stronger in-country analytical capacity would
position the Council to act more effectively. However, we
must ensure that reporting and resources are prioritized
for the situations where climate is clearly relevant.
Secondly, the Council’s climate action and counterterrorism work must be gender- and age-sensitive. That
is critical to achieving outcomes that enable resilience
and recovery and address the full needs of an affected
population. Quotas, gender and youth advisers, gender
and age markers and women and youth advisory boards
are all proven tools from United Nations peace missions
that ensure inclusion. Climate security advisers in
peace missions, by design, must also work hand in
hand with advisory capacities, like gender, to ensure
coherent engagement and protection strategies.

Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates): The
United Arab Emirates is grateful to the Niger, and
President Mohamed Bazoum in particular, for bringing
the Security Council’s attention to the critical interplay
between climate change, terrorism and extremism.
We would also like to thank the briefers for their
valuable input.

We must bear in mind, however, that climate
security inherently requires the engagement of the wider
United Nations system. We cannot overemphasize,
for instance, the link between the collapse of fragile
food-producing communities and increased insecurity,
including violent extremism and terrorism. It
behooves Member States to encourage the World Food
Programme, the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations, the United Nations Development
Programme, the World Bank and other actors to sharply
increase their budgeting and programming for those
communities. Similarly, we would hope to see counterterrorism actors incorporate climate stress as a factor
when considering early-warning and capacity-building
assistance in fragile settings.

The nexus between climate change, terrorism and
extremism calls for action. Even if indirect, there is a
connection between climate impacts — from migration
to unemployment — and the feelings of helplessness,
resentment and loss of faith in governance systems
that contributes to terrorist recruitment. There are,
furthermore, already examples of climate stress

However, the responsibility of those actors for
large parts of the climate-security response does not
diminish the urgency of the Council’s leadership.
This open debate reinforces the importance of a
consensus-based resolution on climate security. We
see two fundamental principles behind the drive for a
resolution: first, better context-specific analysis and

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the United Arab Emirates.

21-385929/33

S/PV.8923 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

reporting for the Council on those agenda items where
climate is a relevant factor and, secondly, increased
international support for response measures as per an
affected Government’s request.
We are optimistic that all Council members can
support those principles, and we are committed to
continuing the work to frame and act on climate security
in a way that the full Council can accept, without
sacrificing the needs of vulnerable communities and
regions. A unanimous call for action by the custodian of
international peace and security would send a powerful
message. The United Arab Emirates is committed to
achieving consensus that allows for that outcome.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of El Salvador.
Mrs. González López (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): The Republic of El Salvador thanks the Niger,
in its capacity as President of the Security Council for
this month, for organizing this important open debate.
My country is not unfamiliar with the challenges
posed by climate change and its adverse impacts,
which affect the environment, food security, economic
development and quality of life, generating higher rates
of vulnerability and instability in the population. That
situation, if not dealt with in a timely manner, could
translate into violence and social and political instability.
Those conditions are conducive to the development and
strengthening of terrorist groups, which also represents
a risk to international peace and security.
Furthermore, the prevention of violent extremism
and the fight against terrorism and transnational
organized crime are challenges that must be addressed
while taking into account the link with other structural
factors that affect the environment, food security, social
and economic development and the quality of life of all
human beings.
Therefore, climate change and the fight against
terrorism, isolated phenomena at first glance, are
related and threaten the aspirations for peace and
security of the countries of the world, as well as the
efforts to achieve a sound, healthy and sustainable
environment. As a founding Member of the United
Nations, El Salvador reiterates its commitment and
support to initiatives that promote international peace
and security, including those aimed at the fight against
terrorism and transnational organized crime, as well as
10/33

09/12/2021

others aimed at strengthening peacekeeping operations
that support political and stabilization processes.
My country also recognizes that many areas
in conflict situations face violence and instability
and, in some cases, must also face the consequences
caused by droughts, floods, cyclones, forest fires and
deforestation, to mention only a few natural phenomena
that aggravate their situation.
My delegation also wishes to express its grave
concern over the actions of terrorist groups and
transnational criminal groups, which generate suffering
and result in the loss of life of many, particularly
those from vulnerable population groups, such as
women, children, older persons, indigenous people,
migrants and people with disabilities. For that reason,
El Salvador calls on the international community to
join national, regional and multilateral efforts to seek,
through international cooperation, concrete solutions
to those devastating issues.
Undoubtedly, we see how terrorism increases in
the absence of effective agreements and the capacity to
address the underlying causes and social and political
complexities, as well as because of its interrelation with
the adverse effects caused by climate change. In that
respect, such complexities must be recognized in order
to adopt effective strategies aimed at their prevention.
El Salvador urges that the profound linkages between
climate, socioeconomic and international security
realities be duly studied and taken into consideration
in the context of the ongoing reviews of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, as well as
in the formulation of peacekeeping mandates. At the
same time, my country advocates the strengthening
of international cooperation mechanisms, through the
United Nations system and its funds and programmes,
such as the United Nations Environment Programme,
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, the World Food Programme, UNICEF and
UN-Women, in direct coordination with national and
local authorities.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Maldives.
Ms. Hussain (Maldives): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important high-level debate on
security in the context of terrorism and climate change.
As a low-lying island nation, the Maldives has
long been dealing with the impacts of climate change.
21-38592

09/12/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

Moreover, having faced the threat of terrorism and
extremism, just like many other countries across the
globe, we appreciate the opportunity to share our
perspectives here today.
The Maldives stands at the front lines of climate
change. Comprised of over 1,200 small islands in
the Indian Ocean, stretching across the equator, our
highest elevation is only six feet above sea level. Our
economy, culture — whole life — is built around
our ocean, fisheries, coral reefs and our beautiful
beaches. We have lived on these magnificent islands in
harmony with nature for thousands of years, Today the
anthropogenic impacts of climate change put our very
existence at stake. The effects of climate change, such
as coral bleaching, ocean acidification, global rise in
temperatures and the corresponding rise in sea level,
greatly impact our lives. Climate change is altering the
rain and monsoon patterns necessary for our limited
agricultural yields. Our tourism industry, our fisheries,
our rich biodiversity, responsible for over 80 per cent of
our gross domestic product and over 90 per cent of our
exports, are also impacted and imperilled. Our very life
and future generations are threatened. What world will
our children inherit?
The burdens of climate change and the resulting
degradation of our natural resources place an
unbearable burden on small countries such as the
Maldives, consuming an ever-increasing portion of our
fiscal and human capacity, our clean water, sanitation,
food, housing and health care — all the necessities of
an enduring and durable peaceful society. Furthermore,
allow me to highlight that women and children often
bear a disproportionate burden from those impacts.
The causes of terrorism are often complex. The
Maldives realizes the impacts of climate change, added
to the aftermaths of a terrorist attack, play a role in
leaving many people despondent and vulnerable. We
have therefore taken a whole-of-society approach
to addressing it through our national strategy on
preventing and countering violent extremism. That
involves building a more cohesive society, while
strengthening and empowering our communities and
increasing their resilience. It addresses hate speech,
xenophobia and related intolerances in order to teach
values of respect and acceptance. We believe that our
youth must have opportunities to realize their full
potential. In view of a bleak future, disillusionment
arises, with the potential for extremism. Terrorism and
violent extremism are pressing global issues, and we

S/PV. 8923 (Resumption 1)

must remain vigilant in addressing their root causes,
both domestically and internationally.
If the current issues related to climate change and
terrorism continue, we will face a future of increasing
violence and the possible breakdown of societies. Those
climate impacts will manifest themselves in different
forms in different contexts — droughts, floods, fires,
deforestation, soil loss or sea level rise. Whatever the
specific impacts, resource contention, mass migrations
and other consequences of our climate breakdown
drive radicalization.
The Maldives condemns terrorism in all its forms
and reiterates its steadfast commitment to work with
the international community to counter terrorism and
violent extremism in a coordinated and comprehensive
manner. That should be a multidimensional approach
involving
domestic
and
international
efforts
because these issues transcend national borders. To
implement effective strategies to combat terrorism,
we must address the root causes and drivers of violent
extremism, including climate change. We must also put
in place the regional and multilateral mechanisms to
share information and work together to address this
growing concern.
In that spirit, the Maldives welcomes the draft
resolution initiated by the Niger and Ireland on climate
and security and is pleased to join as a co-sponsor. The
draft resolution is an essential step in capturing the
important work of the Council on the nexus of climate
and security and in taking steps to continue to ensure
that the Security Council and the United Nations system
more broadly continue to consider this vital linkage.
We look forward to continuing to engage on this
issue and to build a shared understanding and consensus.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Netherlands.
Ms. Brandt (Netherlands): The Kingdom of the
Netherlands aligns itself with the statements made on
behalf of the European Union and by the representative
of Germany on behalf of the Group of Friends on
Climate and Security. I make these additional remarks
in my national capacity.
I would like to start by thanking the Niger for
organizing today’s debate on the issue of security in the
context of terrorism and climate change.

21-3859211/33

S/PV.8923 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

The climate crisis is arguably the greatest challenge
of our time. It threatens to uproot entire communities
and to be a catalyst for conflict. We already see this
happening in various parts of the world, such as in the
Sahel region. Given the Council’s responsibility for
maintaining peace and security, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands sees a clear role for the Security Council
when it comes to addressing the security implications
that result from climate change in a more effective and
systematic way. Although the impact of climate change
is felt worldwide, it disproportionately affects already
disenfranchised and marginalized communities.
We need to better understand its impact on creating
conditions that could lead to increased radicalization
and the creation of a breeding ground for terrorism.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands believes we need
to integrate climate considerations in the work of the
United Nations on peace and security every step of the
way. Allow me to briefly highlight two points.
First, we must focus on holistic prevention
approaches. Too often, counter-terrorism efforts are
predominantly informed by the security dimension.
It is clear that imminent terrorist threats require an
imminent response. However, we must also look past
the imminent threats and focus on the longer-term goal
of prevention. For that, we need holistic prevention
approaches, including wider peacebuilding efforts that
help communities and countries to build resilience and
adapt to the impacts of climate change, all with human
rights and gender equality at its core. In that way,
development, climate and prevention objectives can be
achieved at the same time.
Secondly, we must strengthen the knowledge bases.
Some of the countries that are most impacted by terrorist
attacks, like those in the Sahel and Horn of Africa, are
also among the most vulnerable to climate change and
often lack the means and capacity to adequately address
this. It is therefore crucial to better understand whether
and how investing in climate solutions can also have an
effect on the factors that will move individuals towards
joining or supporting violent extremist groups, as well
as on wider conflict issues. To that end, the Netherlands,
together with Germany, will organize a conference in
February 2022 with the aim of better understanding
the dynamics of violent extremism in West Africa.
We look forward to strong participation and improved
coordination and cooperation on this topic, particularly,
of course, from and with the countries in the region.
12/33

09/12/2021

In conclusion, climate-related security risks require
our sustained attention. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
therefore welcomes the thematic draft resolution on this
matter, which we proudly co-sponsor, and look forward
to its adoption by the Council, hopefully on Monday.
We stand ready to continue working with all Member
States on this.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Greece.
Mrs. Theofili (Greece): At the outset, we wish
to congratulate the Niger for convening this very
important and timely meeting.
Greece aligns itself with the statement made by
the observer of the European Union (EU) and by the
representative of Germany on behalf of the Group of
Friends on Climate and Security.
The climate crisis is one of the greatest challenges
of our time, and a complex one. Moreover, acting as
a threat multiplier, it can affect peace, stability and
security, increasing the risk of hunger and poverty.
Its impacts are no longer a distant eventuality, but a
present reality. No country is immune to the direct and
indirect consequences of climate change. In Greece and
throughout the Mediterranean, catastrophic forest fires,
diminishing water resources, progressively prolonged
seasonal droughts and floods pose a serious threat to
sectors such as agriculture, fisheries and tourism. That
is the main reason that a new climate crisis ministry
was created this year to address all the relevant issues
comprehensively and holistically.
Raising climate ambition and intensifying climate
action is now more needed than ever in order to prevent
the worst-case scenarios forecasted by scientists. As
our Prime Minister announced in his intervention at
the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change in Glasgow,
our plans for a cleaner environment include the closing
of all our lignite power plants by 2028 at the latest,
banning single-usage plastics across the country from
2021 on, decarbonizing key sectors such as shipping
and tourism, enhancing investments in renewable
energies, turning our islands into self-sustaining green
communities and protecting our seas and mountains
more intensively from environmental degradation. Our
Government strongly supports the strategic long-term
vision for a climate-neutral EU economy by 2050. For
us, it is not just an obligation but also an opportunity.
21-38592

09/12/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

Since climate and security challenges are crosscutting, a holistic approach is necessary to address their
dimensions at the same time, and the United Nations
should play a central role in that regard. Furthermore,
we need to upgrade our knowledge base, which will
lead to improved risk assessment and more effective
field-level policies. At the same time, climate security
concerns have to be integrated into early-warning
and conflict prevention systems for more effective
prevention of future crises.
We should not let entire communities in the most
vulnerable countries become prey to the inflammatory
rhetoric of terrorist and extremist groups. In that
regard, more extensive fact-finding research is needed
to establish connections between the rise of extremist
groups, as reflected in the concept paper (S/2021/988,
annex), and the adverse climatic events that affect the
same regions, especially in Africa and the Sahel.
In conclusion, if we fail to reduce emissions and
build our capacity to cope, the impact of climate change
will become more acute and will lead to insecurity and
instability. By investing in resilience and adaptation
efforts along with mitigation and by explicitly linking
climate action today with a more secure tomorrow, we
can strengthen our response to climate change while
ensuring a safer and more peaceful and prosperous
future for people and our planet.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Poland.
Mr. Szczerski (Poland): Poland aligns itself with
the statement of the European Union. In addition, as
a member of the Group of Friends on Climate and
Security, we fully support the statement delivered
today on behalf of the Group.
Terrorism and extremism remain a key threat to
security, stability and peace. No country or region is free
from it. Recent years have shown that, in many cases, a
driver of terrorism — and of conflicts in general — are
the deteriorating environmental conditions caused by
climate change. The nexus between climate change,
poverty and terrorism is particularly visible in
developing countries with fragile State institutions.
Climate change threatens the stability of many regions
of the world. It will increasingly exacerbate conflicts
over natural resources. That in turn opens the way for
the infiltration of the vulnerable populations by terrorist
organizations. A dire result of the instability driven by
climate change can be uncontrolled migration, exploited

S/PV. 8923 (Resumption 1)

by human trafficking groups or control orchestrated by
the States. Poland strongly condemns such activities.
We consider the United Nations to be the key
international forum on counter-terrorism issues,
which we have stressed on many occasions, including
as a non-permanent Member of the Security Council
in 2018 and 2019. We commend the growing number
of United Nations activities and efforts in the field of
counter-terrorism undertaken despite the coronavirus
disease pandemic. Acting one-step ahead of terrorists,
especially in the light of a changing environment and the
use of the new technologies, is crucial for maintaining
regional and global security.
The experience of the international community calls
for a multidisciplinary, multi-agency and integrated
approach in order to tackle terrorism effectively,
while ensuring that any measures taken respect human
rights and fundamental freedoms. We stand ready to
contribute our share and to work hard with all here in
order to minimize terrorist threats globally.
The challenges of climate change, instability and
terrorism have to be at the core of our joint efforts
within the international community. That requires a
two-pillar approach: fighting terrorism on the ground
and fighting its sources — not the least of which being
the consequences of climate change. In that regard,
we believe that the entire United Nations system must
address the issue of climate and security in all relevant
forums. I would like to emphasize that Poland continues
to support the inclusion of the climate-security nexus in
the formal work of the Security Council.
We join the call of many delegations speaking today
for concrete tangible actions to be considered by the
Security Council. The adoption of the thematic draft
resolution on climate and security would serve as an
important and very much welcomed step in that regard.
In that context, I would like to recall that in three weeks
Poland will start its chairmanship of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE),
the world’s largest regional security organization.
Bearing in mind the OSCE’s comprehensive concept of
security, we would like to praise the recent adoption
of the new OSCE ministerial decision on strengthening
cooperation to address the challenges caused by climate
change, which brings momentum to the OSCE’s work in
that regard. With that decision, the OSCE participating
States have confirmed that finding a consensual
approach to the issue of climate change — which may

21-3859213/33

S/PV.8923 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

negatively affect prosperity, stability and security — in
the OSCE area is possible.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Albania.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Let me thank the Niger for
organizing this high-level open debate. The topic could
not be timelier. We thank the Secretary-General for his
insightful remarks this morning, and all other briefers
for bringing us a better view and closer to the realities
on the ground.
Climate Change is without a doubt the major
challenge of our time. It has profound and adverse
consequences for peace and security, our well-being
and ultimately our survival. We need no longer wait
for proof since we have far too many recent examples,
including in our own vicinity — as the representative
of Greece highlighted earlier. Those examples have
convincingly shown how climate change is affecting
every aspect of life, everywhere, causing huge
economic downturns, throwing thousands back into
extreme poverty, provoking migration and displacement
and making those affected more vulnerable of being
recruited and used by terrorist groups.
We are concerned by the findings of the annual
assessment report of the United Nations counterterrorism
mechanism,
the
Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate and the Office of
Counter-Terrorism, which emphasized that the number
of cases of individuals being recruited by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), Al-Qaida, Boko
Haram and the like belonging to families living in bad
environmental conditions has increased. Even more
concerning are the findings of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change, which show that climate
disruption caused by human activities is widespread
and intensifying. We cannot ignore that.
Under those circumstances, we strongly believe
that there is an urgent need to increase efforts and to
take concrete action to address climate change and
climate-related risks in the context of international
peace and security. That is why we think that the United
Nations system, and the Security Council in particular,
should play a greater role in addressing, properly and
continuously, the climate-related risks to international
peace and security.
The Council should fully integrate knowledge of
climate-related risks into all aspects of its work. In
14/33

09/12/2021

that regard we welcome the draft resolution initiated
by Ireland and the Niger calling for a more systematic
United Nations analysis of climate security, including
on the security implications of climate change for the
regions and countries on the Council’s agenda. Albania
co-sponsored the draft resolution. We hope the Council
will be able to adopt this concrete landmark initiative,
showing that the Council is there when people and the
world need it.
Albania is working hard to achieve the United
Nations global goal to reduce greenhouse-gas emissions
by 45 per cent in the next decade, and to achieve netzero emissions by 2050, in accordance with Paris
Agreement. Our national strategy on climate change and
the mitigation action plan on greenhouse-gas emissions
is at the core of our development road map. Aware that
climate-related security risks to international peace
and security are real and increasing, Albania has
defined climate change as one of its priorities in the
Security Council for our term starting in January 2022.
In that context, we will work to better integrate the
climate-security nexus in the Security Council agenda.
(spoke in French)
In conclusion, I wish to recall that our children
and future generations will, rightfully and with good
reason, hold us to account for our action or inaction on
climate change. We now regret not having done more
20 or 30 years ago. We believe in human wisdom and
the capacity of humankind to learn from its mistakes,
correct its course and take due action. That is why we
stand ready to join forces with like-minded countries
in taking this agenda further. Albania will continue to
be an active and proactive member in upholding and
promoting the climate and security agenda.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Chile.
Mr. Ruidíaz Pérez (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the Niger for organizing this open debate. We
also thank the President of the Niger for being here
to preside over this meeting, as well as the briefers
for their contributions this morning. This meeting
presents a timely opportunity to exchange observations
and analyse the issue of security, terrorism and
climate change.
This year, we saw the information that scientists
and experts gave us with respect to the acceleration
of climate change and its irreversible consequences.
21-38592

09/12/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

That data must be used to make the best decisions in
pursuit of development and international security. This
phenomenon must be considered in a multidimensional
way. As has been established, climate change and
environmental degradation can aggravate international
conflicts and affect peace and stability and, in the
most unprotected areas, put food security at risk,
trigger migration and refugee flows and expose already
vulnerable groups to other threats. It is therefore clear
that the various aspects and consequences of climate
change must be addressed.
The role of cooperation in the international
community and multilateral action are essential for that
purpose. Without that, any national effort is undertaken
in vain. For that reason, it is essential to strengthen
the information-exchange mechanisms among the
various relevant agencies and bodies, including police
units, financial and terrorism-prevention units that
are sometimes also connected to these situations. It
should also be emphasized that international judicial
cooperation is key to avoiding impunity for those
responsible for terrorist acts. It is also important to
respect and comply with the resolutions issued by the
various sanctions committees of the Security Council.
These debates are important, just as, on previous
occasions, we have also discussed the relationship
between climate change and peacekeeping and
peacebuilding operations. It is important to conduct
further research on the link between climate change and
international security, based on evidence, particularly
with a focus on the most vulnerable regions and groups.
Initiatives on climate change and international security
must also take into account the views of affected
communities, which may, and often do, suffer the
effects of these phenomena and their consequences,
with fewer resources to protect themselves from the
same. That will strengthen sustainable results and
avoid the intensification of these scourges.
Finally, I would like to highlight that a report on the
link between security and climate change is currently
being considered in my country, within the context
of multidimensional threats. Chile has incorporated
climate change within its 2017 National Defence Book
and its 2020 National Defence Policy among the new
global challenges for security and defence.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Lebanon.

S/PV. 8923 (Resumption 1)

Ms. Mudallali (Lebanon): I would like to
congratulate the Niger on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council this month. We
welcome the presence of the President of the Republic
of the Niger, who presided over the debate this morning.
We also pay tribute to Mexico for its successful
presidency in November. And we thank the SecretaryGeneral and the other briefers for their contributions
this morning.
Today’s open debate attests to the increased focus
placed on the impact of climate change on peace and
security. We all know that the Council does not have
consensus on this issue, but I am sure as the evidence
accumulates daily around us, and as there is an urgent
need to work together to mitigate the harmful impact
of climate change on our planet, that we will find unity
and consensus again, especially on the issue of climate
and security.
While the world is still struggling to emerge from a
pandemic that has compounded existing challenges and
threats, it has become clear that climate change puts an
additional strain on such challenges and threats. That
is especially the case with countries already severely
affected by economic and social challenges, and that
are already hit by water scarcity, droughts, fires and
floods, as is the case in the Horn of Africa, where
climate-induced events are driving people out of their
homes and villages and leading to threats of social
upheaval and instability. An article in the current issue
of Foreign Policy paints a very bleak picture of the
devastating impact of climate change on sub-Saharan
Africa, where 40 per cent of internal displacement in
2019 was due to natural disasters. As the SecretaryGeneral put it in his report Our Common Agenda,
“The disastrous effects of a changing
climate — famine, floods, fires and extreme
heat
—
threaten
our
very
existence.”
(A/75/982, summary)
We see that in many places around the world, and not
only in Africa.
Severe climate negatively impacts peace and
security by fuelling more instability, risking leading
to further conflict and violence, and pushing more
people towards poverty and marginalization. We know
that terrorist and violent extremist groups are on the
lookout for grievances and injustice to exploit. We
have consistently recalled the imperative to tackle root
causes of conflict and instability. The disruption in the

21-3859215/33

S/PV.8923 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

societies caused by climate disasters truly undermines
that imperative by exacerbating the root causes. That
reality was recognized by the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union, which for the first time
acknowledged the harmful impact of climate change on
peace and security in the region. Locals know better,
and we need to heed the counsel of Africans when they
say the two issues are linked. They know better because
they are taking the brunt of the disruptions to lives and
livelihoods on the continent.
With respect to climate, implementation is of
the essence. At the twenty-sixth Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change, held in Glasgow and which
concluded less than a month ago, countries agreed on
a process to keep the 1.5°C goal alive. Implementing
that commitment remains the first line of defence to
prevent the adverse impact of climate change and
is an effective way towards climate security. As we
expressed in previous debates, the Security Council,
which is entrusted with the maintenance of peace and
security, should work towards ensuring that conflict
prevention and peacebuilding approaches increasingly
integrate climate considerations into their strategies.
To that end, we are of the view that coordination
between the Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) could be enhanced by including the
issue of climate security in the agenda of the PBC and
of the Council.
Prevention can also be strengthened by the
adoption by the Council of a thematic draft resolution
on climate security. Ten years after this organ agreed
on a presidential statement on the impact of climate
change on the maintenance of international peace and
security (S/PRST/2011/15), the time has come for more
concrete action by adopting a draft resolution. In that
regard, Lebanon co-sponsored the draft resolution
prepared by the Niger and Ireland, and we are hopeful
that all members of the Council will adopt it in the
upcoming days.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Peru.
Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): First of all,
I thank the Niger presidency of the Security Council,
especially President Mohamed Bazoum, for taking
the initiative to convene this open debate, which is
providing us with an opportunity to jointly assess the
issue of international security in the context of terrorism
16/33

09/12/2021

and climate change, as their implications constitute a
threat to the maintenance of peace.
In a world marked by an increase in situations
of violence and in which ensuring transition
processes from conflict to peace and development
are becoming increasingly important, safeguarding
civilian populations from terrorist threats and poor
environmental management as a risk multiplier in
terms of their consequences for ecosystems, water
supply and food security, calls on us to determine the
best way to generate synergies among States, regional
and subregional organizations, civil society and the
United Nations system for the management, prevention
and mitigation of such risks.
The importance of prioritizing joint efforts to
appropriately determine actions to address climate
change and terrorism, as root causes of conflicts,
must already be part of our agenda and must be
aimed at strengthening multilateral commitment as
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, the
peaceful settlement of disputes and the principle of
collective security, given that both phenomena develop
transnationally, are limitless in their devastating effects
and know no borders.
Peru agrees with what the Secretary-General sets
forth in his report Our Common Agenda (A/75/982) in
that our collective peace and security are increasingly
threatened by new risks and dangerous trends that are
very difficult to address with traditional methods of
prevention and management, given that they involve
transnational networks and new actors that are often
linked to terrorism. Peru shares the report’s vision, given
that the consequences of climate change contribute
to instability, the displacement of entire populations,
desertification and consequently limit access to the
means of subsistence and resources, resulting in
scarcity, which is often the trigger of conflicts.
Efforts to prevent violent acts related to terrorism
must consider approaches based on respect for human
rights and the rule of law and, at the same time, promote
inclusive pluralism to help avoid the threats posed
by the rise of xenophobia, racism and other forms of
intolerance, be they in the name of religion or belief.
The twenty-sixth Conference of the Parties to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, recently held in Glasgow, which focused on
global warming, places us at a crossroads between
immobility and ambitions far removed from the
21-38592

09/12/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

demands of the climate crisis, which is manifested
in floods, droughts and other related consequences
leading to individualism characterized by human
need and misery, and which, as a whole, contribute to
generating conflicts.
The current international system, characterized
by instability and inequality among nations and
segments of society within States, requires a new
world governance that builds peace from a structural
and multidimensional perspective in which actions
to prevent terrorism and mitigate the consequences
of climate change contribute to the maintenance and
consolidation of peace. In that regard, we support the
new United Nations guidelines for both peacekeeping
operations and the Organizational Committee of the
Peacebuilding Commission to include the continuous
evaluation of both phenomena in their areas of work.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we sincerely congratulate the Niger on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council. We were pleased
to see His Excellency Mr. Mohamed Bazoum, President
of the Republic of the Niger, presiding over the open
debate this morning. We also thank His Excellency
Secretary-General António Guterres; His Excellency
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chair of the African
Union Commission; and His Excellency Mr. Mamman
Nuhu, Executive Secretary of the Lake Chad Basin
Commission and Head of the Multinational Joint Task
Force, for their valuable briefings.
As peace, security and sustainable development are
interrelated, the State of Qatar has sought to ensure the
holistic nature of its global efforts to achieve peace and
security taking into account the multi-aspect threats
to peace and security, including the phenomena of
terrorism and climate change. Aware of the persistent
threat of terrorism to international peace, security
and stability, the State of Qatar has stepped up its
national efforts to fight terrorism and its financing.
We have enhanced cooperation with international
partners and our participation in international and
regional arrangements.
The State of Qatar enjoys an effective partnership
with the United Nations in the area of counterterrorism, including addressing the multi-aspect
threats of terrorism and links to other risks, such as
the link between the financing of terrorism and human

S/PV. 8923 (Resumption 1)

trafficking. In addition, the State of Qatar supports
United Nations programmes to build the capacities of
Member States to counter this heinous scourge.
With regard to climate change, the State of Qatar
has taken a number of concrete steps to address this
threat at the national and international levels. We
hosted the eighteenth session of the Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change in 2012 and have actively participated
in subsequent related sessions, including the latest
twenty-sixth, session held in Glasgow, at which the
delegation of the State of Qatar was headed by His
Highness Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani, Amir
of the State of Qatar. We have also taken the initiative
of establishing the Global Dryland Alliance, one of the
international mechanisms to address climate change.
We recently announced our nationally determined
contributions, which reflect the goals that we set for
ourselves to adapt to climate change and mitigate
its effects.
As we are aware of the significant burden placed
upon small island developing States and least developed
countries resulting from climate change, His Highness
Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani, Amir of the State
of Qatar, announced at the 2019 Climate Action Summit
a contribution of $100 million to support and build the
capacities of those countries to counter climate change.
Fighting climate change and addressing its effects will
be of the major issues on the agenda of the fifth United
Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries,
which will be hosted by the State of Qatar from 23 to
27 January 2022. We hope that this Conference would
provide a vital opportunity to shed light on innovative
plans and solutions to address climate change and its
effects on international peace and security.
In conclusion, the State of Qatar commends the
Security Council for considering the challenges of
climate change and terrorism and other threats to
stability and security, as it fulfils its mandate of
maintaining international peace and security. On its
part, the State of Qatar will continue its efforts at the
international level to contribute towards addressing
emerging and multidimensional threats.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Dominican Republic.
Mr. Blanco Conde (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): The Dominican Republic thanks the Niger

21-3859217/33

S/PV.8923 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

and its President, Mr. Mohamed Bazoum, for convening
this meeting.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the representative of Germany on
behalf of the Group of Friends on Climate and Security.
We have sufficient evidence and testimonies from
real people that the negative effects of climate change
have diverse and profound repercussions. The potential
for their effects to translate into root causes of conflict
is becoming increasingly clear. We are therefore faced
with a reality that the Security Council cannot ignore.
The primary responsibility of this organ is to ensure
international peace and security. That is indisputable
but, at the same time, it has the unique ability to draw
the attention of the entire United Nations system to
how the Organization must integrate into its work
the tools necessary for identifying, anticipating and
eventually staving off the sources of destabilization
and armed conflict.
For that reason, during its term as a non-permanent
member of the Council, the Dominican Republic
advocated a comprehensive approach that would include
climate risk in its deliberations and an increase in the
flow of systematic and contextualized information
provided by the Secretary-General.
The draft resolution submitted by the Niger and
Ireland constitutes both a historic opportunity and a
great responsibility. It contains the essential elements
to better equip the Council and increase its analytical
competencies with regard to the entire peace and
security pillar of the United Nations, opening the
door to impactful action in line with the realities on
the ground.
My delegation calls on every member of the Council
to not miss this opportunity and to vote in favour
of the draft resolution and to channel their efforts
towards rendering the Council more relevant, better
informed and better prepared to take timely action.
The Dominican Republic is honoured to co-sponsor the
draft resolution and will do everything in its power to
achieve its full implementation.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): Ukraine appreciates
the initiative of the Nigerien presidency to hold this
important high-level debate and welcomes the personal
participation of the President of the Niger and the
18/33

09/12/2021

President of Estonia. We also express our gratitude to
the Secretary-General and the other briefers for their
rich insights.
Having played an active part in the first-ever
visit of the Security Council to the Lake Chad basin,
in March 2017 and having witnessed first-hand the
devastating impact on the ground of the terrorism and
climate change nexus — to which I can personally
testify, as one of the visit participants — Ukraine is
closely following the challenge at hand. We also look
forward to the adoption of the relevant Security Council
draft resolution.
While we align ourselves with the statement
delivered by the observer European Union, I would like
to make the following remarks in my national capacity.
We fully share the view that both terrorism-related
threats and the security implications of climate change
should remain in the focus of the United Nations.
Terrorism threatens our core values and principles, Any
act of terrorism is unjustifiable and shall be punished.
Unfortunately, Ukrainians know too well how evil
terrorism can be. The Russian armed aggression against
Ukraine has led to a sharp increase in terrorist threats
in the occupied territories and throughout the country.
It suffices to mention the downing of Malaysia Airlines
Flight MH-17 by the Russian Buk missile system,
killing almost 300 innocent people of 17 nationalities.
Ukraine remains fully committed to fighting
terrorism and violent extremism. That includes taking
effective measures to address conditions that allow the
spread of that menace. We highly value civil society
engagement, including that of women and youth, in
counter-terrorism efforts at the domestic and global
levels. We are convinced that combating the activities
of individual terrorists and terrorist groups will not be
sufficient if the problem of State-sponsored terrorism is
not addressed in a robust and comprehensive way.
Another matter of concern are attempts to use
counter-terrorism as a pretext for repressive purposes
in situations of occupation. We are appalled by the
practices of the Russian occupying administration to
oppress Crimean Tatar activists, human rights defenders
and journalists in temporarily occupied Crimea under
the guise of counter-terrorism measures and to terrorize
civilians in temporarily occupied parts of Donbas. It is
our joint task to ensure that all perpetrators, organizers,
mentors and sponsors of terrorist activities be brought
to justice.
21-38592

09/12/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

The environmental impacts of armed conflicts and
terrorism also remain a source of serious concern. As a
non-permanent member of the Council from 2016 to 2017,
Ukraine made its own contribution to the advancement
of new counter-terrorism standards by raising the issue
of the protection of critical infrastructure from terrorist
attacks. That resulted in the adoption of resolution 2341
(2017). Yet it is crucial for States to develop and put
in place a strategy that would assign relevant tasks
and responsibilities regarding the protection of critical
infrastructure from terrorist attacks and extend its
applicability to the area of environmental security.
As the President of Ukraine stated at the twentysixth session of the Conference of the Parties to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change in Glasgow last month, “Our planet has two
eco-bombs in the centre of Europe: occupied Crimea
and part of Donbas”. The militarization of Crimea,
which Russia is attempting to transform into its naval
military base, has an adverse impact on the unique
ecosystem of the peninsula and its adjacent waters.

S/PV. 8923 (Resumption 1)

and security. To deliver practical results, we need strong
preventive diplomacy and resolve in returning to the
tenets of international law. Our deliberations, therefore,
must be followed by concrete actions to break the cycle
of impunity and hold violators accountable.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Lam Padilla (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the delegation of the Republic of the Niger for
convening this open debate on such a pertinent topic,
namely, curbing the impacts of climate change and
terrorism. Guatemala also appreciates the presence of
His Excellency Mr. Mohamed Bazoum, President of the
Republic of the Niger, to lead our deliberations today.
The phenomenon of climate change and its negative
impacts constitute an undeniable reality. It is necessary
to address the issue as a threat to international peace
and security without delay, as we will bear witness to
the catastrophic long-term consequences if we do not
act immediately and forcefully.

In that context, we welcome the adoption
earlier today by the General Assembly of the fourth
resolution entitled “Problem of the militarization of
the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of
Sevastopol, Ukraine, as well as parts of the Black
Sea and the Sea of Azov”, in which the international
community reiterates, inter alia, its concern

As the international community, we are at a turning
point in ensuring global peace and security. Today we
face not only the pandemic caused by the coronavirus
disease and its socioeconomic repercussions, but also
the increasingly devastating effects of climate change
that exacerbate existing trends, including migration
and displacement.

“regarding multiple military exercises of Russian
armed forces held in Crimea and parts of the Black
Sea and the Sea of Azov, which undermine regional
security and entail considerable long-term negative
environmental consequences in the region (General
Assembly resolution 76/70, para. 11).

Unfortunately, in addition to all of that is the
scourge of terrorism and its close links to organized
crime, which affects millions of people, including
women and children. As indicated in the concept
paper (see S/2021/988), the negative impacts of climate
change have been increasing, particularly in the Sahel
region, as well as in many countries in Central America
and the Caribbean.

Moreover, the continued Russian aggression in
Donbas also harmfully affects the environment in
the region and creates high climate-related risks. For
instance, in the occupied areas of Donbas, many coal
mines have had their power supplies cut. The shut-down
of mine ventilation and pumping systems often leads
to volley emissions of mine gases and the flooding of
mines and nearby areas. Yet the situation of occupation
makes it impossible to assess the precise environmentand climate-related risks in those territories and
implement the measures required to address them.
The fight against terrorism and an efficient response
to climate-related security risks are indispensable
prerequisites for the maintenance of international peace

As such, we believe that it is necessary that the
Security Council make the discussion of measures
to prevent climate change from becoming a threat
to international peace and security a high priority
on its agenda. That will require protecting the most
vulnerable and acting immediately to save lives,
especially in emergency, disaster and crisis situations,
by implementing humanitarian actions focused on
building more resilient communities.
My delegation has repeatedly stated that terrorism
is a global phenomenon that must be addressed from
its roots. All States are vulnerable to terrorist acts,

21-3859219/33

S/PV.8923 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

since they represent a serious threat to international
peace and security, undermine democracy and create
political instability, impeding the economic and social
development of our populations, as well as the full
enjoyment of their human rights.
Guatemala again stresses the danger posed by
the link between transnational organized crime and
terrorism, a relationship that promotes the illicit use of
financial assets. Owing to its geographical position, our
region has been affected by transnational networks that
encourage the commission of crimes, especially those
related to illicit drug trafficking. It is due precisely to
the phenomenon of drug trafficking that trees have
been cut down and tropical forests destroyed in order
to build clandestine landing strips for loading and
unloading drugs. Those reprehensible acts are having a
devastating impact on the environment.
In addition, my delegation wishes to emphasize
that the impact of climate change on food security has
the potential to lead to massive migration and conflict
over water. We must prioritize health, the protection
of lives and respect for the human rights of the most
affected populations, including the most marginalized,
as they are the most likely to fall prey to criminal and
terrorist networks.
The Security Council must prioritize conflict
prevention in order to take decisions on issues that
threaten international peace and security on the basis
of scientific data, since its resolutions are binding.
Climate change is a reality that is changing our lives.
It is therefore necessary to take measures to promote
stable and peaceful societies, while prioritizing the
development of our populations.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sweden.
Ms. Eneström (Sweden): I have the pleasure
to deliver this statement on behalf of the Nordic
countries — Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and
my own country, Sweden.
I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
and through you the President of the Niger, His
Excellency Mr. Mohamed Bazoum, for convening this
timely meeting.
The recent twenty-sixth session of the Conference
of the Parties to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change meeting highlighted
the urgent need of halting climate change in order to
20/33

09/12/2021

avoid disastrous consequences in the very near future.
Without countermeasures, nature’s hand will shift from
benevolent to malevolent. There will be no place to
hide, and no society will be spared.
Climate change, biodiversity loss and environmental
degradation have severe impacts on the availability of
and access to natural resources such as water, food,
forests and land. Those changes can increase competition
over natural resources. That competition, in turn, can
escalate into violence, particularly in areas that have
already experienced conflict and where certain groups
are excluded from natural-resource management.
Today transnational environmental crime generates
an estimated 38 per cent of the financing for illegal,
non-State armed groups, including terrorist groups,
representing their largest source of income. Armed
groups increasingly capitalize on climate-related
disasters and livelihood losses to expand their
recruitment pool. They can use the impacts of climate
change to position themselves as alternative service
and relief providers where Government efforts are
insufficient or unresponsive.
We are way past the point for moving from words
to action. United Nations missions and United Nations
Resident Coordinators must play an active role in
addressing local climate- and security-related risks and
reporting to the Security Council. That work needs to
be supported by the United Nations agencies that make
up the Climate Security Mechanism. They need to build
on local expertise in order to do so.
Interventions should be based on the best available
science. To understand the security risks of climate
change, we need to look at a longer-term timescale.
Simply dealing with the current climate variability is
not enough. Close cooperation with national weather
services, regional climate centres and the World
Meteorological Organization is of the essence. The
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), with its emphasis
on local ownership and inclusion, should address those
risks. The PBC should also advise the Security Council
on those matters.
Six of the 10-largest United Nations missions
operate in some of the countries most exposed to climate
change. Research from the Stockholm International
Peace Research Institute, the Norwegian Institute for
Foreign Policy and others has shown the importance
of integrating a climate-change lens into peacekeeping
and peacebuilding.
21-38592

09/12/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

The debate today, the continuing increase in
members of the United Nations Group of Friends on
Climate and Security and the recent landmark decision
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe on climate change are testament to the demand
for systemic global action.
Regular, periodic Secretary-General reports on the
security implications of the adverse effects of climate
change could form the basis of regular debates in the
Security Council. We strongly support the adoption
of a draft resolution by the Security Council to that
effect, and we would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for the strong commitment of the Niger and Ireland in
that connection.
In conclusion, how we decide to act today on
the risks of climate change, biodiversity loss and
environmental degradation will determine the
prospects for peaceful societies and human security
for millions of people in the coming decades. Common
challenges need a common understanding, solidarity
and strong multilateral institutions for a secure and
sustainable future.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Australia.
Ms. Webster (Australia): Australia thanks the Niger
for organizing this forum and welcomes this important
discussion on the maintenance of international peace
and security in the context of climate change.
Climate change exacerbates the existing root causes
of poverty and disproportionately affects the most
fragile countries and the most vulnerable people within
those countries. It acts as a threat multiplier, indirectly
escalating the risk of conflict through mechanisms
such as food and water insecurity, economic shocks
and human mobility. Of course, the Niger has firsthand experience of the stresses imposed by a changing
climate, including desertification and severe droughts.
Addressing climate change requires global
cooperation. We must reduce emissions, invest in
mitigation and adaptation strategies and build social
and economic resilience. In some countries, including
those in the Sahel and the Lake Chad basin, political,
social and environmental vulnerabilities intersect.
In those regions, building resilience and enhancing
efforts to avert, minimize and address the impacts of
climate change is a key element of conflict prevention.
Responsible management of the environment and

S/PV. 8923 (Resumption 1)

natural resources, together with mitigation and
adaptation planning and capacity-building, must be
better integrated into peacebuilding activities.
While assistance has been provided through the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, regional coordination on climate change
action and governance support could help drive more
effective outcomes. For example, in Australia’s own
neighbourhood, the Pacific islands are at great risk of the
adverse consequences of climate change, and we have
shown collective leadership to address the challenges.
The Pacific Islands Forum countries signed the Boe
Declaration, which acknowledged that climate change
remains the single greatest threat to the livelihoods,
security and well-being of our peoples.
To help implement the Boe Declaration, Australia
is working with Pacific partners to establish the Pacific
Fusion Centre, which is operating in Vanuatu, to
enhance regional information-sharing and analysis and
to draw on climate data and disaster analysis to inform
responses to shared security threats. The relationship
between security and climate change is complex to
understand and complex to address, but that cannot be
an excuse for inaction.
Australia recognizes that global and national efforts
to reduce emissions and limit warming must be at the
centre of our approach. Finalizing the Paris Agreement
rulebook at the twenty-sixth Conference of the Parties to
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change this year was a significant step forward. It
reaffirmed the importance of meeting global challenges
with global solutions through the rules-based order and
provides a framework to bring the Paris Agreement
to life.
Australia believes the Security Council can and
should be engaged on this issue. Other parts of the United
Nations system must complement global, regional and
national efforts and assist us to better understand and
address the security implications of climate change.
Australia would welcome the opportunity to help the
many valuable parts of the United Nations system
to coalesce around a collective response to these
pressing issues.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ecuador.
Mr. Montalvo Sosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I thank your country, Mr. President, the

21-3859221/33

S/PV.8923 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

Niger, for the work it has done during its two years on
the Security Council, which are coming to an end with
this presidency.
Since my delegation will not have another
opportunity to do so in this principal organ, I also take
this opportunity to recognize Estonia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Tunisia and Viet Nam for their
contribution to the Security Council during the 20202021 term, as it draws to a close. Ecuador is convinced
of the crucial contribution of the elected members and
the need for a more frequent rotation, which will only be
achieved by expanding the category of non-permanent
seats on the Security Council, an organ on which
Ecuador aspires to serve in 2023-2024.
On this occasion, I especially thank the leadership
of the delegation of the Niger in convening this open
debate, which complements the one organized by
Ireland on climate and security, on 23 September
(see S/PV.8864), during the high-level week. On that
occasion, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ecuador,
Ambassador Mauricio Montalva Samaniego, called
for peacekeeping operations to be provided with
the technical capabilities and mandates to assess
climate-related security risks according to their specific
contexts. Today’s meeting is an opportunity to reiterate
and strengthen that call.
Throughout the day, we have heard a number of
statements about the Security Council’s competence
in the area of international peace and security in the
context of their link with climate change and terrorism.
Similarly, the focus on conflict prevention promoted
by Secretary-General António Guterres, clearly laid
out in Our Common Agenda (A/75/982), as he reminded
us at the beginning of this debate, and the outcome of
the United Nations 2020 review of the peacebuilding
architecture, contained in resolution 2558 (2020),
require joint efforts by the Security Council and the
entire United Nations system that include the climate
issue in strategies to enhance sustained peace.
Exactly one week ago, it was the seventeenth
anniversary of the issuance of the report of the Highlevel Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change (see
A/59/565), established by then Secretary General
Kofi Annan, which recognized that infectious
diseases, environmental degradation and war are
mutually reinforcing. With the loss of biodiversity,
desertification and drought and with sea-level rise,
there is an exacerbation of socioeconomic problems,
22/33

09/12/2021

such as food insecurity, precarious health-care systems,
unemployment and a lack of means of subsistence. The
catastrophic humanitarian consequences of climate
change are also reflected in the loss of millions of lives,
displacement and the weakening of the social fabric,
with a disproportionate impact on women and girls and
on vulnerable groups.
Socioeconomic deterioration and marginalization
generate conditions for the spread of violent extremism
and organized crime. That is why, as we have previously
stated, this meeting covers a key element of the problem
of climate change and terrorism.
Ecuador expresses gratitude for the statements
delivered this morning. We agree on the advisability
of strengthening the synergies among the Security
Council, the other bodies of the United Nations system
and regional and subregional efforts to combat terrorism
and insecurity, such as the Group of Five for the Sahel
and the Lake Chad Basin Commission. Adequate
financial resources, capacity-building and technology
transfers for developing countries are essential.
We recognize that the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change is the principal
intergovernmental forum with the necessary experience
and capabilities to negotiate a global response to
climate change. These Security Council debates enable
a complementary approach, rightly in my view, to the
links between the climate and security. In addition to
promoting complementarity and synergies within the
United Nations, they also contribute to national efforts
to prevent conflict and build peace.
Finally, Ecuador supports the initiative of the Niger
and Ireland that calls for the Security Council to adopt
the draft resolution on climate and security, which
will allow for a comprehensive understanding of this
important item on the international agenda.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Burkina Faso.
Mr. Sinka (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
Before I begin, I would like, on behalf of His Excellency
Mr. Roch Marc Christian Kaboré, President of Faso,
congratulate the Security Council presidency of the
Niger and in particular congratulate His Excellency
Mr. Mohamed Bazoum, President of the Republic of the
Niger, whose presence at this debate demonstrates the
importance of the issue under consideration.
21-38592

09/12/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

I would also like to congratulate all Council
members on the successful organization of this debate
on such an important theme, namely, the maintenance
of international peace and security in the context
of terrorism and climate change and thank them for
allowing us to participate in this event. I thank all
speakers for their contributions, which have given us a
better understanding of the topic.
The achievement of international peace and security
is one of the main purposes of the United Nations. The
world is facing multiple challenges that threaten the
achievement of our Sustainable Development Goals.
Terrorism and climate change are new contemporary
threats that further complicate the achievement of the
common ideal of peace for humankind.

S/PV. 8923 (Resumption 1)

Insecurity caused by terrorism and climate change
constitutes a serious threat to international peace
and security. In that regard, I would like to appeal to
the members of the Security Council to adopt stronger
measures in support of affected countries. We must act
now before it is too late by providing more support to
existing programmes and mechanisms, including the
United Nations Support Plan for the Sahel, Agenda
2063 of the African Union and the efforts of the G-5
Sahel, as well as those of individual countries.
In that context, I would like to recall, and express
our support for, the Secretary-General’s initiatives
contained in his report Our Common Agenda (A/75/982),
which provides a good basis for collectively addressing
the challenges of peace and climate change.

In Africa, and in particular in the countries
of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel),
including Burkina Faso, these two threats have led to
an unprecedented security and humanitarian crisis,
severely hampering the opportunities for growth and
developments, and civilians, in particular women and
children, are paying the highest price.

Finally, I would like to stress the need for financial
support for all initiatives to maintain international
peace and security. We must work harder to mobilize
sufficient, predictable and sustainable funding. That
must be done in a coherent manner, closely involving
all relevant multilateral and bilateral partners, as well
as civil society and the private sector.

Our populations are facing, on a daily basis, the
adverse effects of these threats, which can be seen in
unprecedented natural disasters, including increasingly
prolonged droughts, heat waves, intense dust clouds,
significant loss of biodiversity and so forth.

Burkina Faso supports the initiative of the Niger
and Ireland proposing a draft resolution on climate
change. It is through more meaningful cooperation and
collaborative action that we will ultimately succeed in
putting an end to terrorism, curbing the degradation of
our environment and safeguarding our common good,
which is the planet.

On a more global level, we are witnessing an
alarming increase in temperatures and the emergence
of extreme weather phenomena, which threaten the
survival of populations and jeopardize their already
meagre means of subsistence, often turning them into
climate refugees.
Climate change is a source of instability. It causes
and accentuates conflicts between communities with
regard to access to meagre shared resources; this is as
true for water management as it is for arable land.
Along the same lines, armed terrorist groups are
undermining the State’s presence in the affected areas,
making access to basic social services even more
difficult. They exacerbate intercommunal tensions,
undermine the foundations of the rule of law and
democracy and force people to move away from their
homes. In Burkina Faso, more than 1 million people
have been forced to flee their homes owing to the threat
of terrorism, which, unfortunately and dangerously,
makes life more precarious for many families.

The President (spoke in French): The representative
of the Russian Federation has asked for the floor to
make a further statement.
Mr. Chumakov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I apologize for taking the floor again. We
listened very carefully to what has been said today. We
are very concerned about the problems occurring in the
region. However, we are against generic discussions
because they can be used for politicization. Specifically,
the delegation of Ukraine made that mistake just now.
We are convinced, and see, that for our Ukrainian
neighbours any Security Council meeting is now used
as an excuse to present a distorted picture of the world,
where Russia is guilty of all ills. I am sure that everyone
has had enough of that. We can see that in today’s vote
in the General Assembly, which had nothing to do with
the actual situation regarding Ukraine. Despite Kyiv’s
efforts, the support significantly decreased and did not
even achieve a third of the votes. We therefore urge that

21-3859223/33

S/PV.8923 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

we do not concern ourselves with unnecessary matters
but instead implement the Minsk agreements.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Edokpa (Nigeria): At the outset, let me
congratulate you, Mr. President, on the Niger’s presidency
of the Security Council for the month of December.
I thank you and your delegation for organizing this
important meeting. Nigeria appreciates the opportunity
to speak at this event, and we wish to reiterate our
unwavering commitment to promoting international
peace and security. Let me also thank the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission, His Excellency
Mr. Faki Mahamat, and the Executive Secretary of the
Lake Chad Basin Commission, Ambassador Mamman
Nuhu, for their comprehensive briefings.
Nigeria condemns in the strongest possible terms
the recent multiple attacks against peacekeepers
from Mali and Togo and calls for the prosecution of
the perpetrators of those grave crimes. In that regard,
Nigeria joins others in sponsoring the draft resolution on
climate and security proposed by the Niger and Ireland.
Terrorism and climate change remain among the
greatest threats to international peace and security
for our generation. Both phenomena are capable of
triggering violent conflict and insecurity, especially
in communities with pre-existing tensions, weak
governance and other socioeconomic challenges. The
adverse effects of climate change on communities,
including the loss of livelihoods, hunger, poverty,
inequality and migration, can often prompt clashes
over resources that can create an enabling environment
for terrorist groups to recruit and spread their
extremist ideology.
Given the Security Council’s important role in
maintaining international peace and security and its
noteworthy efforts in combating global terrorism,
today’s meeting is an opportunity to give the highest
priority to climate action and seek holistic responses to
the threats that both climate change and terrorism pose
to international peace and security. In that regard, allow
me to underscore five measures that Nigeria considers
vital to that goal.
First, it is often said that where there is a lack of
development, there is also likely to be a lack of peace.
As developing nations are among the hardest hit by
climate impacts, providing essential services and
24/33

09/12/2021

critical infrastructure to catalyse economic growth
remains imperative. In addition, strengthening their
criminal justice systems remains key to ensuring that
all terrorists are made to account for their crimes.
In that regard, there is a need for Governments and
international partners to enhance collaboration in areas
of development to prevent terrorism and terrorist groups
from exploiting the deficiencies of Governments.
Secondly, international cooperation on combating
climate change and countering terrorism remains vital
to ensuring global security, and it requires a whole-ofUnited Nations response. Member States should ensure
the integrated and balanced implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy along
its four pillars, as well as upholding their obligations
under the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change (UNFCCC) and the Paris Agreement
on Climate Change. The United Nations system has a
responsibility to maintain its support to all Member
States in fulfilling those objectives.
Thirdly, multilateral support for regional efforts to
curb the threats of terrorism, especially in the Sahel
and Lake Chad basin regions of sub-Saharan Africa,
which have fast become a hotbed for insecurity, should
be enhanced. That could ensure that collaborations such
as the Multinational Joint Task Force and the Group of
Five for the Sahel Joint Force receive adequate external
support to build capacity and develop appropriate
solutions to effectively neutralize the threat of Boko
Haram, the Islamic State in West Africa Province and
other terrorist groups in the region.
Fourthly, there is a need to enhance capacity
and build expertise across the United Nations on the
growing interlinkages between climate impacts and
violent conflict. Such knowledge could help bolster
the already immeasurable impact of peacekeeping and
political missions. As most of those missions already
occur in conflict settings that are challenged by a
loss of biodiversity, desertification or other climate
change-related issues, such knowledge should bring
about tailored mechanisms for building lasting peace
and criminalizing extremism.
Finally, despite a low contribution to greenhouse-gas
emissions and global warming, many African countries
are most vulnerable to extreme weather conditions and
natural disasters that affect livelihoods. The impacts
are exacerbated by rapid population growth, fragile
economies, a high dependence on rain for agriculture and
21-38592

09/12/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

a weak climate-adaptive capacity. Against the backdrop
of the recently concluded twenty-sixth session of the
Conference of the Parties to the UNFCCC in Glasgow,
let me reiterate the need for developed countries to
honour their promises to mobilize $100 billion yearly
to support climate action in developing countries. That
could go a long way to provide predictable sources
of financing for climate-adaptive measures, such as
early-warning systems, within many climate-affected
regions, especially on the African continent.
In conclusion, as no one nation or region in the
world is completely immune or safe from the effects
of climate change or terrorism, we call for a unified
and comprehensive approach, through stronger
partnerships and strengthened global efforts, to
address these challenges. Furthermore, let me reiterate
Nigeria’s unwavering determination to meet its climate
goals as a means of alleviating the untold hardship and
improving peace and security in Nigeria, the subregion
and beyond.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bahrain.
Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, it is my pleasure to thank you, Mr. President, as
well as His Excellency Mr. Mohamed Bazoum, President
of the Niger, for presiding over today’s meeting. I also
thank the Permanent Mission of the Niger for convening
this meeting on the maintenance of international peace
and security in the context of terrorism and climate
change. I also thank His Excellency the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. António Guterres, and the other briefers
for their contributions today.
Terrorism is one of the greatest challenges faced
by the international community, which is addressing
this dangerous phenomenon as it increases insecurity
and lack of stability, targets achievements by States
and peoples and prevents progress and prosperity. The
Kingdom of Bahrain continues its efforts to combat
this serious scourge, which is spreading and becoming
a global threat. The Kingdom of Bahrain has always
actively contributed and coordinated with various
States in the fight against terrorism and its financing
by acceding to many regional and international
conventions and treaties. The Kingdom also participates
in and supports the efforts of the international coalition
to combat the Da’esh terrorist organization.
The Kingdom of Bahrain reiterates its commitment
to implementing the various international resolutions

S/PV. 8923 (Resumption 1)

on combating the financing of terrorism. We regularly
submit periodic reports pursuant to the relevant Security
Council resolutions. We also implement the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, adopted
by the General Assembly in 2006 (resolution 60/288),
and the recommendations of the Financial Action Task
Force on money laundering and terrorist financing.
As a small island developing State, the Kingdom
of Bahrain pays close attention to climate change. We
believe that climate change is an international challenge
that requires international collective solutions.
Although Bahrain’s emissions do not exceed 0.07 per
cent of global emissions, it has adopted a number of
measures to counter the negative effects of climate
change. Our country is affected by temperature and
sea-level rise.
According to our economic vision for 2030, my
country has adopted integrated plans to increase the
use of renewable energy. It recently adopted many
initiatives to eliminate carbon, in particular through
increasing mangroves by a factor of four, planting
more trees in general and investing directly in
carbon-capture techniques.
Bahrain supports the Middle East initiative
announced by the sisterly Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in
October. We support initiatives adopted by the Middle
East Green Initiative Summit. His Royal Highness
Prince Salman bin Hamad Al Khalifa, Crown Prince
and Prime Minister, announced at the climate change
conference in Glasgow in November that our country
is committed to reaching carbon neutrality by 2060.
Moreover, the Kingdom of Bahrain has endorsed
four important international initiatives on climate
change — the global coalition for the oceans, the Global
Methane Pledge, the Greening Government Initiative
and the United Arab Emirates strategic initiative to
achieve carbon neutrality by 2050 — in support of
international cooperation and hard work, in order to
address challenges and implement commitments to
achieving whatever is possible to meet climate goals
that contribute to preserving our planet and ensuring a
safer and better future for future generations.
Finally, the Kingdom of Bahrain is ready to hear
all points of view on combating terrorism and security
threats related to climate change in the context of
maintaining international peace and security. We are
also ready to work towards strengthening international
cooperation to address such challenges, particularly

21-3859225/33

S/PV.8923 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

during conflict or post-conflict times. We hope that
the discussions at this meeting will help us to arrive
at a clearer concept about the relationship between
terrorism and climate change. The Kingdom of Bahrain
confirms its support for any international consensus in
this regard to achieve stability, security and prosperity
for all peoples and nations of the world.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Pieris (Sri Lanka): I wish to congratulate the
Republic of the Niger on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for this month and appreciate the
convening of today’s high-level meeting.
The Security Council has been at the forefront of
the united international response to combat terrorism,
as we have seen in the benchmarks set by resolutions
1373 (2001) and 2560 (2020), the latter adopted in
December 2020. However, we must note that the face of
terrorism has become extremely complex. Its roots have
gone beyond spreading religious or political ideology.
Terrorism has become a governance mechanism
and a lucrative economic activity for some. It is this
phenomenon and the new modus operandi that we must
recognize and take a more proactive stance in curbing.
The scourge of terrorism will be a persistent threat
to global peace and security as long as its feeders and
threat multipliers are not addressed, and climate change
has established itself as one of the greatest threat
multipliers. The interplay between climate change and
terrorism is a critical dimension of the climate-security
nexus and needs to be evaluated, discussed and met with
a unified global response. It is a cyclical and complex
relationship wherein natural disasters exacerbate
existing structural and social vulnerabilities and add
pressure to the already tenuous relationship between
resources and civil unrest.
Peace and security are often found together in the
sense of maintaining international peace and security.
Whereas peace was traditionally conceived as the
absence of war, resolution 46/14, of October 1991,
defined peace in a more positive sense to foster human
rights, social and economic development, disarmament,
protection of the environment and improvement of the
quality of life for all as sine qua non for the establishment
of peaceful societies.
Owing to its inherent intersubjectivity, security as
a concept poses a considerable challenge in terms of
26/33

09/12/2021

detecting any definitive normative or legal meaning,
but there is no doubt as to the legal effects of security.
Security considerations often prevail in drafting
and implementing laws. In terms of the international
legal order, security is not traditionally viewed as a
legal principle but is seen, along with peace, as the
primary purpose of the United Nations Charter and the
Organization constituted by it. The International Court
of Justice declared that
“[t]he primary place ascribed to international
peace and security is natural, since the fulfilment
of the other purposes will be dependent upon the
attainment of that basic condition”.
Without peace nothing is possible.
While this is a broad and open-ended definition of
peace, security is perhaps more elusive, and it has not
been the subject of formal definition or elaboration by
the United Nations. According to the academics, the
concept of security is politically very savvy. It is weakly
conceptualized and a highly contentious concept.
In general terms, security is an absence of threats to
States, groups and individuals, and it implies methods
to achieve a condition of security through measures
designed to prevent threats from materializing at all.
When one undertakes an international legal
analysis, it tends to focus on the principles of the
Charter, set out in Article 2, which includes the
principles applicable to the United Nations of sovereign
equality and non-intervention and the duties of States,
primarily the obligation to settle disputes peacefully
and the duty to refrain from the threat or use of force.
However, Article 1 is important for international law
more broadly because it sets the purposes — arguably
the values that the United Nations system aims to
achieve and uphold. It is worth considering Article 1,
paragraph 1, in greater detail because it only places
security — partly, I would say — within the framework
of international law by declaring that the maintenance
of peace and security can be achieved through the taking
of effective measures for the prevention and removal of
threats to the peace, and by bringing about by peaceful
means, and in conformity with the principles of justice
and international law, adjustments or settlements of
international settlements or disputes or situations.
The prospect of United Nations security action
unbound by international law, as one academic puts
it, runs like a red thread through the Charter. First,
21-38592

09/12/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8923 (Resumption 1)

there is the principle that the United Nations should not
intervene in domestic affairs, but that does not prejudice
action taken by the Security Council under Chapter
VII. Secondly, the ban on the use of force allows for
only two exceptions: self-defence and military action
taken to combat threats to, and breeches of, the peace as
authorized by the Security Council under Chapter VII.
The content of the Charter seems to favour security,
especially the collective coercive type found in Chapter
VII, unfortunately, over the law.

affect national security by disrupting livelihoods, lead
to displacement and migration and increase conflict
over limited resources, people’s property and the
economy and safety of a nation. In certain regions of
the world, we have seen where the loss of traditional
livelihoods has increased the opportunity cost of
exploring membership in armed groups, and we have
seen the increase of youth viewing the potential of
terrorist and rebel groups as providing an alternative
source of income.

The achievement of peace and security is the raison
d’être of the United Nations, and the enforcement of
international law is secondary to that.

Increased insurgent activity fuels environmental
collapse, agricultural and infrastructure loss, the
degradation of natural resources and desertification,
creating an environment of internal unrest,
migration, statelessness and ending in conflict over
scarce resources.

Let me say a quick word with regard to security and
climate change. A central question is whether climate
change is a security issue. In the late 1980s, climate
change was seen as second only to a global nuclear
war. In 2009, the General Assembly adopted resolution
63/281, on climate change and its possible security
implications. The resolution resulted in a report
prepared by the Secretary-General (A/64/350), which
identifies five aspects that are considered as having an
impact on security.
The first is vulnerability. The report states that
climate change threatens food security and human
health and exposes humans to extreme events.
The second is development. The report states that
climate change results in reversing the development
process, and it exacerbates the vulnerability and
undermines the stability of States.
The third is coping and security. The report states
that migration, competition over natural resources
and other coping responses increase the number of
domestic issues.
Fourthly, it deals with statelessness, whereby there
are implications for rights, security and sovereignty
of the loss of statehood because of the disappearance
of territory.
Lastly, it deals with international conflict in the
context that there may be implications for international
cooperation from the impact of climate change on
undemarcated international resources.
Climate change has therefore brought the world
to face unprecedented problems. It has the potential
to affect the lives of individuals who live in coastal
regions, or a farmer who is dependent on rain. It can

Understanding the root causes and ensuring that
we do not underestimate the impact of climate change
is imperative to ensure a long-standing global peace.
Terrorism and climate change are not siloed threats to
humankind, but rather different manifestations of the
same threat that builds on human fear and insecurity.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Korea.
Mr. Cho (Republic of Korea): First of all, I thank
the President for convening this timely open debate on
security and climate change.
As the report of the Secretary-General Our
Common Agenda (A/75/982) highlights, climate change
is contributing to instability and is affecting livelihoods,
access to resources and human mobility trends. We
have witnessed those trends in many parts of the world,
especially in the Sahel region, where climate change
has affected people, and communities are struggling for
their livelihoods, often falling into the hands of terrorist
groups, and in the small island countries, where one
severe weather event can threaten the very existence of
the people and the State themselves, resulting in tens of
thousands of migrants moving away.
It is now our common understanding that, in
most of the conflict-affected regions, where the
activities of United Nations peacekeeping operations
and special political missions are ongoing, climate
change is aggravating already-vulnerable situations
on the ground. Therefore, in preventing conflicts and
rebuilding peace after conflicts, it is essential to take
into account climate change-related factors and build

21-3859227/33

S/PV.8923 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

greater resilience to them. In doing so, we especially
need to take heed of how terrorist and violent extremist
groups exploit such situations and counter such
acts appropriately.
In that connection, Korea believes that an allof-United Nations approach is needed to address the
climate-security nexus, including the active engagement
of the Security Council. Korea supports the work of the
Climate Security Mechanism and the Informal Expert
Group on Climate and Security. We also welcome the
idea of the Secretary-General regularly reporting on
this issue before the Council.
In order to better cope with the climate threat posed
to security, we need to address the root cause itself, that
is, climate change. Last month, we took an important step
in Glasgow. Yet science tells us that that is not enough.
We must aim higher and do more to reduce emissions
and limit temperature rise with urgency. Korea has
been accelerating its efforts in that regard. Last year,
in the middle of the pandemic, we declared 2050 the
year by which we would achieve carbon neutrality. This
year, we established a presidential committee on carbon
neutrality and enacted a framework act for green
growth and carbon neutrality. After intense discussions
with all stakeholders, this year Korea announced its
enhanced 2030 nationally determined contribution of
reducing emissions by 40 per cent below its 2018 level.
Climate change will increasingly pose a threat to
global peace and security. The Security Council, as the
primary organ responsible for maintaining global peace
and security, needs to be more involved in this issue.
In recognizing the importance of the linkage between
climate change and global security, Korea recently
joined the Group of Friends on Climate and Security.
In this light, we are also delighted to co-sponsor the
draft resolution on climate and security, presented by
the Niger and Ireland.

09/12/2021

Mr. Pérez Ayestarán (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): As this is our first time
taking the floor this month, allow us to wish you, Sir,
every success at the helm of the Security Council during
December. We would also like to take this opportunity
to recognize the work of Mexico in its presidency over
the Council in November.
At the outset, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
would like to reaffirm two central issues in its statement,
namely, its categorical rejection of international
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations and its
firm commitment to the fight against climate change.
We agree that, as indicated in the concept paper
prepared to guide the deliberations of this debate (see
S/2021/988), the intensification of both scourges in
recent years is a source of great concern for the entire
international community.
In that vein, we reiterate that international
terrorism today represents one of the greatest threats
to international peace and security. The criminal acts
committed by terrorist groups threaten the territorial
integrity and political unity of States, while seeking to
generate terror, destabilize legitimate Governments and
undermine their constitutional order. We reject, in that
connection, the exploitation of the ongoing pandemic
for the perpetration of terrorist acts and reiterate that the
use of terrorism and violence to promote the overthrow
of legitimate Governments is clearly unacceptable.
For its part, while climate change — the consequences
of which have accelerated in recent months — constitutes
an existential threat to all humankind, that phenomenon
has a major impact on the countries of the South,
and especially on small island developing States. We
insist, in that regard, on the need to comply fully with
the relevant commitments in that area, including the
three pillars in our joint response to global warming,
and to always observe the principle of common but
differentiated responsibilities.

The Republic of Korea, as a candidate for
membership of the Council for the term 2024 to 2025,
is willing to join forces in global actions to address
existing and potential security threats, including
climate change. We will spare no effort to promote
global peace and security.

We further stress that the illegal application of
unilateral coercive measures has serious repercussions
on climate action, as they undermine, inter alia,
the implementation of the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change and efforts aimed at adaptation,
mitigation, financing and the acquisition and transfer
of technologies.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.

We agree that, in situations of armed conflict or
post-conflict, the adverse effects of climate change
may represent an additional threat that has the potential

28/33

21-38592

09/12/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

to further exacerbate the situation on the ground.
However, we must express our concern over attempts
to securitize such a sensitive issue that concerns us
all, without exception, by having it addressed by the
Security Council, which has a clear mandate to ensure
prompt and effective action by the United Nations in
cases that threaten international peace and security.
Furthermore, if that practice were to be
consolidated, it would open the door to invoking issues
related to climate change for the purpose of including
certain countries on the agenda of this organ for purely
political motivations that are clearly not in line with
those established in Article 24 of the Charter of the
United Nations.
Similarly, we reiterate that climate change must be
addressed through cooperation and concerted action;
that is, within the framework of multilateralism and
under the auspices of the United Nations, in order to
ensure the due participation of the entire international
community. Therefore, the General Assembly, as the
main deliberative, policymaking and representative
organ of the United Nations, and the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, the main
forum for discussing and comprehensively addressing
that important issue, represent more inclusive platforms
for forging consensus and adopting decisions, jointly
and on an equal footing, on the course of action to
follow in order to achieve the goals we have set together.
In conclusion, we echo the words of the SecretaryGeneral in that there is no planet B. That is why there
can be no other option than collective action with a
sense of urgency to make climate justice a reality now,
without political calculations or pettiness. Venezuela
is determined to continue participating actively and
constructively to that end, but we would warn of the
dangers of including the issue on the agenda of the
Security Council. On the one hand, it would do nothing
to contribute to the efforts under way to address the
climate crisis. On the other, it would perpetuate
the organ’s practice of usurping functions that are
not within its scope of competence by insisting on
addressing issues that go beyond the powers conferred
upon it by the founding Charter of our Organization.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Republic of the Niger
for having convened this high-level Security Council

S/PV. 8923 (Resumption 1)

debate on the crucial matter of international peace
and security in the context of terrorism and climate
change, and I welcome the presence earlier today of His
Excellency Mr. Mohamed Bazoum, President of the
Republic the Niger.
I wish to take this opportunity to congratulate the
brotherly Republic of the Niger for its highly appreciated
contributions as a non-permanent member of the
Security Council, doing great honour to our African
continent. I would also like to thank the briefers for
their extremely valuable interventions.
Morocco is situated in a region that clearly
demonstrates the interlinkages between climate
change, security and sustainable development. The
African continent and the Sahel region in particular
disproportionately suffer under the impacts of climate
change, to which it has made practically no contributions.
In that vein, Morocco is fully committed to pursue
the dynamic launched at the first African Action
Summit aimed at reaching a continental agreement
on an ambitious and specific transnational project in
line with the guidelines of His Majesty Mohammed
VI. Morocco will continue to provide political,
financial and technical support within the framework
of South-South cooperation with the Lake Chad Basin
Commission, the Group of Five for the Sahel and
landlocked developing States.
With regard to the various environmental issues
resulting from climate change, there is also an
increasingly clear causality between climate change and
rising levels of violence and instability and the spread
of scourge of terrorism in certain regions. Indeed, in
several regions, climate change is a threat multiplier,
as it exacerbates vulnerabilities due to a scarcity of
resources. The lack of economic resources as a result
of the loss of traditional livelihoods has created fertile
ground for recruitment by terrorist and armed groups,
in particular among young people. It is therefore vital
that the international community act wherever climate
change poses a threat to international peace and security
by creating conflict situations or security issues.
By committing to taking action on the ground, the
United Nations must deal with increasingly complex
situations and asymmetric threats. That reaffirms the
need to take those threats into consideration as part of
peacekeeping operations and their working methods.
In the context of the fight against asymmetric threats,
it is important to deepen the triangular dialogue on

21-3859229/33

S/PV.8923 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

cooperation among the Security Council, the Secretariat
and troop- and police-contributing countries in order
to better coordinate United Nations peacekeeping
missions, define their mandates and ensure proper use
of resources. Moreover, peacekeeping missions must
decrease their environmental footprint and support
host countries in their environmental initiatives.
As a troop-contributing country, Morocco strives
to ensure that its participation in peacekeeping missions
has a minimal environmental impact in line with the
aims of the United Nations environment strategy for
missions on the ground. We commend the positive
results achieved with the completion of the first phase
to that end.
In that connection, the Royal Moroccan Armed
Forces have adopted a national strategy, the measures
contained in which concern all Moroccan contingents
deployed on the ground within the framework of
peacekeeping operations. Furthermore, Moroccan
contingents have also benefited from specific training
modules to raise awareness among Blue Helmets of
their environmental responsibility.
Once again, Mr. President, I thank you very much
for convening this extremely important debate.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Fiji.
Mr. Prasad (Fiji): We are very heartened by the
Niger’s sustained leadership throughout its Security
Council tenure, as well as the efforts of Ireland, to
maintain interest and actions on the debate on climate
and security within the Security Council.
At the recently concluded twenty-sixth session of
the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, the world’s
attention was focused on one number — 1.5°C. We left
Glasgow with hope for 1.5°C, but that hope is hanging
by a weak thread. Securing 1.5°C is, by far, the most
important peace and security investment that the world
can make today. It is that simple, because the members
of the Security Council are deeply aware that even at
1.2°C, the majority of Council’s peace interventions
are engagements where climate crisis already shapes,
exacerbates and defines the contours of conflict that
our peacekeepers are trying to redress.
This afternoon’s debate in the Security Council
therefore must help to build climate resilience in ways
that promote peace and stability, rather than lead to
30/33

09/12/2021

inaction, which would fuel conflict, instability and
even possible State collapse. That is what is before the
Council — not more, not less.
Throughout the day and during earlier discussions
on climate change and security, many countries shared
their experiences with the Security Council. Country
after country has shown evidence that repeated climate
catastrophes, combined with slow-onset climate
change, are transforming stable regions into regions
that now face heightened instability, growing fragility
and intensifying conflict.
Today we also heard about the rise of new weapons
of war. One would have thought that those new weapons
would be cyberweapons or high-tech weapons, but
that is not so. The climate crisis has brought to the
forefront new weapons of war — selective access to
increasingly scarce water resources, fertile lands and
homes unaffected by sea-level rise.
We are also seeing strong positive trends, such as
how Security Council peacekeeping interventions and
Blue Helmets are investing in desilting lakes and river
systems for the sake of peace and security. Some are
building nature-based solutions to protect communities
from sea-level rise, which is helping to restore peace
and stability. We hope that those lessons are also taken
into account as we consider the draft resolution before
the Council.
The Security Council is at an important crossroads.
How the Security Council takes forward the advice of
many Member States in the General Assembly will
shape how well and how substantively the world can
respond to growing, more diverse threats to peace and
security within regions and between countries.
Allow me to convey to the Security Council two
important messages from Fiji and Pacific leaders.
At its most recent meeting, Fiji and Pacific island
leaders issued the Pacific Islands Forum Leaders Ocean
Statement 2021, indicating that our maritime zones and
the rights and entitlements that flow from the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea shall continue
to apply without reduction, notwithstanding any
physical changes connected to climate change-related
sea-level rise. That is Pacific island leaders doing the
work of the Security Council.
That Statement follows our Boe Declaration on
Regional Security, in which our leaders assert that:
21-38592

09/12/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

“climate change remains the single greatest threat
to the livelihoods, security and well-being of the
peoples of the Pacific.”
I underscore that the Declaration does not say that
climate change is the second-most important threat or
one of the main threats, but the single greatest threat.
Against that backdrop, we are heartened and
welcome the draft resolution co-sponsored by the Niger
and Ireland and submitted for the Security Council’s
consideration, and we urge its speediest adoption.
The text before the Council provides a pragmatic way
forward and a good starting point.
I have two final observations to share.
First, none of the small States of the Pacific were
members of the Organization when the Charter of the
United Nations was adopted, for if we had been, we
might have helped the United Nations frame the security
discussions differently. At no time in the Security
Council’s 75-year history has a Pacific island ever sat
on the Council, but at every opportunity, we have said
to the Council that we see security and peace differently
from others. For 30 years, we have consistently said that
climate change is the most persistent and gravest threat
to peace and security. We have reiterated that message
before the Council time and again at every opportunity.
Secondly, the Security Council is at a cusp. It can
take a measured, small and necessary step forward
by adopting the draft resolution under consideration.
By doing so, the Council would be telling us, our
communities and our people, who face constant
dislocation, that this is also their Security Council. The
Council would be telling thousands of Pacific Islanders
today — in the Marshall Islands, in Kiribati, in the
Solomon Islands, in Papua New Guinea — whose homes
were flooded for the first time in one of the rarest of
king tides, that this is also their Security Council.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belarus.
Mr. Pilipenko (Belarus) (spoke in Russian):
Belarus shares the serious concern of the international
community regarding the topic of today’s open debate,
namely, combating terrorism and overcoming climate
change. Belarus is an active participant in combating
these issues, both as part of its national efforts and in
the international arena. It is indisputable that both are
international and transboundary issues. In that context,
Belarus urges further international cooperation and

S/PV. 8923 (Resumption 1)

collaboration to effectively and efficiently combat
terrorism and climate change.
By the same token, we view climate change
and natural disasters as just one of the many issues
and factors that have a direct and indirect impact on
international security. This topic is multidimensional
and varies according to the unique climate and
environmental conditions in each country, taking
the form of desertification in one place, floods and
tsunamis in another, earthquakes in a third, the
disappearance of mangroves in a fourth, and so on.
That is why a generic approach is impossible. Instead,
this requires an individual approach and assistance
based on the requests of each State. In that connection,
we underscore the importance of taking action only
with the consent of the national Governments of the
recipient States.
Belarus also believes that all countries, especially
developing and least developed countries, need to
strengthen their national capacities to overcome the
problems each of them face. To that end, we must work
together to facilitate access to technology, education
and financing, among other things.
We are concerned that focusing on climate change in
the work of the Security Council could mean neglecting
hundreds of other factors affecting international
security and instability. Access to vaccines, poverty,
unilateral coercive measures against individual States,
women’s rights, the protection of children and other
topics may have an equal or even greater impact on
peace and security in certain situations.
In that context, we believe that the primary
responsibility of the Security Council should remain
to address and eradicate the root causes of conflict.
Focusing the Council’s work on climate change would
also violate the principle of division of responsibilities
and tasks among the organs, bodies and agencies of
the United Nations system, and could therefore lead
to the duplication of functions. In that regard, we call
for utilizing the full potential of existing mechanisms
under the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change and engaging in more active work
in the General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council, the High-level Political Forum on Sustainable
Development and other specialized forums to address
climate change specifically.
Belarus is a candidate for a non-permanent seat on
the Security Council for 2024-2025 and is prepared to

21-3859231/33

S/PV.8923 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

cooperate with all States on these matters in all forums
in the search for mutually acceptable solutions to issues
challenging international peace and security.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Uzbekistan.
Mr. Ibragimov (Uzbekistan): First of all, let
me commend you, Mr. President, and the Permanent
Mission of the Niger for convening this open debate
on maintaining international peace and security in the
context of terrorism and climate change.
Today global warming causes extreme natural
cataclysms around the world, such as droughts,
hurricanes, debilitating heat, fires, torrential rains
and floods, which present significant challenges for
the international community. The Government of
Uzbekistan has been making consistent efforts to
address climate change, which is one of the important
prerequisites for maintaining international peace
and security.
As President Shavkat Mirziyoyev of Uzbekistan
has noted, today every country feels the destructive
effects of the consequences of climate change, and
these negative consequences directly pose a threat to
the stable development of the Central Asian region.
Scientists warn that, if global warming continues at the
current pace, then by the end of the twenty-first century
the average temperature in the world will increase well
above 2°C, and in Central Asia that indicator could
be even higher. In that regard, Uzbekistan welcomes
the outcome of the recent Conference of the Parties to
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, which resulted in agreeing the Glasgow
Climate Pact to keep warming to 1.5°C and finalize
the outstanding elements of the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change.
For its part Uzbekistan, remains firmly committed
to moving towards renewable energy sources. In
particular, it envisages doubling the energy efficiency
of our economy by 2030 by increasing the share of
renewable energy by 25 per cent and developing
environmentally clean transportation. To achieve
those goals, we have adopted a national strategy for
the transition to the green economy for the period
2019 to 2030. In addition, during the general debate
at the seventy-sixth session of General Assembly last
September, the President of Uzbekistan proposed to
develop a global environmental charter aimed at laying
32/33

09/12/2021

the foundations for a new environmental policy of the
United Nations.
Climate change also results in shrinking already
scarce water resources in various part of the world,
which becomes a potential source of instability.
Uzbekistan stands for cooperation in the field of water
resources on the basis of sovereign equality, territorial
integrity, mutual benefit and good faith in the spirit of
good-neighbourliness and cooperation.
According to some projections, by 2050 the water
resources of the basins of the two major rivers in
Central Asia, the Syr Darya and the Amu Darya, are
expected to decrease by up to 5 per cent and 15 per cent,
respectively. In addition, the shortage of fresh water in
the region by 2050 could lead to the reduction of the
regional gross domestic product by 11 per cent.
The only way to effectively address the negative
consequences of those challenges is to increase mutual
trust and understanding and strengthen bonds of
friendship and cooperation. In that regard, the Central
Asian countries have been making concerted efforts
in this direction. In particular, at the initiative of the
President of Uzbekistan, the Central Asian countries
have jointly established the platform of consultative
meetings of Heads of State to constructively discuss
the entire range of issues pertaining to our region with
an aim to maintain peace and security in Central Asia.
During the third consultative meeting, held in August,
the President of Uzbekistan called for the development
of a regional programme — a green agenda — for
Central Asia, which will contribute to the adaptation of
the countries of the region to climate change.
Terrorism and violent extremism today continue
to pose persistent transnational threats, which require
close international cooperation against that evil.
Central Asia was the first region where a comprehensive
and integrated implementation of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy was launched. On
the occasion of the tenth anniversary of the adoption
of the Joint Plan of Action for the Implementation of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
in Central Asia, Uzbekistan will host an international
conference next year entitled “Regional Cooperation
among Central Asian States within the Framework of
the Joint Plan of Action for the Implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy”.
We hope that it will provide a good opportunity
21-38592

09/12/2021

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8923 (Resumption 1)

for the countries of our region to further forge close
cooperation in the fight against terrorism.

change and remains committed to continue close

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that
Uzbekistan attaches great importance to the issues of
maintaining peace and security and tackling climate

in this realm.

cooperation with Member States and other stakeholders

The meeting rose at 5.55 p.m.

21-3859233/33
