S/PV.8128

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8128th meeting

Friday, 8 December 2017, 11.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bessho. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Mrs. Haley
Mr. Rosselli Frieri

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-42749 (E)
*1742749*

S/PV.8128

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 11.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Israel and Jordan to participate in
this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in the meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General, to participate in this meeting.
Mr. Mladenov is joining today’s meeting via videoteleconference from Jerusalem.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to Mr. Mladenov.
Mr. Mladenov: Jerusalem is one of the most
complex, and perhaps captivating, cities in the world.
Of all the final-status issues in the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict as identified in the Oslo Accords — refugees,
settlements, security arrangements, borders, relations
and cooperation with other neighbours and other
issues of common interest — Jerusalem is the most
emotionally charged and difficult subject.
For the Jewish people, it is, and will always be, the
centre of their faith and life. For centuries, they have
looked to it as a symbol of hope for the future. It is
also the centre of life for Palestinians and, since the
occupation of East Jerusalem in 1967, many have lived
in fear of losing their livelihoods and their connection
to the city. For both Israelis and Palestinians, Jerusalem
is, and will always remain, an integral part of their
national identity. For billions of people around the
world, it also serves as a symbol and a cornerstone of
2/20

08/12/2017

their Christian, Jewish or Muslim faiths. That is why it
remains one of the most sensitive places in the world.
For decades, there has been broad agreement among
Member States about the particular status of Jerusalem,
including through resolutions 252 (1968), 476 (1980) and
478 (1980), as well as General Assembly resolution 181
(II). The United Nations has repeatedly declared that
any unilateral decision that seeks to alter the character
and status of Jerusalem could seriously undermine
the current peace efforts and may have repercussions
across the region. As stated by the Secretary-General,
the United Nations position is clear: Jerusalem is a
final-status issue, for which a comprehensive, just and
lasting solution must be achieved through negotiations
between the parties and on the basis of the relevant
United Nations resolutions and mutual agreements.
On 6 December, United States President Donald
Trump announced that the United States recognized
Jerusalem as the capital of the State of Israel. In that
recognition, he said that final-status issues, including
the boundaries of Israeli sovereignty, remained for the
parties to determine. He made clear his commitment
to advancing peace between Israelis and Palestinians
and called for the status quo at the holy places to be
respected. The announcement also signalled the start of
preparations to move the United States Embassy from
Tel Aviv to Jerusalem, while renewing the six-month
waiver by which the Embassy remains in Tel Aviv.
Without doubt, that decision has been widely
welcomed in Israel. It has also caused much anger
among Palestinians and anxiety across the Middle East
and beyond. Palestinian President Abbas condemned the
move and stressed that the United States had withdrawn
from its role as a mediator in the peace process. He
warned of the potential consequences for security
and stability in the region and underlined the need to
immediately work towards national reconciliation.
Hamas described the proclamation as an attack against
the Palestinian people and called on the Palestine
Liberation Organization to withdraw its recognition
of Israel. In Israel, Prime Minister Netanyahu thanked
President Trump for the decision. He reaffirmed his
commitment to maintaining the status quo at the holy
sites, while President Rivlin said that Jerusalem was
not an obstacle to peace.
I am particularly concerned about the potential risk
of a violent escalation. In anticipation of the United
States decision, Palestinian factions called for three
17-42749

08/12/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

days of rage to take place from 6 to 8 December. Some
called for 8 December to be the start of a new uprising,
or intifada.
Since the decision, we have seen widespread
demonstrations and violent clashes between Palestinian
protesters and Israeli security forces throughout the
occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and
Gaza. According to the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, at least one Palestinian was
killed and more that 140 have been injured. There have
also been protests in Arab cities and villages within
Israel, as well in cities around the region and beyond,
from Lebanon and Jordan to Malaysia and Bangladesh.
On 7 December, six rockets were reportedly
fired from Gaza towards Israel. All but one landed
short of Israel, without causing damage or injury. The
Israel Defense Forces responded by shelling a Hamas
military installation in the Gaza Strip and by bombing
another from the air, causing damage but no injuries.
We continue to follow developments on the ground
very closely.
We all understand and respect the symbolic,
religious and emotional charge that Jerusalem holds for
people across the region and beyond. Nevertheless, I
urge all political, religious and community leaders to
refrain from provocative action and rhetoric that could
lead to escalation. I call on all of them to exercise
restraint and to engage in dialogue.
It is now more important than ever that we preserve
the prospects for peace. It will be ordinary Israelis and
Palestinians — their families and their children — who
will ultimately have to live with the human costs and
the suffering caused by further violence. They will
look to their leaders to find the strength and the will to
achieve a just and comprehensive peace that addresses
all final-status issues, that ends the occupation of
Palestinian territory that started in 1967 and that brings
security and stability to both Israelis and Palestinians.
The United Nations remains strongly committed to
supporting all efforts to achieve a negotiated two-State
solution. That is the only way to achieve the legitimate
national aspirations of both Israelis and Palestinians.
That point has been clearly reaffirmed by SecretaryGeneral Guterres. I again stress his view that there is
no plan B for the two-State solution. Palestinian and
Israeli leaders, as well as the international community,
have an important responsibility to advance peace
efforts to that end. Only through constructive dialogue

S/PV. 8128

can we hope to achieve peace. I call on all parties to
remain engaged.
Today we stand at another critical moment in the
long-running history of the conflict. We are yet to see if
the prospects for peace can be preserved and advanced.
It is up to us all in the international community, as much
as it is up to Israeli and Palestinian leaders, to urgently
advance a just and lasting resolution of the conflict. The
Secretary-General clearly stated that realizing a twoState solution with Jerusalem as the capital of Israel
and Palestine is the only way that such a vision can be
achieved. I have warned many times in the past — and
I will do so again today — that if the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict is not resolved in line with relevant United
Nations resolutions and in a manner that meets the
legitimate national aspirations of both peoples, it risks
being engulfed into the vortex of religious radicalism
that has taken over the Middle East. There is a serious
risk today that we may see a chain of unilateral actions
that can only push us further away from achieving a
shared goal of peace. In the coming days, it will be
critical that leaders demonstrate their wisdom and make
every effort to reduce the rhetoric, prevent incitement
and rein in radical elements.
In its 2016 report (S/2016/595, annex) the Middle
East Quartet called for steps to reverse negative trends
that undermine the two-State solution, so as to build
the conditions necessary for successful final-status
negotiations. Today that call remains as valid as ever.
I urge the international community to fulfil its historic
responsibility to support the parties in achieving
peace and a comprehensive agreement. The SecretaryGeneral and the United Nations are committed to
supporting Palestinian and Israeli leaders in returning
to meaningful negotiations in order to achieve a
lasting and just peace for both peoples. We remain
deeply committed to working with the parties and
with our international and regional partners to realize
that objective.
The President: I thank Mr. Mladenov for
his briefing.
I shall now give the floor those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing today’s emergency meeting. I also thank
Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his very
clear briefing.

17-427493/20

S/PV.8128

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We requested today’s meeting, together with seven
other members of the Security Council — Bolivia,
Egypt, France, Italy, Senegal, the United Kingdom and
Uruguay. Sweden took that step in anticipation of the
repercussions that the statement made by United States
President Donald Trump with regard to Jerusalem on
6 December would have. We clearly disagree with the
recognition of Jerusalem as the capital of Israel and
with the plan for a move of the United States Embassy
to Jerusalem for number of reasons, which I will
now outline.
First, it contradicts international law and Security
Council resolutions. Jerusalem is a final-status issue,
and can therefore be resolved only through negotiations
agreed upon between the parties. In 1947, the United
Nations attributed to Jerusalem a special legal and
political status as corpus separatum. In 1980, when
Israel attempted to declare Jerusalem its capital, the
Council stated, in resolution 478 (1980), that it was a
violation of international law. Furthermore, the Council
declared that attempts to change the character and
status of Jerusalem were null and void, and called upon
all States to accept that decision, as well as to withdraw
their missions from Jerusalem. Until now, all States
have abided by the Council’s call. It was only one year
ago that the Council again stated that
“it will not recognize any changes to the 4 June
1967 lines, including with regard to Jerusalem, other
than those agreed by the parties through negotiations”
(resolution 2334 (2016), para. 2).
The European Union (EU) has a clear position on
Jerusalem, which explains why all EU member States on
the Council were united in requesting today’s meeting.
We consider Jerusalem to be the future capital of two
States. We have never recognized Israel’s annexation of
East Jerusalem, and we therefore consider it to be part
of occupied territory. As I stated, we believe that the
future status of Jerusalem can be resolved only through
negotiations. The statement made by the President of
the United States is at variance with the plea of many
friends of the United States and Israel. However, it does
not affect the position of Sweden, the European Union
or the wider international community, which, up to
now, has been in line with international consensus on
the status of Jerusalem.
Secondly, it is fuelling tensions and increasing
instability in an already volatile and turbulent region.
The question of Jerusalem has an impact far beyond
4/20

08/12/2017

the region — and there are already strong reactions to
that decision around the globe. Clashes yesterday and
today have already resulted in more than 100 people
injured. We call on all parties to maintain calm, show
restraint and refrain from violence. The conflict must
not be turned into a religious one. Jerusalem is a holy
city for the three Abrahamic religions. Now more
than ever, we need respect, tolerance and dialogue to
prevail over division and antagonism. We should not
forget the strong ties to Jerusalem of both Israelis and
Palestinians, and that approximately 40 per cent of the
inhabitants of Jerusalem are Palestinians.
Thirdly, despite its stated intention to the contrary,
it risks prejudging the outcome of negotiations on
final-status issues, such as Jerusalem, and therefore
threatens prospects for peace itself. As the SecretaryGeneral has stated repeatedly, there is no alternative to
the two-State solution and no plan B. Yet that vision is
threatened now more than ever before. Sweden has a
long-standing and firm commitment to the two-State
solution. Seventy years ago, Sweden was one of 33
States Members of the United Nations that voted in
favour of General Assembly resolution 181 (II), which
paved the way for the establishment of the State of
Israel. In 2014 Sweden decided to recognize the State
of Palestine as a logical consequence of our support for
the two-State solution.
For decades, the United States has played a key role
in the quest for peace in the Middle East. We note the
stated intention of the United States Administration
to bring an end to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and
to facilitate a peace agreement between Israelis and
Palestinians. Words must now be followed by deeds and
ideas by proposals. We encourage the United States to
follow up its statement with action towards the twoState solution. Now is the time to move forward with a
detailed peace plan that enables the State of Israel and
the State of Palestine to live side by side in peace and
security, with Jerusalem as the future capital of both
States. The Council also has a responsibility. and all
stakeholders must engage more than ever on the path to
peace in the Middle East.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
Security Council is meeting today in an emergency
meeting at the request of the majority of its members,
which, along with a large number of countries and
people around the world, are gravely concerned about
an international peace and security-related issue. This
17-42749

08/12/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

is about a dangerous precedent, and one that requires
our consideration.
Over the past few days, fear has emerged in the
international community with regard to one of the issues
that has been on the Security Council’s agenda since its
establishment — the question of Palestine. Such fear
also emanates from the repercussions and impact of
unilateral decisions that are at odds with international
law and threaten the system of international
political relations. That system was founded based
on the Charter of the United Nations over 70 years
ago to prevent the repetition of the scourges of war
and to regulate relations among peoples in an era that
supposedly takes into account the fundamental rights
of peoples on an equal basis. We are confronted with a
test of that system, a test of the rule of law. Our efforts
will not be successful unless we work together in the
framework of international legitimacy. If we surrender
and fail, the repercussions will be grave — whether on
this question or other international issues — for years
to come.
The issue of Al-Quds Al-Sharif is rooted
in history. Generations of followers of the three
Abrahamic religions have been closely linked to
that city for hundreds of years. In modern times
and under the umbrella of the United Nations, the
international community succeeded in setting legal
parameters to address this issue when the Organization
decided to establish two States on the Palestinian
territories — pursuant to resolution 181 (II). Therefore,
the sole rationale and only solid basis for addressing
the question of Al-Quds Al-Sharif in the context of the
Palestinian question is to follow that reality — pursuant
to international law, as established through United
Nations and Security Council resolutions. All such
resolutions have unequivocally rejected the occupation
of Jerusalem that started in 1967.
Since we are meeting today to shed light on
the danger of infringing upon the legal parameters
that were reached over dozens of years, it might be
appropriate to recall the most important binding
Council resolutions on Jerusalem, longstanding and
more contemporary ones alike. Resolution 242 (1967)
provided for the withdrawal of Israel from the territories
occupied in 1967, including Jerusalem. Resolution 478
(1980) rejected the occupation of the city by force and
considered Israel’s imposition of the so-called basic law
to be a violation of international law and asserted that
the basic law did not alter the legal status of the city.

S/PV. 8128

It also maintained that the basic law had no impact on
the applicability in Al-Quds Al-Sharif of the Fourth
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War.
It is also of vital importance to recall the latest
Council resolutions on the matter. Some of them are
only one year old. We are referring to resolution 2334
(2016), which reaffirmed that the Security Council
does not recognize any alteration of the 4 June 1967
lines, including with regard to Al-Quds Al-Sharif,
unless it is a result of negotiations between the two
parties. Moreover, resolution 478 (1980) called for
the withdrawal of all diplomatic missions from
Jerusalem, since the international community does not
recognize it as the capital of Israel. Resolution 2334
(2016) clearly requested that all countries differentiate
between Israeli territories and those occupied in 1967,
including Jerusalem.
Those are all resolutions of the Security Council
elaborated over decades and up until this very day.
Taken as a whole, they constitute the corpus of law
governing the status of Jerusalem. They are the
binding Security Council resolutions that all countries
have pledged, pursuant to the Charter of the United
Nations, to implement and abide by in order to maintain
international peace and security. They are the Council
resolutions that represent the only reality and logic with
regard to Al-Quds Al-Sharif.
Based on what I have just referred to, the Arab
Republic of Egypt denounces the United States decision
to recognize Jerusalem as the capital of the State of
Israel and to move its Embassy to Jerusalem. We also
reject any implications of that decision. We would also
like to stress that such unilateral decisions violate
international legitimacy, and therefore have no impact
on the legal status of the city of Jerusalem, as it is a city
under occupation. It is not legally permissible to take
any action that would alter the status quo of the city.
As I have explained, and as is well-known to
everyone, given the highly sensitive nature of the
question of Jerusalem, we would like to express our
serious concern about the potential repercussions of
such a decision on the stability of the region — since
it will arouse sentiments among Muslim and Arab
peoples given the great spiritual, cultural and historical
status of the city of Jerusalem in Arab and Muslim
hearts. Such a decision will also have a grave negative
impact on the peace process between the Palestinian

17-427495/20

S/PV.8128

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and Israelis. That process was founded on major terms
of reference, including providing that the question of
the city of Jerusalem was to be a final-status issue to be
settled through negotiations between the two parties.
The call to safeguard the international legal terms
of reference and international law is not a luxury,
especially in a region that is beset by conflict and a
world subjected to huge challenges. We have no need
for further unjustified chaos. This is a call that takes
into account what is before our very eyes — the huge
danger posed by the deterioration of the international
legal system. Therefore, we once again reaffirm that the
status of Jerusalem as a city under occupation, pursuant
to Council resolutions, has not changed and will not
change unless the parties agree to that issue through
negotiations. We call upon United Nations agencies
to face the emerging challenges on the Palestinian
question in a way that maintains the inalienable rights
of the Palestinian people, including the right to establish
an independent State along the 4 June 1967 lines, with
east Jerusalem as its capital.
Egypt will always uphold its pledge to reach fair,
just and durable peace in the region, based on the
parameters of international legitimacy.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for scheduling this important meeting. I
also thank Mr. Mladenov for his briefing, in particular
for his unequivocal support for the two-State solution
and for his warnings against unilateral measures that
jeopardize the prospects of sustainable peace for
Israelis and Palestinians.
At the outset, I would like to note that the United
Kingdom’s position on the status of Jerusalem is clear
and long-standing: it should be determined through
a negotiated settlement between the Israelis and the
Palestinians, and Jerusalem should ultimately be the
shared capital of the Israeli and Palestinian States. In line
with relevant Security Council resolutions — including
resolutions 242 (1967), 478 (1980) and 2334 (2016) — we
regard East Jerusalem as part of the occupied Palestinian
territories. We therefore disagree with the United
States decision to move its Embassy to Jerusalem and to
unilaterally recognize Jerusalem as the capital of Israel
before a final status agreement. Those decisions are
unhelpful to the prospects of peace in the region — an
aim that I know all of us in the Security Council remain
committed to. The British Embassy to Israel is based in
Tel Aviv, and we have no plans to move it.
6/20

08/12/2017

We share President Trump’s desire to bring an
end to this conflict. We welcome his commitment to a
two-State solution negotiated between the parties. We
note his clear acknowledgement of the importance of
the final status of Jerusalem, including the sovereign
boundaries within the city, which must be subject to
negotiations between the parties.
We remain committed to an Israeli-Palestinian
peace agreement that is based on 1967 borders with
agreed and equal land swaps, reflecting both parties’
national and religious interests, and with Jerusalem as
the shared capital of an Israeli and Palestinian State.
This outcome must be determined through a final status
agreement and a just, fair, agreed and realistic settlement
for refugees that is demographically compatible with
the principle of two States for two peoples.
We recognize that Jerusalem holds huge significance
and holiness for Jews, Muslims and Christians. We
reiterate the fundamental necessity of maintaining the
status quo at the holy sites, in particular the Temple
Mount/Haram al-Sharif, and we welcome President
Trump’s call on the parties to maintain that status quo.
The access and religious rights of both peoples must
be respected. We value Jordan’s important role as
custodian of the holy sites, and remain fully supportive
of their efforts to maintain calm.
We are deeply concerned by continued
developments on the ground that undermine the
prospects for a two-State solution. As the Quartet has
made clear, settlement construction and expansion,
particularly in East Jerusalem, are a significant barrier
to achieving that solution. Terrorism and incitement
to violence constitute another crucial barrier. We will
continue to press the parties to refrain from actions
that make a viable peace more difficult to achieve. A
just and lasting resolution to end the occupation and
deliver peace for Israelis and Palestinians alike is long
overdue. Recent developments demonstrate the urgent
need for progress towards peace.
Today, I reaffirm our strong support for renewed
peace negotiations between the Israelis and Palestinians
as soon as possible. These should be supported by the
international community and should result in a safe and
secure Israel living alongside a viable and sovereign
Palestinian State. We welcome the Secretary-General’s
intent to do everything in his power to support
the Israeli and Palestinian leaders in returning to
meaningful negotiations and in realizing this vision of
17-42749

08/12/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

a lasting peace for both peoples. We strongly encourage
the United States Administration to bring forward
detailed proposals for an Israeli-Palestinian settlement.
The United Kingdom will also do everything we
can to support progress and achieve the vision of a
lasting peace.
To have the best chances of success, the peace
process must be conducted in an atmosphere free
from violence. We call on all parties to maintain calm
and work together in a spirit of commitment to that
common enterprise. On Jerusalem specifically, peace
efforts need to take account of the people, not just the
land and the holy sites. There are more than 320,000
Palestinians in East Jerusalem. The vast majority are
permanent residents whose permits can be revoked
at any point. If they move away from the city, Israel
often does not allow them back. If they marry, they
face obstacle in bringing their spouses. If they apply for
Israeli citizenship, and most do not, a high proportion
of applications are rejected. Their status must not be
forgotten in any peace effort.
If all parties can truly take bold steps in the spirit
of compromise, I have no doubt that an agreement
can finally be reached. That is the only way to ensure
the long-term security that Israelis deserve, and the
statehood and end to the occupation that Palestinians
are calling out for. This is what both peoples ought to
have. It has been denied to them for too long.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Coordinator for his briefing.
The status of Jerusalem has been the subject
of specific Security Council resolutions and in that
regard concerns the entire international community, as
the President of the French Republic, Mr. Emmanuel
Macron, reminded us yesterday. That is why, with
several of its partners, France took the initiative to
request this meeting of the Security Council.
As President Macron noted, we regret the decisions
announced by the President of the United States on
Wednesday, unilaterally recognizing Jerusalem as
the capital of Israel and preparing for the transfer of
the American Embassy from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem. I
wish to stress three elements guiding France’s position,
concerning the law, the two-State solution and the risk
of escalation, respectively.
First, as to the law, the decisions to which I
have just referred do not alter the parametres of the

S/PV. 8128

settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, as set out
by international law. The status of Jerusalem will have
to be determined by the parties in the framework of a
peace agreement. In the absence of agreement, and in
accordance with the consensus that has prevailed for 70
years within the international community, France does
not recognize any sovereignty over Jerusalem. Thus,
following the June 1967 conflict, we did not recognize
the annexation of East Jerusalem, which is, under
international law, part of the occupied territories; nor
in 1980 did we recognize the unilateral acts taken by
Israel concerning Jerusalem.
The Council adopted resolutions 476 (1980)
and 478 (1980), before and after the enactment of
the Israeli Basic Law: Jerusalem, Capital of Israel.
These resolutions include two principles. First, any
measure aimed at altering the status of Jerusalem, as
well as the geographical, demographic and historical
characteristics of the city, is considered null and void
and must be abandoned. Secondly, all United Nations
Member States that have established diplomatic
missions in Jerusalem must remove them from the city.
This is what happened as a result of resolution 478
(1980), without exception. Finally, barely a year ago,
the adoption by the Council of resolution 2334 (2016)
recalled that no modification of the 1967 borders other
than those agreed by the parties would be recognized by
the international community, including in Jerusalem.
It is now up to the United States to clarify the
compatibility of President Trump’s announcement on
6 December with this common legal base on which
all peace efforts are built. And it is more than ever
up to us to reaffirm our collective commitment to
international law, including the resolutions of the
Council, on the essential question of the status of
Jerusalem, which is decisive for any prospect of peace.
For without agreement on Jerusalem, there will be no
peace agreement.
That is the second element guiding our action.
The historical and religious significance of Jerusalem
in the eyes of all parties makes it one of the keys to
resolving not only the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, but
also to regional and international stability. Given its
gravity, its centrality in the Middle East, its symbolic
dimensions and its place in the collective imagination,
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict — and at its core the
unique question of Jerusalem — is a deeply mobilizing
issue, the scope of which extends far beyond the borders
of Israel and the Palestinian territories. That is why it is

17-427497/20

S/PV.8128

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

essential to take great care to provide no pretexts to the
radical movements in the region and, on the contrary, to
encourage all peacemakers.
In that spirit, and because it is steeped in spiritual
and symbolic significance, if we are not careful
the question of Jerusalem could transform from a
political conflict, which by its nature is susceptible
to compromise, into a religious conflict that would
be intrinsically impossible to resolve. In that context,
France and its European Union partners believe that
Jerusalem is destined to become the capital of two
States, Israel and Palestine, pursuant to parameters that
must be defined by Palestinians and Israelis through
negotiations, together with Jordan, given its special role
in that regard. Let us be clear: there is no alternative to
the two-State solution, and there will be no two-State
solution without an agreement between the parties on
Jerusalem. In that regard, we noted the willingness
displayed by the President of the United States to
support the two-State solution. We hold out the hope
that it will pave the way for the United States to return
to the fold of international consensus.
Thirdly, in the immediate term we are of course
very concerned about the risk of escalation on the
ground following three days of clashes, particularly in
Gaza and parts of East Jerusalem. We call on everyone
to exercise restraint and make every effort to restore
calm. Beyond that, negative repercussions throughout
the region must be avoided. We therefore call upon
all regional stakeholders to avoid fuelling tension and
contribute to restoring calm.
France is both a friend to the Palestinians and
the Israelis, which is why we are seeking an honest
approach to the situation by calling upon those parties
to simply return to the negotiating table. Indeed, there
is no shortcut in the difficult path towards peace — that
path is one of negotiation and respect for the other. As
the issue of Jerusalem is one of the keys to peace in the
Middle East, it is more important than ever to recall our
collective commitment to safeguarding international
consensus on the specific status of the city. The
following things are at stake: respect for international
law and the legitimate rights of each of the parties, the
legitimacy of the Security Council and preserving the
two-State solution. In all of those endeavours, members
of the Council can count on the continuous and resolute
commitment of France.
8/20

08/12/2017

Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): In view of the announcements made
by the President of the United States concerning his
unilateral recognition of Jerusalem as the capital of
Israel and his decision to start taking steps to move
the United States Embassy to that city, eight Security
Council delegations requested the Council’s presidency
to convene this emergency meeting. The Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries has taken the same stance in
that regard, as have the African Union and the League of
Arab States. A series of statements by several Member
States also attest to the importance of the issue that we
are addressing today.
Bolivia wishes to clearly and unequivocally state
that it opposes that unilateral decision, as it is not only
contrary to international law, but it is also harmful
and undermines the possibility of achieving a just and
lasting peace between Israel and Palestine. The decision
is extremely damaging and irresponsible, because it
further exacerbates the already unstable situation in the
Middle East, in addition to being in contravention of
the Charter of the United Nations and Security Council
and General Assembly resolutions. That decision will
affect not only Palestinians and Israelis, but the entire
region. It will be exploited by extremists and fule
violence by radicals.
Likewise, that unilateral decision affects the
multicultural and multi-religious identity of Jerusalem,
which Pope Francis put in the following words:
“I cannot silence my deep concern for the situation
that has been created in recent days. At the same
time, I urgently call on all parties to strive to
respect the status quo, in accordance with the
relevant United Nations resolutions. Jerusalem is
a unique city; it is sacred to Jews, Christians and
Muslims, who therein venerate the holy places of
their respective religions. It has a special vocation
for peace.”
We express our resolute commitment to all
international efforts that lead to a peaceful solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. In that regard, we of course
support initiatives such as the Quartet road map, the
Madrid principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and others
that constitute guarantees for a just and lasting peace, so
that both peoples can live within recognized and secure
borders. Bolivia is convinced that the only alternative
to resolving this conflict is the two-State solution — a
free, sovereign and independent Palestinian State within
17-42749

08/12/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the pre-1967 international borders, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions.
It is necessary to remember that, while there are two
parties to this conflict, they are not on an equal footing.
One of the parties, Israel, is the occupying Power; the
other, Palestine, is an occupied people. There is historic
and undeniable inequality between them. One of the
parties has used, and uses, force to occupy the territory
of the other. One of the parties has built a wall that,
according to an advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice, constitutes a violation of international
law. One of the parties builds illegal settlements in
the territory of the other. One of the parties forcibly
displaces civilians, confiscates land, demolishes homes
and transfers settlers to illegally built settlements. One
of the parties imposes a blockade on Gaza, with terrible
humanitarian consequences, restricting access to basic
services. One of the parties has caused 5 million
Palestinians to become refugees. One of the parties
appropriates the water resources and agricultural lands
of the other. One of the parties has unleashed a brutal
military campaign against the Palestinian people. One
of the parties commits serious human rights violations
and has allegedly committed war crimes. One of the
parties is responsible for the forced displacement of
Palestinian civilians. One of the parties violates its
international obligations and systematically violates
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions.
That is the result of the longest military occupation
in the modern world. In recent years and months,
settlements have increased exponentially, and a
discriminatory economic, political, juridical and social
system has been emplaced. This situation removes us
further from the two-State solution.
We must ask ourselves — how is such a situation
occurring in the twenty-first century? How is it
admissible that the series of resolutions of the Council
are not being implemented, not just with regard to
Jerusalem but concerning the conflict in general? We
must recognize that calls for dialogue and negotiations
are insufficient. The Security Council bears a
responsibility to take action and decisions; otherwise,
the Security Council will also become an occupied
territory, and this Chamber will have to join the long
list of settlements of the occupying Power. We will have
demonstrated our irrelevance in this matter. Bolivia
demands the end of the occupation, the end of its

S/PV. 8128

policies that violate international law and its colonizing
practices in Jerusalem and all Palestinian territory.
Mr. Rosselli Frieri (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his very
accurate briefing.
The political, historical and religious relevance of
Jerusalem for Israel and Palestine, as well as Christian,
Jewish and Muslim believers all over the world, is
the reason that it has been given a special status. My
Government issued a statement yesterday, which I am
now going to read out:
“The Government of Uruguay reaffirms its
support for General Assembly resolution 181
(1947), which provided for the creation of a Jewish
State and an Arab State in the Palestinian territory,
with Jerusalem as corpus separatum subjected to
a special international regime, while at the same
time as expressing its commitment to Security
Council resolution 478 (1980). In that connection,
the Government of Uruguay expresses its concern
and objection with the decision of the Government
of the United States, which does contribute to
the essential climate of peace and mutual respect
needed to reach a fair, complete and lasting solution
in Middle East.”
Uruguay voted in favour of General Assembly
resolution 181 (1947), and reaffirms once more the
special status of the city of Jerusalem according to all
of the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and
of the Security Council.
As stated yesterday by Secretary-General António
Guterres, the final status of Jerusalem is an issue that
is yet to be resolved. Therefore, the sovereignty and
the boundaries of Jerusalem must be agreed by Israel
and Palestine in bilateral negotiations. As we have
done since 1947, Uruguay underscores the right of
Israel and Palestine to live in peace, within secure and
internationally recognized borders, in an atmosphere of
renewed cooperation and free of any threat or act that
endangers peace.
The two-State solution continues to be the only
viable option to end the conflict. To that end, it will be
necessary to resume direct, bilateral negotiations at the
earliest opportunity so that all pending issues can be
clarified in order to reach a peaceful, fair and lasting
solution to this long-standing conflict.

17-427499/20

S/PV.8128

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Exactly 37 years ago today, in this very city and
not very far from here, John Lennon was murdered. In
one of its most famous songs, Lennon, a self-declared
pacifist, imagined a world in which humankind could
live in peace, sharing the whole planet, without reasons
for killing or dying. Lennon was a dreamer, but he was
not the only one. I hope that, one day, his dream will
become a reality.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): First of all, I would like to
thank Mr. Mladenov for his briefing. I also welcome
the continued personal engagement of the SecretaryGeneral on this issue.
Following the recent declaration on Jerusalem
by the President of the United States, Italy joined
seven other members of the Security Council in
requesting this meeting. Italy’s position on Jerusalem
remains unchanged. It continues to be consistent
with that expressed by the European Union and with
international consensus based on the relevant United
Nations resolutions.
We believe that the status of Jerusalem as the future
capital of two States needs to be negotiated between
Israel and Palestine, within the framework of a peace
process that will eventually lead to the establishment
of two States, living side by side in peace and security,
taking into account the legitimate concerns and
aspirations of both parties. Until that moment, Italy
will continue to abide by the relevant United Nations
resolutions and will maintain its Embassy to Israel in
Tel Aviv.
We are, of course, very concerned by the risk of
unrest and tensions in the region. We call on all actors
in Palestine and the Middle East to show responsibility,
exercise restraint and refrain from any form of violence
or incitement. As the Secretary-General affirmed in
his statement on Wednesday, there is no alternative to
the two-State solution. Therefore, Italy reiterates its
commitment to working towards that aim together with
the members of the European Union and other regional
and international partners, and to contributing to the
resumption of a meaningful peace process.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for having agreed to
the request of eight members of the Security Council,
including Senegal, to allow this organ, charged by the
Charter of the United Nations to maintain international
peace and security, to be able to discuss in an open
meeting today the situation generated by the decision
10/20

08/12/2017

taken by the United States announced on 6 December.
I also thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his
briefing today.
Our meeting today is all the more important
given that it makes it possible for us to reiterate the
international consensus on the status of Jerusalem,
which the Israeli and Palestinian parties, supported by
the United Nations and, in particular, by the Security
Council, have reserved for final-status negotiations.
There is no need to dwell on the particular
importance of the city of Jerusalem for the Israeli and
Palestinian parties, nor on the symbolism that this holy
city represents for the three monotheistic Abrahamic
religions, and therefore for the entire world. Therefore,
Senegal, in its capacity as Chair of Committee on the
Exercise of Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People,
calls for strict respect for the status quo concerning
Jerusalem, in line with the international parameters
established by General Assembly resolution 181 (II)
as well as Security Council resolutions 476 (1980), 478
(1980) and 2334 (2016). The question of Jerusalem lies
in a final status.
All of us should work towards a climate of peace
and bear in mind the violence of recent days, which has
unfortunately claimed Palestinian and Israeli victims.
My delegation reiterates its condemnation and rejection
of violence, extremism and terrorism, whomever the
perpetrators and whatever the justificaitons. The
violence brings to mind the extreme volatility of the
security situation in Jerusalem, and should therefore
prompt all stakeholders to act with restraint and, above
all, to safeguard the current status of the city pending
the outcome of negotiations, which all of us fervently
hope for.
Senegal once again reiterates its thanks to Jordan
for its ongoing important role as custodian of Christian
and Islamic holy sites, including Al-Haram Al-Sharif.
Lastly, my delegation calls for a return to the
spirit of sharing that prevailed 70 years ago at the
establishment of two States, Israel and Palestine, both
of which have a right to Jerusalem as their capital.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): The
Jewish people are a patient people. Throughout 3,000
years of civilization, foreign conquest, exile and return,
Jerusalem has remained their spiritual home. For nearly
17-42749

08/12/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

70 years, the city of Jerusalem has been the capital of
the State of Israel, despite many attempts by others to
deny that reality. The American people are less patient.
In 1948, the United States was the first nation to
recognize the independent State of Israel. In 1995, the
United States Congress declared that Jerusalem should
be recognized as the capital of Israel and that the United
States Embassy should be located there.
Former United States Presidents Clinton, Bush
and Obama all agreed with that position, but they did
not act. They delayed, in the hope that a peace process
would produce results, but those results were never
attained. For 22 years, the American people have
overwhelmingly supported that position, and they have
waited — and waited. This week, President Trump
finally made the decision to no longer deny the will of
the American people. It is important to be clear about
what the President’s decision specifically means.

S/PV. 8128

peace. We must recognize that peace is advanced — not
set back — when all parties are honest with each other.
Our actions reflected an honest assessment of reality.
I understand the concerns that Security Council
members have in calling this meeting. Change is hard,
but we should never doubt what the truth can do. We
should never doubt that peace can happen when we face
the truth, believe in the human spirit and encourage
each other. To those who have good-faith concerns
about the future of peace between the Israelis and
the Palestinians, let me again assure them that the
President and the current Administration of the United
States remain committed to the peace process. To those
who do not act in good faith, including any person,
leader, country or terrorist group that uses this week’s
decision as a pretext for violence: they are only showing
themselves to be unfit partners of peace.

The President has announced that the United States
recognizes the obvious; that Jerusalem is the capital
of Israel. He has also instructed the State Department
to begin the process of relocating the United States
Embassy from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem. That is what the
President has done; and the following is what he has
not done. The United States has not taken a position
on boundaries or borders. The specific dimensions of
sovereignty over Jerusalem are still to be decided by
the Israelis and the Palestinians through negotiations.
The United States has not advocated changing any
of the arrangements at the Temple Mount/Al-Haram
Al-Sharif. The President specifically called for
maintaining the status quo at the holy sites. Finally,
and critically, the United States is not pre-determining
final-status issues. We remain committed to achieving
a lasting peace agreement. We support a two-State
solution, if agreed by the parties. Those are the facts
of what has been said and done this week. There are
a few more points that are central to the discussion of
this issue.

Finally, I will not let this moment pass without a
comment about the United Nations itself. For many
years, the United Nations has outrageously been of the
world’s foremost centres of hostility towards Israel.
The United Nations has done much more damage to
the prospects for peace in the Middle East than it has
advanced those prospects. We will not be a party to that.
The United States no longer stands by when Israel is
unfairly attacked in the United Nations, and the United
States will not be lectured by countries that lack any
credibility when it comes to treating both Israelis and
Palestinians fairly. It is no coincidence that the historic
peace agreements between Egypt and Israel and between
Jordan and Israel were both signed on the White House
lawn. If and when there is a historic peace agreement
between Israelis and Palestinians, it is likely that that
will also be signed on the White House lawn. Why is
that? It is because the United States has credibility with
both sides. Israel will never be, and should never be,
bullied into an agreement by the United Nations, or any
collection of countries that have proven their disregard
for Israel’s security.

Israel, like all nations, has the right to determine its
capital city. Jerusalem is the home of Israel’s Parliament,
its President, its Prime Minister, its Supreme Court and
many of its ministries. It is basic common sense that
foreign embassies be located there. In almost every
country in the world, the United States Embassy is
located in the host country’s capital city. Israel should be
no different. The United States took that step in the full
knowledge that it would raise questions and concerns.
Our actions are intended to help advance the cause for

To my Palestinian brothers and sisters, I can tell
them with complete confidence that the United States
is deeply committed to achieving a peace agreement
between the Israelis and the Palestinians. We have
demonstrated that commitment over many years and
with the investment of large quantities of financial
resources and diplomatic energy. Sadly, peace between
the two sides has not been achieved, but we will not
give up. Our hand remains extended to them. We are
more committed today to Israeli-Palestinian peace than

17-4274911/20

S/PV.8128

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

08/12/2017

we have ever been, and we believe that we might be
closer to that goal than ever before.

East Jerusalem as its capital. That is the position of
China, and it will not change.

Both Israelis and Palestinians have very real
stories to tell; painful stories of challenges, distrust
and destruction. But this conflict is not just about the
past. It must not be about all of those painful stories.
It must be about future generations. Palestinian and
Israeli children both deserve a future of peace; neither
one deserves it more or less than the other. When those
children have grown up, they should be able to look
back to this time as one when the parties genuinely
negotiated for their sake. Those Palestinian and Israeli
children deserve to have hope for a brighter and more
peaceful future.

The two-State solution is the right choice for the
political settlement of the question of Palestine. As
a permanent member of the Security Council and
a responsible State, China will continue to play a
constructive role with respect to the political settlement
of the question of Palestine.

Our wish and prayer is that this is the time when
both sides stop thinking about their present needs
and start thinking about future generations. I urge all
countries in the Security Council and in the Middle
East to temper their statements and actions in the days
ahead. Peace remains achievable. We must all do our
parts to achieve it.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
emergency public meeting. I also thank Mr. Mladenov,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
for his briefing.
The question of Palestine is at the heart of the issue
in the Middle East and is fundamental to achieving
peace in the region. China is paying close attention
to the recent developments regarding the status of
Jerusalem. A series of Security Council resolutions,
including resolution 2334 (2016), include provisions
regarding the status of Jerusalem. Any unilateral action
that changes the current status of Jerusalem will alter
the long-standing foundation for the settlement of the
question of Palestine. It would trigger new conflicts
and confrontations in the region.
We urge the parties concerned to bear in mind the
overall interest of peace and tranquility, as well as the
peace process in the Middle East, while avoiding any
action that might exacerbate tensions or complicate
the situation. China has always firmly supported and
promoted the peace process in the Middle East. We
support the just cause of the Palestinian people for
restoring their legitimate national rights. We support
the establishment of a fully sovereign and independent
State of Palestine, based on its 1967 borders and with
12/20

Chinese President Xi Jinping has put four proposals
for the promotion of the settlement of the question of
Palestine, namely, advancing the process of political
settlement based on the two-State solution, adhering
to the concept of common, integrated, cooperative and
sustainable security, further coordinating the efforts of
the international community, increasing synergies for
peace and taking integrated measures to promote peace
through development.
This year China received visits by the President of
Palestine, Mr. Abbas, and the Prime Minister of Israel,
Mr. Netanyahu, and has engaged with both sides.
Recently President Xi Jinping sent a congratulatory
message to the meeting in commemoration of the
International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People in which he said that China firmly supports peace
between Palestine and Israel (see A/AC.183/PV.386).
China will remain true to its commitment and
continue to work towards the settlement of question of
Palestine and the promotion of the peace, stability and
development of the Middle East.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I want to thank you,
Mr. President, for having organized this very important
and urgent meeting and to express appreciation to
those Council members who took the initiative for the
meeting. We thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for
his briefing.
We appreciate the statement that the SecretaryGeneral issued two days ago, which we believe was
timely and most appropriate and reaffirmed the longstanding position of the United Nations regarding the
approach and the principles on the basis of which peace,
security and justice could be sought by the Israeli and
the Palestinian sides.
The Chairperson of the African Union Commission
has also spoken on our behalf when he reiterated the
African Union position and called for renewed efforts to
find a just and lasting solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, stressing the solidarity of the African Union
17-42749

08/12/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

with the Palestinian people and its support for their
legitimate quest for an independent and sovereign
State, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
We are indeed very concerned by this latest
development surrounding Jerusalem, because unilateral
measures concerning a place with so much historical,
religious and therefore emotional significance is bound
to cause incalculable damage and undermine hopes
for peace.
Jerusalem, as the Secretary-General said, is a
final-status issue that must be resolved through direct
negotiations between the two parties on the basis of
the relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions, taking into account the legitimate concerns
of both the Palestinian and Israeli sides.
It seems to us that there is only one viable,
realistic, fair and sustainable option for resolving the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict: the two-State formula,
which entails two States living side by side in peace
and security.
We are not aware of any other viable option that
would accommodate the interests of both parties and
also accord with the interests of the region for durable
peace and security while being consistent with the
aspiration that people have for justice and fair play.
We are not convinced that this latest development,
which, not surprisingly, has begun to roil the Middle
East, will advance the cause of peace and lay the
foundation for peace, security and the two-State
solution, with all its implications. Obviously, the
Middle East does not need all this, for it already has
its fair share of insecurity and very complex challenges
that could affect not only the security of the region but
also that of the entire globe.
That is why this latest development is so worrisome
and why it is so critical that ways and means be found
to limit the damage that might be caused and to try, no
matter how difficult it might be, to save the two-State
formula in a credible manner and in a way that goes
beyond paying lip service.
Many who still had some hope despite the many
hurdles have already begun to show signs of despair
and hopelessness. We all know, and life experience
has shown so many times, that when those who
seek moderate solutions are deprived of space and
their credibility is destroyed, the results are never
salutary. That is one way of inadvertently opening

S/PV. 8128

the floodgates for extremism and terrorism. That is to
say, the implications of this latest development are so
huge that it warrants serious handling and readiness
to look into what the Security Council can do to avert
what otherwise could be the further destabilization of a
region that is already facing major challenges.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would like to
thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for
his statement.
Ukraine is convinced that the issue of Jerusalem
is a final-status issue that needs to be resolved through
negotiations only and in strict compliance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions. We believe
that the United Nations, through the Office of Special
Coordinator Mladenov, as well as the Quartet, must
redouble their efforts to resume the negotiations and
to achieve progress in the Middle East peace process.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We express our
appreciation to Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing
and to the delegations of Bolivia, Egypt, Italy, Senegal,
Sweden, the United Kingdom and Uruguay for
requesting this meeting on the status of Jerusalem.
This meeting is important as it demonstrates once
again that there is unity among the States members of
the Security Council that peace in the Middle East is
important, and it is a warning that any unilateral action
to change the status or even a declaration about it will
cause great concern.
Kazakhstan’s position on the Middle East peace
process remains unchanged: maintain the historical
status quo in accordance with the previously reached
international agreements. We firmly support the twoState solution and stand for an early resumption of
dialogue, especially in the bilateral format and without
preconditions. The ultimate goal should be the restoration
and promotion of the peace process in accordance with
the relevant Security Council resolutions, the Madrid
principles, the land-for-peace formula, the road map for
peace and the Arab peace initiative.
We stress once again that there is no alternative
to the two-State solution. We call on both sides to
refrain from provocative actions and rhetoric, to take
appropriate steps to resume direct negotiations as soon
as possible, and to comply with their obligations in the
spirit of mutual respect and understanding, and calm
and compromise, in accordance with the previous
Security Council resolutions.

17-4274913/20

S/PV.8128

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Peace should be based on the inalienable right of
the Palestinians to statehood and the right of Israel to its
own durable long-term security. It is necessary to begin
negotiations on each existing problem with a view to
reaching agreement on pending issues and arriving at a
so-called final status. Only such an approach can lead
to the adoption of a basic treaty.
Kazakhstan is strongly against any modification
of the existing status quo concerning the future of
Jerusalem, as it could aggravate an already difficult
situation and threatens to result in serious consequences
for the entire region and the world.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We have listened attentively to the assessment
of Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process and Personal Representative
of the Secretary-General, of the announcement made in
Washington, D.C., recognizing Jerusalem as the capital
of Israel.
Washington’s decision on Jerusalem was received
with criticism by the Palestinian side and the ArabMuslim world. President Abbas of Palestine emphasized
that the move undoes all the international community’s
efforts to resolve the Middle East issue. At the same
time, Palestinian factions, including the Palestinian
Liberation Organization and Hamas, have called for
strikes and protest marches in the Palestinian territories
of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.
In Moscow, the decisions announced in Washington,
D.C. were received with grave concern. We believe that
a fair and sustainable settlement of the long-standing
Palestinian-Israeli conflict must be achieved on a basis
of commonly accepted international law, including
the relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions, which provides for the settlement of all
aspects of the final status of the Palestinian territories,
including an issue as sensitive as that of Jerusalem,
through direct Palestinian-Israeli negotiations. It is an
alarming fact that the newly declared position of the
United States on Jerusalem risks further complicating
the situation in Palestinian-Israeli relations and in
the region as a whole. We therefore call on all the
parties involved to exercise restraint and refrain from
actions that could have dangerous and uncontrollable
consequences. Particular attention should be paid to
ensuring that all worshippers have freedom of access to
Jerusalem’s holy sites.
14/20

08/12/2017

Russia’s principled position on this issue is
unchanged. It calls for facilitating a lasting PalestinianIsraeli settlement that ensures Israel’s peaceful and
secure existence within internationally recognized
borders and fulfils the Palestinian people’s aspirations
to establish their own independent State, in which East
Jerusalem becomes the future capital of Palestine and
West Jerusalem, the capital of the State of Israel. As
a permanent member of the Security Council and an
active participant and mediator in the Middle East
Quartet, Russia will continue to actively assist the
Palestinians and Israelis in achieving the relevant
agreements. We reiterate our firm position that there
can be no alternative to a two-State solution. Everyone
should have an interest in resolving the PalestinianIsraeli and Arab-Israeli conflicts, and all efforts to
achieve that goal deserve support. However, a decision
that fails to consider the interests of all of the parties in
the Middle East peace process cannot succeed.
We welcome the steps that have been taken to
solidify the unity of the Palestinian people with the
help of Egypt. We support regional stakeholders’
active involvement in the Middle East peace process,
especially that of Cairo and Amman. Russia’s proposal
for convening a summit in Russia for the leaders
of Palestine and Israel is still on the table. We await
the long-promised United States proposals to the
international community for settling the PalestinianIsraeli conflict.
We have already asked the United States to explain
the rationale for its decision to eventually transfer
the United States Embassy in Israel from Tel Aviv to
Jerusalem and what effect it imagines that it will have
on the international mediation efforts of the Quartet
being conducted under the auspices of the United
Nations. We have pointed to the apprehensions voiced
by Arab and Muslim countries in general, as well as
the League of Arab States and the Organization of the
Islamic Conference, about how it could undermine or
even put a stake through the heart of the negotiations
for a two-State solution, in which the States of Israel
and Palestine can live fully, side by side and in security,
in accordance with the relevant General Assembly and
Security Council decisions.
Given the present circumstances, it is more
important than ever to relaunch a sensible political
process aimed at achieving a lasting and sustainable
Palestinian-Israeli settlement based on a two-State
17-42749

08/12/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

solution. In that regard, the Quartet remains a unique
international mediation mechanism.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Japan.
The Security Council has closely followed the
Palestinian issue in its monthly meetings. I thank
Mr. Mladenov for his update, and Japan shares his
assessment of the alarming situation surrounding the
peace process.
Japan’s position remains unchanged. Japan
supports a two-State solution, based on the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Madrid principles,
the Quartet road map, the agreements previously
reached by the parties and the Arab Peace Initiative.
The final status of Jerusalem is part of a range of issues
that should be resolved through negotiations based on
those parameters.
President Trump reaffirmed his strong commitment
to facilitating a lasting peace agreement and his support
for a two-State solution in his announcement two
days ago. Japan appreciates that strong commitment
and support. Japan also notes the importance of the
President’s clear acknowledgement that the final status
of Jerusalem, including the sovereign boundaries
within the city, must be subject to negotiation between
the parties. The United States should continue to
play an important role in advancing peace. However,
Japan is concerned about the fact that the United
States’ announcement could worsen the environment
surrounding the Middle East peace process or lead to
a deterioration of the situation in the Middle East more
generally. Japan took note of the Secretary-General’s
statement two days ago about the Middle East peace
process and of Mr. Mladenov’s briefing today, which
calls for avoiding any unilateral measures that might
jeopardize the prospect of peace. Japan has consistently
reiterated its support for that position in the context of
the issue of settlements and violence. We are deeply
concerned about the increasing tension on the ground.
Cases of violence at such times can easily snowball into
larger crises. Japan has consistently stated that violence
will not bring peace any closer. We call on the parties
to maintain calm and act in the interests of peace rather
than violence.
Against that backdrop, efforts to create an
environment conducive to peace are all the more
important. We have seen various parties put forward
initiatives and proposals for bringing both sides closer

S/PV. 8128

to meaningful negotiations. Their implementation is
key, and Japan calls on both Israelis and Palestinians to
sincerely engage in those initiatives and take advantage
of opportunities leading to peace. For its part, Japan
will support efforts to bring peace in the Middle East
by facilitating confidence-building and the economic
development of Palestine. We are committed to working
with our partners in the international community to
uphold a two-State solution whereby Israel and a future
independent Palestinian State can live side by side in
peace, prosperity and security.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I would like to thank
Japan in its capacity as President of the Security
Council for the leadership it has shown in convening
this emergency meeting. I also express our gratitude
to the eight members of the Council — Egypt, Bolivia,
France, Italy, Senegal, Sweden, the United Kingdom
and Uruguay — who requested this meeting as a matter
of urgency following the recent alarming developments
regarding Jerusalem. We also thank Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his briefing to the Council, and
the Secretary-General for his statement in this regard.
Before I deliver the rest of my statement in English, I
would like to say something in Arabic.
(spoke in Arabic)
From this Chamber, I would like to commend our
great Palestinian people who are defending Jerusalem
today in its neighbourhoods, streets and places of
worship. I would like to commend those at the Gate of
Amud, in all the villages and Palestinian camps and all
over the world. I would like to commend the honourable
people who support and defend international law, our
rights and the resolutions of the Security Council,
and those — whom we support — who are urging the
United States Administration to withdraw its illegal,
irresponsible and provocative decision, which has no
meaning other than that of pleasing Israel, the occupying
Power, as it continues its arrogant and unjust defiance of
international law. I would like to thank the 14 members
of the Security Council who expressed their principled
legal positions with respect to Jerusalem.

17-4274915/20

S/PV.8128

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

(spoke in English)
We come before the Security Council today with
a sense of urgency. We urge the Council to act swiftly
to uphold its duties under the Charter of the United
Nations and the integrity and authority of its resolutions
in the light of the violations and provocations against
Jerusalem’s legal, political and historical status, and
the Palestinian people’s rights and legitimate national
aspirations. The extremely regrettable announcement
by President Donald Trump on 6 December declaring
that the United States recognized Jerusalem as the
capital of Israel, and his decision to move its Embassy
to that city, in direct contravention of Security Council
resolutions and the long-standing international
consensus on Jerusalem, has heightened tensions
and risks the complete destabilization of this volatile
situation, with far-reaching consequences.
The Israeli Government’s glee at this decision
underscores the fact that the situation we face today
has been blatantly instigated by the occupying Power.
Rather than complying with the Council’s repeated
demands to cease its violations in the occupied
Palestinian territory, the Israeli Prime Minister and
his Government have persisted with their crimes and
with their incessant bullying of world leaders into
endorsing Israel’s illegal policies and practices in the
city and even joining it in its attempts to destroy the
possibility of a two-State solution based on the pre1967 lines, including by altering and undermining
Jerusalem’s legal status, character and demography,
along with that of the rest of the occupied territory,
in grave breach of international law and the relevant
United Nations resolutions.
We have often lamented this impunity, but we
have not addressed often enough the actions enabling
the crimes that have led to the grave reality we now
face. The complicity must be recognized. The decision
by the United States to reward the Israelis’ impunity
undermines and essentially disqualifies its leadership
role in the quest for peace in the region. Indeed, world
leaders’ resounding rejection of this provocative
decision is indicative of the general rejection of all
such illegal policies and measures and of the immense
concerns about the dangerous implications of this
decision, including the prospects for peace and security
in the region and beyond. We are grateful for the strong,
principled positions that have been expressed by States
and organizations worldwide. The global consensus in
this regard is clear. International law and the relevant
16/20

08/12/2017

Security Council resolutions, including resolutions 478
(1980) and 2334 (2016), must be upheld and respected;
the status of Jerusalem cannot be unilaterally altered
or determined by any State; and this decision by the
United States should be reconsidered and rescinded.
That the Israeli-Palestinian conflict continues
to pose a threat to international peace and security
is beyond question. That has been confirmed by
the national, political and religious sensitivities and
emotions stirred by these developments. Jerusalem’s
significance to the Palestinian people, both Muslims and
Christians, cannot be underestimated. President Abbas,
in his statement of 6 December, clearly reaffirmed our
historical, national and religious attachment to the Holy
City. His declaration, along with those of Palestinian
officials and millions of Palestinian citizens, should
leave no question that Jerusalem is a matter of priority
and a redline for Palestinians. There can be no just and
lasting solution to the question of Palestine without a
just solution to the question of Jerusalem. Jerusalem
has long been the heart of Palestine and always will be.
Nor can Jerusalem’s significance to all Arabs and
Muslims worldwide be underestimated. It is the first
qibla, and Al-Haram Al-Sharif is the third holiest
sanctuary in Islam. The historic status quo at Al-Haram
Al-Sharif must be fully respected and preserved, as
repeatedly called for by Arab and Muslim nations and
by the international community as a whole, and as
reflected in the resolutions of the Security Council and
the General Assembly. We recognize the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan and its special role and efforts in that
regard as custodian of the holy sites in Jerusalem. And
the clarity and strength of statements made in recent
days — a profound backlash against this irresponsible
unilateral decision — reaffirm the legitimate concerns
and interest of the international community regarding
the question of Jerusalem.
Jerusalem has long been accorded a special
political and legal status, beginning with General
Assembly resolution 181 (II) of 1947, in which the city
was designated a corpus separatum, and the many
resolutions thereafter that called for protection of the
city’s unique spiritual, religious and cultural dimensions
and heritage, and for access to its holy sites by people
of all religions and nationalities, with due regard for
the fact that Jerusalem is sacred to the followers of
the three monotheistic religions, Islam, Christianity
and Judaism. The Assembly has just reaffirmed those
principles by a vast majority in its resolution 72/15 on
17-42749

08/12/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Jerusalem, contrary to the false Israeli narrative and
rhetoric in that regard.
Israel has never been recognized by any country
as sovereign over Jerusalem. Its status remains
unresolved, as affirmed in Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions and by its designation
for decades as a final-status issue in the Middle East
peace process. Moreover, East Jerusalem has continued
to be occupied territory since 1967 and an integral
part of the rest of the occupied Palestinian territory, to
which international law, including the Fourth Geneva
Convention, applies, as reaffirmed by the Council,
most recently in resolution 2334 (2016), the General
Assembly and the International Court of Justice.
We recall the Council’s resolutions on Jerusalem,
including resolution 476 (1980) and resolution 478
(1980), which lays out the clear determination that
“all legislative and administrative measures and
actions taken by Israel, the occupying Power,
which have altered or purport to alter the character
and status of the Holy City of Jerusalem”
have no legal validity and constitute a flagrant violation
of the Fourth Geneva Convention and “are null and
void and must be rescinded forthwith”. Resolution 478
(1980) rejected Israel’s attempts to forcibly annex East
Jerusalem, deeming the occupying Power’s enactment
of its basic law a violation of international law and
demanding that it be rescinded. The Council further
specifically called on all Member States to accept its
decision not to recognize the basic law or any other
such actions seeking to alter the character and status
of Jerusalem, and directly called on “those States that
have established diplomatic missions at Jerusalem
to withdraw such missions from the Holy City”. In
resolution 2334 (2016), the Council unequivocally
affirmed that

S/PV. 8128

Bank, including East Jerusalem and the Gaza Strip,
is an established legal and political fact. No policy
announcement can change that reality, nor can it negate
the rights of the Palestinian people, as per international
law and the relevant United Nations resolutions.
The Security Council must reaffirm its clear
position on the status of Jerusalem and its rejection
of all violations of that status regardless of when they
are committed or who commits them. The Security
Council’s resolutions remain fully valid and must be
implemented. They are the key to peace. The extremely
negative messages that such reckless action sends to our
people are clear. They say that our belief in international
law and the international system, our patience and
perseverance, our unending pursuit of peace and
cooperation in good faith with all peace initiatives,
not to mention our historically painful compromise for
peace, based on a two-State solution, have all been to
no avail. They say that those who play by the rules will
lose and those who trample on the law will win. That
must be redressed. The Council must act to restore the
Palestinian people’s belief in international law as the
most viable path to the realization of our rights and
freedom. The Council must restore our belief that peace
is possible and ensure that no more generations will
suffer this grave injustice.

“it will not recognize any changes to the 4 June 1967
lines, including with regard to Jerusalem, other than
those agreed by the parties through negotiations”.

As President Abbas has repeatedly cautioned,
the Council must also act in order to avert the risks
of further exacerbating religious sensitivities, which
threaten to transform a solvable political-territorial
conflict into a never-ending religious war that will
only be exploited by extremists, thereby fueling more
radicalism, violence, terrorism and strife in the region
and elsewhere. We call on the Council to denounce
the recent decision about Jerusalem, act responsibly
and assert its authority in the efforts to resolve the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We will work with all of
our partners to adopt a Security Council resolution. We
believe that paragraph 3 of Article 27 of the Charter
of the United Nations should be invoked and that it is
applicable in this regard.

The decision of the United States cannot change
those facts. I repeat, the decision of the United States
cannot change those facts. Actions taken contrary
to Security Council resolutions have no legal effect
and cannot change the applicability of international
law to the situation, including the prohibition of the
acquisition of territory by force. The occupied territory
of the State of Palestine, which encompasses the West

We once again urge the United States to rescind its
decision and rectify this serious matter, in conformity
with the relevant resolutions and in a manner that can
salvage the prospects for a peaceful solution and ensure
a future of peace, security, prosperity and dignity for
both the Palestinian and Israeli peoples sooner rather
than later. In line with the relevant resolutions, we urge
States not to recognize such unilateral decisions and the

17-4274917/20

S/PV.8128

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

unlawful situation that has resulted from Israel’s illegal
measures, and to ensure that all of their respective
policies and actions, including vis-à-vis Israel’s illegal
settlement and colonization of our land, conform to that.
We also call on States that have not recognized
the State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, on the basis of the pre-1967 borders, to do so
as a matter of urgency and an investment in peace.
That practical step would accord with the longstanding international consensus and the international
community’s declared commitment regarding a twoState solution. Considering recent developments, it
would also represent an important contribution to
salvaging the prospects for peace and pushing back
against actions that undermine efforts to achieve a just
and lasting solution that is based on the relevant United
Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles, including
the principle of land for peace, and the 2002 Arab
Peace Initiative.
We call yet again for collective peace efforts.
In resolution 2334 (2016), the Council advocated
intensifying and accelerating international and regional
diplomatic efforts aimed at achieving a comprehensive,
just and lasting peace in the Middle East without delay.
It is high time for all the parties concerned to mobilize
such efforts. From now on, it must be a collective
process undertaken by the Security Council and the
Quartet-plus-plus-plus. It must be collective, because
when one party dominated the process, that did not lead
to success. It led to what we saw two days ago.
We cannot continue repeating the same failed
formula and mistakes of the peace process of decades
past. It is clear that only a collective effort can resolve
the prolonged conflict. The recognition that all must
do their part and that a multilateral approach is the
more effective path has been central to the Arab Peace
Initiative and the French initiative, as well as to the
efforts of the Russian Federation, China, Egypt and the
Quartet. It is urgent that we expand on and accelerate
those efforts. One party cannot continue to monopolize
the peace process, and especially not one that acts with
a bias in favour of the occupying Power at the expense
of the law and rights of the occupied people.
For their part, in the days ahead, President Abbas
and the Palestinian leadership will continue their
consultations at all levels to address the critical situation
and determine the most appropriate path forward. That
will include emergency meetings of the Palestinian
18/20

08/12/2017

Liberation Organization’s Central Council to affirm
a unified Palestinian national position, as well as the
upcoming Arab Ministerial Meeting in Jordan and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation’s Islamic Summit
in Turkey on Wednesday. Our overarching priorities will
remain central to all of those efforts — the protection
of our steadfast people, our land, including Jerusalem,
and our holy sites. That will be true as long as Israel’s
belligerent foreign occupation persists. We will make
every effort to bring an end to that occupation and to
achieve a just and lasting peace that upholds the rights
of the Palestinian people, ensures a just solution to the
plight of the Palestinian refugees, in accordance with
resolution 194 (II) and the Arab Peace Initiative, and
achieves the independence of the State of Palestine,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, where our people can
finally live in freedom, dignity, peace and security side
by side with Israel and all our other neighbours in a new
Middle East.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Danon (Israel): Wednesday’s declaration
marks a milestone for Israel, for peace and for the
world. The United States had the courage and true
understanding of justice to officially state what has
always been known — that Jerusalem has always been
and always will be the capital of Israel, and that the
Embassy of the United States belongs in Israel’s capital.
For that, I thank President Trump, Vice President Pence,
Ambassador Haley and the American people.
The Jewish people are an ancient nation. Three
thousand years ago, King David declared the city of
Jerusalem the capital of the Jewish people. Jerusalem
appears in the Bible 660 times. It is the centrepiece
of our vibrant Jewish history. Three times a day, Jews
turn towards Jerusalem to pray. At every birth and
every wedding, we remember Jerusalem. I have here a
replica of an ancient coin, found on the Temple Mount
in Jerusalem. It dates from the year 67 A.D., during
the time of the second Jewish Temple. The words
“Jerusalem the Holy” are inscribed on it. Only three
years later, in the year 70 A.D., our holy temple was
destroyed and the Jewish people were sent into exile for
2,000 years.
Nearly 70 years ago this week, shortly after Israel
declared independence, Prime Minister David BenGurion made a timeless affirmation. He said: “Jerusalem
is an inseparable part of Israel and her eternal capital.
17-42749

08/12/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

No United Nations vote can alter that historic fact.” It
was an important message, one that the world too often
seems to forget.
Last year, in this same Chamber, almost all of
us were here when the Security Council adopted its
shameful resolution 2334 (2016). The Council had the
audacity and the chutzpah to say that Israel’s presence
at the Western Wall in Jerusalem has, and I quote,
“no legal validity and constitutes a flagrant violation
under international law”. Then, in May, UNESCO,
the organization responsible for preserving cultural
heritage, adopted a resolution declaring that Israel has no
legal or historical rights anywhere in Jerusalem. It was
one historic wrong after another. That is why President
Trump’s decision was so important. The United States
had the courage and sound moral judgment to right
those historic wrongs in recognizing Jerusalem as the
capital of the State of Israel.
Middle Eastern capitals are not known for tolerance
or freedom of religion. But not in Israel. Jerusalem,
under a sovereign Israel, is freer and more open to people
of all religions than at any time in history. In Jerusalem,
all people practice their religions freely. These values
are enshrined in our Declaration of Independence, the
founding document of our State. In it, we pledged to
“safeguard the holy places of all religions”. We have
always known that Jerusalem is holy for others, too.
From the moment of our founding, we vowed to create
a State that would honour that holiness; a democracy
that would respect and value the traditions of all people.
That has never changed, nor will it ever change — not
this past week, not tomorrow, not ever.
The announcement on Wednesday revealed a sad
truth about some people around the world, the people
who threaten to ignite a wave of violence against Israel
and Jews everywhere and who may claim they want
peace but whose actions speak louder than their words.
That is why every member of the Security Council
must send a clear message today that there is never any
excuse for violence. Violence must never be used as
a threat. We have heard such threats before. In 1948,
when the State of Israel was established, President
Harry Truman of the United States was warned not to
recognize us. People said that such recognition would
spark terrible violence, but President Truman stood
strong, just as President Trump did this week. They
made the right decision.

S/PV. 8128

The Palestinians now have a decision to make.
They can choose violence, as they have always done.
As we speak, we are seeing reports of rockets flying
from Gaza into Israel. Or they can choose to join us
at the negotiating table. They can meet us to talk — in
Ramallah, Jerusalem or anywhere around the world. I
sincerely hope they make the right decision. The United
States announcement should serve as a reality check for
the Palestinians and for the nations of the world. They
can see this moment for what it is, an opportunity to
initiate hope. They can realize what has always been
true — that recognizing Jerusalem as Israel’s capital is
a critical and necessary step for peace. They can learn
that there will never be peace without Jerusalem as the
capital of the State of Israel. That is why today I call on
all countries, all peace-seeking nations of the world,
to join our American friends, recognize Jerusalem’s
connection to Israel and move their embassies to our
capital. I urge them to understand that this declaration
is a positive step and to see in it the potential that it can
bring to our region.
Twice a year, Jews all over the world conclude two
of our major holidays, Yom Kippur and Passover, with
a prayer. That prayer calls for “next year in Jerusalem”.
Seventy years ago, the Jewish people came home to
Jerusalem. We are grateful to the United States for its
courageous decision and we call on all the nations of
the world to join us this year in Jerusalem, the capital
of the State of Israel.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jordan.
Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
to begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for having
convened this emergency meeting in the delicate
circumstances our region is experiencing and which
pose a threat to international peace and security. I
would also like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
for his briefing ,and I thank the members of the Security
Council that called for this very important meeting to
be convened.
The Government of the Hashemite Kingdom
of Jordan underscores that the decision taken by
the United States Administration on 6 December to
recognize Jerusalem as the capital of Israel and transfer
the Embassy of the United States there constitutes a
violation of internationally legitimate resolutions and
a transgression of the Charter of the United Nations,

17-4274919/20

S/PV.8128

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

which confirms that the status of Jerusalem can be
decided only through final-status negotiations between
the parties involved. The Hashemite Kingdom believes
that any unilateral measure aiming to impose a new
situation on the ground is null and void. That is why
Jordan rejects this decision, which risks exacerbating
tensions, consolidating the Israeli occupation on
Palestinian land and even prejudge the outcome of
negotiations on the final status, as well as inciting anger
and provoke anti-Muslim and anti-Christian sentiment
throughout the Arab world.
We believe that the occupation is the principal
cause of tension in the region and that there will be no
security or stability without a settlement to bring justice
to the Palestinian people and satisfy their legitimate
rights to freedom and the creation of an independent
Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Jordan also highlights the importance and the need to
intensify consultations to find a political horizon that
will prevent despair and aggression from taking root in
the region and its surroundings.
The issue of Jerusalem must be addressed
from the perspective of all three religions. We once
again underscore that the question of Jerusalem is
a final-status issue that must be resolved through a
comprehensive settlement of the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict, while guaranteeing the existence of an
independent Palestinian State along the borders of
4 June 1967 and with Jerusalem as its capital. That is the
only way of achieving security, stability and peace in
accordance with internationally legitimate resolutions
and the Arab Peace Initiative.
The United States recognition of Jerusalem as the
capital of Israel has no validity under law as it only
perpetuates the Israeli occupation of the eastern part of
the city occupied by Israel in June 1967. Resolution 478
(1980) stipulates the non-recognition of Israel’s basic
law on Jerusalem and calls on the Member States with
embassies in Jerusalem to close them. Any proceedings
or measures taken by Israel on Jerusalem that aims to
alter its legal nature and status, including declaration of
it as capital, are null and void as confirmed by various
relevant Security Council resolutions, particularly
resolutions 465 (1980), 476 (1980) and 478 (1980).
We must emphasize that recognition of any status of
Jerusalem as the capital of Israel can have no legal effect

20/20

08/12/2017

in changing the status of Jerusalem from occupied land,
as determined by the General Assembly, the Security
Council and the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice on the Legal consequences of the
construction of a wall in the occupied Palestinian
territory (see A/ES-10/273). Jordan also condemns the
expansion of settlements and asserts their illegality. We
highlight the need to halt all unilateral Israeli measures
that may impose a new reality on the ground. We must
also emphasize the need for the United States to play its
central role as a neutral mediator to settle this conflict
and achieve peace on the basis of the two-State solution,
agreed upon by the entire world as the only way of
settling this conflict and achieving lasting peace.
I wish to emphasize that the Hashemite Kingdom
of Jordan will spare no effort and take all possible
measures, together with the international community,
to help successfully reach a settlement and realize the
legitimate rights of our brotherly Palestinian people. I
would also like to inform the Council that the Hashemite
Kingdom, together with our brothers in the Palestinian
National Authority, has called for an emergency meeting
of the Council of the League of Arab States at the
ministerial level in Cairo tomorrow to coordinate our
position regarding the United States decision and agree
on a collective action mechanism to lessen its negative
effects and contain the potential consequences.
Jordan has also called on Istanbul to hold a meeting
of the Foreign Ministers of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation to unify efforts. That meeting will precede
the summit convened by Turkey, which will be held
next Wednesday in Istanbul rather than on Sunday
in Amman.
In conclusion, under the leadership of His Majesty
King Abdullah II bin Al-Hussein, as Custodian of
the Islamic and Christian holy sites in Jerusalem, the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan will continue its intensive
diplomatic efforts at the regional and international
levels. In close coordination with our brothers in the
Palestinian Authority, we will endeavour to put an
end to the occupation and strive for the creation of
an independent Palestinian State, the protection of
Jerusalem and its Islamic and Christian holy sites and
the preservation of its legal and historic status — a top
priority for Jordan.
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

17-42749
