uMTEDNATI0N.Y

COUNCIL

SECURITY
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THJRTY-TIillRD

YEAR

2069

MEETING: 16 MARCH 1978

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2069)

... .........,. ..... ,......,,..

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . , . . . . . . . . . . , , . . . . , . . , , . . , . , . , . . . . . .

1

Complaint by Zambia:
Letter dated 9 March 1978 from the Permanent Representative of Zambia to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/ 12589) . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , , . . . . , . . . . . . . , . . . .

1

slPV.2069

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention bf such a synibol indicates a reference to a United Nations document,
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appearsor in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of’ the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, becamefully operative on that date.

2069th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday,
President: Mr. Ivor RICHARD
(United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).

16 March 1978, at 3.30 p.m.
to invite them to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure,

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bolivia, Canada, China, Czechoslovakia, France, Gabon,
Germany, Federal Republic of, India, Kuwait, Mauritius,
Nigeria, Union, of .Soviet Sqcialist Republics,, United ,&me
dam of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Venezuela.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Florin (German
Democratic Republic), Mr. Boaten (Ghana) and Mr. Mills
(Jamaica) took the places reserved for they ,@,the side of
the Council chamber. “”
3. The PRESIDENT: Members of the Council have before
them in document S/12601 the text of a letter dated 15
March from the representatives of Gabon, Mauritius and
Nigeria which reads as follows:

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2069)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. Complaint by Zambia:
Letter dated 9 March 1978 from the Permanent
Representative of Zambia to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 2589)

“We, the undersigned members of the Security Council,
have the honour to request that, during its meetings
devoted to consideration of the ‘Complaint by Zambia’,
the Council extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. George Silundika,
representative of the Patriotic Front of Zimbabwe.”

The meeting was called to order at 4 p.m.
4. If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council
agrees to the request..

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

It was so decided.

Complaint by Zambia:
Letter dated 9 March 1978 from the Permanent Representative of Zambia to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/12589)

5. Mr. BARTON (Canada): It is a sad comment on the
present state of international life that, almost every time I
have had to speak in the debates of the Council, I seem to
have been moved to deplore loss of human life and
destruction of property. Once again, the deplorable events
of 6 March in Zambia bring to the attention of the Council
the disastrous consequences of the inability of the international community to fmd an adequate solution to the
13-year-old illegal seizure of power by the white minority of
Southern Rhodesia.

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
taken by the Council at the last meeting, I invite the
representative of Zambia to take a place at the Council
table and the representatives of Botswana, Cuba, Egypt,
Mozambique, the United Republic of Tanzania and the
Upper Volta to take the places reserved for them at the side
of the Council chamber.

6. We all, know that this most recent incursion into
Zambiaby the armedforcesof Ian Smith is not anisolated
incident but only one in a long seriesof provocations and
hostile actsagainstthe sovereigntyand territorial ‘integrity
of Southern Rhodesia’sneighbours-not only Zambia,
which suffereda similarattack in 1973, but alsoBotswana
and Mozambique,Weall know that theseirresponsibleraids
are the result of the senseless
determinationof a repressive
administrationto maintain its privilegesat whatever cost,
beit in termsof internal sufferingor regionalinstability.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mwale (Zambia)
took a place at the Council table and Mr. Tlou (Botswana),
Mr. Alarcdn (Cuba), Mr. Abdel Me&d (Egypt), Mr. Lob0
(Mozambique), Mr. Salim (United Republic of Tanzania)
and Mr. Bamba (Upper Volta) took the placesreservedfor
them at the sideof the Council chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform membersof
the Council that I have received letters from the representativesof the German Democratic Republic, Ghanaand
Jamaicain which they request that they shouldbe invited
to participate in the discussion. In accordancewith the
usual practice, I propose, with the consentof the Council,

7. Thereis no doubt in our mindsthat suchactionsmust
be deploredand condemned,But it must alsobe our duty
to seek ways to eliminate the causesof such a serious
situation. In recent days, the Council debated this very
1

,,.

question, and it was regrettable that it was unable to reach
a consensus 01) the best way to reactivate multilateral
efforts for the elaboration of a viable, internationally
acceptable settlement. Canada, for its part, remains prepared to encourage any initiative designed to bring together
the representatives of the people of Zimbabwe so that a
peaceful, stable and multiracial society can be established in
that long-suffering country.
8. We deplore this latest hostile act against Zambia and we
believe that the Council should put clearly on record its
condemnation of all such acts, whether perpetrated against
Zambia or any other State in southern Africa. We hope that
such a condemnation will make clear to the illegal minority
rdgime of Salisbury that its purported change of heart with
respect to majority rule cannot be given credence if its
practice perpetuates human suffering.
9. Mr. N’DONG (Gabon) (interpretation from Bench):
Mr. President, it is an irony of fate that at the very time
when we were examining the situation in Southern
Rhodesia-a situation made very explosive by the so-called
internal settlement agreement, which has been purely and
simply rejected by the international community-the
ignoble Ian Smith did not hesitate for a single instant about
launching his mercenary troops against an independent and
peaceful State, the Republc of Zambia, member of the
Organization of African Unity and Member of the United
Nations.
IO. We have heard the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Zambia [2068th meeting], whose presence here we welcome, give a clear and concise description of the barbarous
attack of which his country was the victim. Furthermore,
he set forth the deep reasons that led his Government to
request that the Security Council should be convened
urgently. The facts he described are particularly serious
and, in my delegation’s opinion, point to a flagrant
violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of a
State Member of the Organization. They also clearly
constitute a threat to international peace and security in
that part of Africa. For all those reasons, the Council
should give this question the serious examination that it
requires.

:

:

13. I need hardly described at length a situation that ha:s
already been thoroughly considered by the Council-that is,
the political situation in Zimbabwe, Nevertheless, I should
like to remind representatives in this connexion that the
Council has adopted a certain number of decisions, in
particular resolution 253 (1968), decreeing mandatory economic sanctions against the rebel British colony. And very
recently-in
fact the day before yesterday-the
Council
adopted resolution 423 (1978). For its part, the General
Assembly has adopted several resolutions condemning the
ilIega1 racist minority regime and appealing to all Member
States to support the just cause of the people of Zimbabwe.
All those measures have but one aim: the total and
complete isolation of the illegal racist minority Ian Smith
rdgime until its unconditional surrender, which should
naturally lead to the effective and definite transfer of
power to the black majority.
14. Banished by the international community, unable to
repel the offensive of the Zimbabwean patriotic forces,
strangled by an economy that has been disorganized by the
strict application of the sanctions decreed by the Security
Council, the Smith &ime, its back against the wall,
is
forced to resort to acts of premeditated aggression agaimt
the neighbouring independent and sovereign States, under
the false pretext of the use of its so-called right of hot
pursuit against the freedom fighters of Zimbabwe. There
can be no doubt but that these explanations amount 110
delaying manoeuvres designed to seek at all costs to
internationalize the conflict through attempts to destabilize
the regimes of the neighbouring countries. Thus, from 6 lto
8 March this year, Zambia was the victim of cowardly
aggression on the part of Smith’s mercenary forces. Thtls
was a genuine military expedition using a large amount of
equipment: artillery, fighter aircraft, helicopters, infantry.
These troops of faithless and lawless mercenaries pitilessly
massacred peaceful and innocent persons and went about
their cynical work of destruction in the Luangwa district to
their heart’s content.

11. I do not need to recall that this is not the first time
that Smith’s hordes have embarked on such sanguinary
expeditions against independent African countries neighbours of Zimbabwe. The list of these heinous actions is well
known and becomes longer each day. Mozambique, Eotswana and Zambia have one after the other been the victims
of these dastardly attacks by Smith’s mercenaries.

15. The means that were used show very eloquently that
this was a premeditated attack and that the ignoble Iian
Smith regime is no longer confining itself to minor
incursions by commandos across the Zambian frontiers or
to simple violations of Zambian air space. This is now a reai
war of aggression using the most deadly means for the
purpose of weakening the African countries in general and
the so-called front-line countries in particular and making
them renounce their sacred duty of resolutely assisting the
Zimbabwean nationalists in their just struggle against the
oppression of the white racist settlers, in conformity wj.th
the relevant resolutions of the United Nations and the
Organization of African Unity.

12. An awareness of the deep and true meaning of the
aggression against. the Republic of Zambia leads inexorably
to an examination of the particularly alarming situation
existing in Zimbabwe. Indeed, the question that we are
discussing today is but one of the consequences of the
tragic situation in which the people of Zimbabwe have been
living since 11 November 1965, the date of the unilateral
proclamation of independence by a handful of white racist
settlers.

16. These measures of intimidation will never prevail over
the unwavering determination of the Republic of Zambia
and of all the independent African States members of the
Organization of African Unity to give unreserved support to
the Zimbabwean nationalists in their struggle against this
bastion of colonialism and racism in that part of Africa. In
this connexion I should like to recall that independent
Africa has pledged its faith before the General Assembly
through the voice of the President of the Republic of
Gabon, His Excellency El Hadj Omar Bongo, who, spealoing

on 14 October 197’7 in his capacity as current President of
the Organization of African Unity, said:
“ . . . The whole purpose of human intelligence is to

andracist rule over the country but alsofrom its repeated
acts of aggressionagainst neighbouringStates. In the
Council we have heardcomplaintsby the Governmentof
Mozambique, the Government of Botswana and the
Governmentof Zambia.

avert catastrophe.
“Our peoples will spare no effort to assist their
unfortunate brothers. Their fate involves not only justice
but the security of the continent. That security will
remain uncertain, vulnerable and illusory as long as such a
source of international crisis remains at our very doorstep.“’

20. Yesterday we heardthe statementof the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Zambia[2068th meeting] giving the
detailsof the latest act of aggression
committedagainstthe
peopleand territory of his country. While I listenedto his
descriptionof the attacksI wassaddenednot only by the
brutality with which they had been carried out and the
great number of casualties
they had causedbuy alsoby the
fact that the Council has not been able to deal with a
problemof which it hasbeenseizedfor somany years.The
whole situation becomesfarcical and, indeed, a sad commentary on the effectivenessor credibility of this supreme
organ which has assumed
a responsibilityfor maintaining
international peaceandsecurity.

The militant commitment of Africa as a whole to this just
struggle cannot be a matter of indifference either to the
international community or to the Security Council.
17. Today the Republic of Zambia is the target of Ian
Smith’s mercenary forces, because of its determination to
apply scrupulously the decisions of the Organization. The
repeated attacks by the Smith forces against that brother
country can be interpreted only as defiance of the
international community as a whole. Confronted by that
defiance, the reaction of the peace-loving and justice-loving
world must be firm. Thus, the Security Council must once
again demonstrate its effectiveness by unanimously and
solemnly condemning the barbarous, unjustified aggression
of which the Republic of Zambia has been the victim and
which is a serious threat to international peace and security.
The Council must also take adequate measures to put an
immediate and final end to these repeated aggressions by
Smith; it should not merely adopt resolutions of condemnation. To that end, the Council needs the active co-operation
of the United Kingdom, the aclministering Power for
Southern Rhodesia. In the view of my country, Southern
Rhodesia is a British colony. Hence, the United Kingdom
remains responsible at the international level for the
criminal acts of its colony. It is therefore for the United
Kingdom to assume all its responsibilities by removing
Smith and his cohorts from the political life of Zimbabwe,
and to do so with authority, by the effective transfer of
power to the black majority. The United Kingdom can do
that; it has done it in other places and at other times. We
sincerely believe that Ian Smith’s eviction from the Zimbabwean political scene is a sine qua non for a return to
genuine peace in that subregion of Africa, That seems to US
to be one of the constructive solutions to the problem with
which we are concerned.

21. Foreign Minister Mwale said that, in the aggression
launchedagainstZambiaby the illegalregimein Rhodesia,
the enemy had employed10 fighter aircraft, sevenhelicopters and morethan 600troops.Theseattacksand the battle
which ensuedlastedfor three days.Twenty-two Zambians
lost their lives and 19 wereinjured. Hundredsof peoplein
the area were obliged to flee their homesfor safety and
werecurrently without food, shelteror clothes.
22. A few weeksago,Botswanawassubjectedto a further
act of aggression
by troopsof the sameillegalregimewhich
resulted in many casualties.Before then, the world had
beenshockedby the viciousassaultby the armedforcesof
the Smith regimeagainstrefugeecampsand villagesin the
border areasof Mozambique,resultingin over a thousand
deaths.
23. Surely the time hascomefor the Security Council to
bring an immediatehalt to suchwanton actsof aggression.
Surely the time hascomewhenthe Councilshouldexecute
the judgement it passedagainstthe illegalregimein 1967
when it declaredthat it wasa threat to internationalpeace
andsecurity and shouldbebroughtto an end.
24. Neither peacenor stability canbe restoredto southern
Africa so long as Smith and his racist minority group
continue in power. This has been made clear by the
liberation movementsof the regionthrough the accredited
leadershipof Mr. JoshuaNkomo and Mr. Robert Mugabe.
Their position-and in this they speakfor the people of
Zimbabwe-is that the armedstrugglewill continueSO long
asthe Smith regimecontinuesin power and so long asthe
will of the majority is deniedexpressionandsovereignty.

18. In conclusion, the delegation of Gabon firmly condemns, as it has always done, the dastardly aggression by
the Ian Smith rebel regime against the sister Republic of
Zambia and takes this occasion to express to the people and
Government of Zambia Gabon’s active solidarity with
them.

25. It is not comfortingto learnfrom the information that
hasbeengivento usby the ForeignMinister of Zambiathat
compliancewith mandatorysanctionsagainstRhodesiahas
beenhonoured morein the breachthan in the observance.

19. Mr. RAMPI-IUL (Mauritius): Thirteen years ago, the
Security Council unanimously determined that the illegal
regime in Rhodesia constituted a threat to international
peace and security and all States were called upon to lend
their active support towards bringing about its downfall.
Since then, the Council has had to deal with innumerable
complaints arising not only from the regime’s tyrannical
1 O#icial Recoj-ds of the General Assembly, Thiwsecond
Sh, Plenary MeetingJ, 34thmeeting,
paras.80 and 81.

26. There is no doubt in my mind that there is an
international conspiracyto maintainand to perpetuatethe
rule of the Smith regimeindefinitely or until suchtime as
conditionsare createdthat would ensurethe protection of
certain interests. It is quite evident that the aircraft and
arms which keep the Smith regimein power are being

Ses-

3

I
supplied with the direct involvement of South Africa and
witi fie active participation of special-interest
groupsin
the countries of origin. This is an intolerable situation
which reveals defianceof and contempt for the Security
Council’sauthority.
27. Very soon the Councilwill be consideringthe report
of its Committee on Sanctionsand will again,I hope,
discussareas in which sanctionscan be extended and
tightened. While my delegationrecognizes
that someuseful
purposehasbeenservedby the applicationof sanctions,the
measureswe have proposeddo not go far enough to
influence the situation, andproceduresfor obtainingstrict
compliancein their applicationhavefallen far short of the
requirements.

suffer as a result of its strict observanceof economic
sanctions
againstSouthernRhodesia.
31, Although the Foreign Minister of Zambia did not
mention this, it is a fact that Zambia’scompliancewith the
application of mandatory sanctions has entailed greater
economic sacrifice for it than for any other country,
Although that is not the issueat the moment, that fact
shouldbe borne in mind, becauseZambia’sdecisionfive
years ago to severall trade and communicationlinks with
SouthernRhodesiawasthe first major blow sufferedby the
illegal regime.The regimehasnot forgotten that decision,
neitherhasit acceptedZambia’sunswervingdetermination
to stand by the liberation movement of the peopleof
Southern Rhodesiauntil freedom and independenceare
established
in the country.

28, I could not agreemorewith what the ForeignMinister
of Zambiasaidwhenhe raisedthe questionOf tighteningoil
sanctionsagainstSouthern Rhodesia.Furthermore, since
the oil which keeps the Smith military machine in
operationis suppliedby South Africa, the time is certainly
appropriatefor the Council to take more effective action
againstSouth Africa under ChapterVII of the Charterasa
form of pressureto ensureits compliancewith the decision
of the Council.

32. The attacks by Smith are not directed againstthe
liberationmovement,ashasbeenreported in somequarters
of the international media and in particular by Smith, but
are deliberately planned to destroy the communications
systemin the border areasof Zambia, to spreadfear and
alarm among the Zambian border population and to
pressure
Zambiainto changingits policy towardsthe illegal
regime.

29. The aircraft, the helicopters,the tanks and armoured
cars,the gunsand the ammunitionbeingemployedby the
Smith regime are all manufacturedabroad. Surely the
Governments of the countries of origin can, if they SC
desire,and if they have the political will, institute within
their countries the measures
necessaryto halt the saleof
armsto Rhodesiaandthe supplyof vital spareparts.

33. PresidentKaunda is a man of peace,a leaderof great
humanity, a statesmanwho has explored every possible
avenue,evento the extent, aswe were remindedby Foreign
Minister Mwale, of having discussedthe problem directly
with Smith and Vorster in an effort to bring about a just
and lasting solution, a solution that would ensurefor the
oppressed
majority in Zimbabwe their inalienableright to
self-determinationand genuineindependence.

30. Throughout the yearsin whichthe UnitedNationshas 34. It is important and indeed necessaryfor the,Security
beenseizedof the problemof SouthernRhodesiawe have Council and for the United Kingdom to co-operateclosely
alwayssupportedthe position-insisteduponby the admin- with PresidentKaunda and other front-line leadersin the
isteringPower-that the United Kingdomhad legal author- collectiveeffort of establishinga firm basisfor a settlement.
ity over Rhodesiaand thereforehad the ultimate interna- We must not allow the Anglo-American plan for Rhodesia
tional obligation of restoring constitutional rule to the to lose its momentumbecauseof the unacceptableSalisTerritory. Wehad hopedthat it wouldbe ableto copewith
bury agreement.
the rebellion, asit had promptly andfirmly donein other
parts of its former empire. Unfortunately it has pre- 35. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the reprevaricated and been apatheticwheneverfacedwith the root
sentative of Jamaica. 1 invite him to take a place at the
questionof the interestsof the white minority. This indeed Counciltable and to makehis statement.
hasbeen tragic, because,
had it actedwith resolutionsoon
after the rebellion took place, the internal situation in
36. Mr. MILLS (Jamaica):Mr, President,first I shouldlike
Rhodesiawould havebeensuchasto sparethat country the
to thank you and, through you, the other membersof the
great loss of life it sufferedand the infinite harm that has Council for affording my delegation the opportunity of
been done to relations between the black and white participatingin this important debate, calledat the request
populations.But there is still time for the UnitedKingdom of the Government of Zambia to consider the latest
to make a positive contribution to the long delayed premeditatedand unprovoked attack perpetrated against
settlement of this problem, The Anglo-Americanplan, Zambia’ssovereignty and territorial integrity by forcesof
which wasfavourably receivedby all parties,of coursewith
the rebelminority regimeof Southern Rhodesiaon 6,7 and
the exception of Smith, provides the best basisfor a 8 Marchlast.
solution. But until a just and lasting solution to the
37. I would alsoassociate
myself with previousspeakers
in
Rhodesian problem is found we must not fail in our
responsibility to provide countries with the assistance congratulatingyou on your assumptionof the presidency
necessaryfor them to defendthemselves
againstaggressive of the Council for the month of March. Your abilitiesand
actions of the Smith regime.Zambia,aswell asBotswana experienceas a diplomat, politician and jurist, as well as
and Mozambique,mustbe provided with the meansto act
your well-known skill in the art of negotiation, amPlY
in self-defenceagainstthe incursionsof the Smith regime, qualify you to guide the Council’sdeliberationsduringthis
Zambia must be given economicassistance
to enableit to
month. In the debateon the RhodesianquestionWh.kll was
cope with the specialeconomichardshipsit continuesto
just concluded,you fully demonstratedthosequalities.
4

38. The Council is well aware that this is not the first
occasion on which Zambia has had to bring to its attention
acts of aggression perpetrated against that country by racist
white minority regimes in southern Africa. In July 1969,
fie Council considered and strongly censured the aggression
of the former colonialist regime of Portugal against Zambia.
In October 1971, it considered the South African aggres.
sion against Zambia and called upon South Africa fully to
respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Zambia.
In January 1973, the Council considered and condemned
the aggression committed by the illegal Rhodesian regime
against Zambia.
39. Within the past 27 months, the Council has had on
four occasions to consider casesof aggression by the white
minority regimes against sovereign and independent African
nations: in March 1976, there was the case of South
African aggression against Angola, in July 1976, there was
the South African aggression against Zambia, in January
1977, the Southern Rhodesian aggression against Botswana,
in June 1977, the Southern Rhodesian aggression against
Mozambique, Members of the Council are also aware of the
aggressioncommitted by that same illegal regime on 27
February 1978 against Botswana,
40. Now the Council meets once more to consider
aggressionby the illegal Smith regime against Zambia. In
this connexion, my delegation wishes to thank the Foreign
Minister of Zambia for his lucid exposition given yesterday
[206&h meeting] when he furnished members of the
Council with specific details of the attack, The delegation
of Jamaica fuIly supports the statement made by him.
41. It is clear that the existence of the white minority
regimes in southern Africa constitutes a grave threat not
only to peace and security of independent African nations
in southern Africa but also to the peace and security of the
entire region.
42, Zambia’s geographical and geo-political situation, its
commitment to the cause of human dignity, brotherhood
and equality and freedom, its commitment to the forces of
liberation and justice, and its dedicated commitment to the
task of ensuring that all the indigenous peoples of southern
Africa freely and totally participate in the affairs of their
countries have made both that country and its neighbours-Botswana, Mozambique and Angola-targets of attack by the racist regimes.
43. My Government has pledged and will continue to
pledge ‘its support for the peoples of southern Africa
struggling against those racist regimes. Here, with the
Council’s permission, I shall quote from a message sent by
my Prime Minister, the Honourable Michael Manley, to His
ExcellencyPresident Kaunda:
“The Government and people of Jamaica are gravely
concerned at the attack on Zambia by Rhodesian forces.
The unprovoked hostility against your country is yet
another indication that the domination of Zimbabwe,
Namibia and South Africa by racist regimes is a threat to
international peace and security.
“We condemn this wanton act of aggression by the
illegal Smith regime and express our firm support for the

Government and peoples of Zambia in defence of their
territorial integrity.
“I wish to affirm my country’s solidarity with the
struggle for the liberation of southern Africa.”
44. Members of the Council are not unaware of the
additional price which Zambia has had to pay for its
principled and courageous stand against the forces of
reaction in southern Africa. It has suffered considerable
material hardship by reason of the imposition of economic
sanctions against the illegal Smith regime.
45. The intentions of the Smith and Vorster regimes are
all too clear. As the Foreign Minister of Zambia and other
speakers have pointed out, such acts of aggression are
intended to achieve two purposes: first, to demoralize
Zambia and its neighbours and to dissuade them from
pursuing the principled stands they have taken; secondly, to
internationalize the conflict by drawing Zambia and other
front-line States into direct conflict with the racist and
oppressive regimes.
46. Repeated aggressive acts of that nature pose a threat
not only to the peace and security of independent sovereign
nations of southern Africa, the peace and security of the
region and, indeed, international peace and security, but
also to the authority and competence of the Security
Council, the organ primarily responsible for peace and
security. The question with which the Council is faced is
not only what response it should make in connexion with
this latest act of aggression, but also what its long-term
response will be, considering the record of unprovoked
aggression committed by the illegal Smith regime against
the front-line States,
47. We join in demanding that the Council should strongly
condemn this recent armed invasion and demand of the
illegal regime respect for Zambia’s sovereignty and territorial integrity. We also ask the Council to consider whether
such repeated acts of aggression do not warrant strong and
effective measures consistent with the relevant provisions of
the Charter.
48. We are sure that arguments will be adduced-as they
have been in the past whenever the questions of Namibia or
Zimbabwe have been raised and in responseto demands for
strong measures against the white minority regimes in
southern Africa-to the effect that delicate negotiations are
either under way or will shortly be under way, and that to
consider strong and effective action would be to jeopardize
such negotiations. We are afraid that such arguments have
been used much too often without the slightest shred of
justification and have thus lost whateverlittle validity they
may originally have had. What we will sayis that, unless the
racist white minority regimes-in particular the Smith
regime-are removed, the root-cause of the problem of
aggression in southern Africa will not be eradicated.
49. The Council concluded a most important debate on
Southern Rhodesia last Tuesday and adopted resolution
423 (1978), by which it condemned all attempts and
manoeuvres by the illegal regime aimed at the retention of
power by a racist minority and at preventing the achieve-

I

i

ment of independence by Zimbabwe. My Government has
publicly rejected and denounced the so-called internal
settlement, It would be naive to expect that the internal
settlement would change the character of the regime. The
Government of the United Kingdom has the historic
responsibility of administering the Territory, and last
Tuesday, Sir, you outlined the steps taken in the exercise
of your Government’s responsibility [206irh meetiN/. It
is to your Government that we look for the immediate
removal of the illegal regime in Rhodesia, thus bringing
about the Territory’s early attainment of independence
under majority rule and thereby contributing to the
creation of an effective state of peace and security in the
area.

55. On 6 March last. 10 Rhodesian iet aircraft ctor~erl
Zambian borders and bombed villages h the Kavalamanja
area of the Luangwa District of Lusaka Province. Seven
Rhodesian helicopters dropped a large force of paratroopers
in the area. The invading Rhodesian forces massacred
peaceful civilians and burned a number of villages,

50. The delegation of Jamaica is grateful for having been
privileged to participate in this debate. Our participation
must be viewed as an expression of our solidarity with the
Government and people of Zambia as they pursue their
principled stand against the white racist minority regimes in
southern Africa.

“The Arab Republic of Egypt received with great
concern the report of the military aggression perpetrated
today by the racist regime of Rhodesia, on land and by
air, against the sisterly Republic of Zambia. The Arab
Republic of Egypt, while strongly condemning this
aggression against a brotherly African people and one of
the African front-line States, considers this aggression a
grave challenge to the whole African continent and that it
unmasks the true intentions of the racist regime of Ian
Smith to abort all efforts for a peaceful and just
settlement and for the realization of majority rule which
the world community is striving to achieve in Zimbabwe,
The Arab Republic of Egypt also condemns the efforts of
the racist regime in Salisbury to maintain its racist control
over the national majority through the so-called internal
settlement. Egypt once again reiterates its solidarity with
its sister African countries for the support and assistance
of the struggle of the people of Zimbabwe under the
leadership of the Patriotic Front for the liberation of
Zimbabwe in accordance with the resolutions of the
Organization of African Unity and of the United Nations.
Egypt will continue to shoulder its responsibilities for the
support and consolidation of the African front-line States
to resist the colonial and racist attacks of the racist
regimes of Salisbury and Pretoria. On the instructions of
President Sadat, Egypt’s Foreign Ministry will continue to
follow closely the situation and to make the necessary
contacts in this regard in order to face the grave situatior!
resulting from the aggression committed by the Ian Smith
regime .”

---““..

56. Egypt has been following with great concern and
indignation the news of the intensified attacks by the
Rhodesian army against the sister African State of Zambia,
President Sadat expressed Egypt’s concern over the criminal
invasion in his message to President Kaunda. The Egyptian
Government issued a statement in the wake of the criminal
act which said:

51. It would seem, then, that the termination of this
intolerable situation calls for action from a number of
directions. First, we hope that the Council will not only
condemn the recent aggression committed by the illegal
Smith regime against Zambia, but will give serious consideration to other strong and effective measures consistent
with the relevant provisions of the Charter. Secondly, the
international community must increase the pressure on the
illegal regime, and those countries which have afforded
direct or indirect support to it must now seek to place the
interests of the majority of the people of Zimbabwe above
their own material interests. Again, the Government of the
United Kingdom, which has failed to exercise its authority
in an effective way in respect of the illegal regime, must
now be fully convinced that strong and immediate action
on its part towards the removal of that regime is necessary.
Finally, those who have struggled and those who have
fought in the battlefield to free the people of Zimbabwe
will no doubt continue that struggle until the issue of
liberation and freedom is settled.
52. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Egypt, whom I invite to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

57. The racist regime of Ian Smith has been given many
opportunities to change its attitude and to comply with
United Nations resolutions, but it has opted not only to
perpetuate the illegal
qua but also to attack African
States. Furthermore, the Anglo-American initiative, which
constitutes a good basis for negotiation, has been rejected
by the illegal racist minority regime.

53. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID (Egypt): Sir, allow me first of
all to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I am
convinced that your vast political experience will be of
great value in helping the Council to find a wise solution to
the important question of which it is seized. I should also
like to express my delegation’s gratitude to you and to the
other members of the Council for having given us the
opportunity to participate in this debate.

status

58. The latest manoeuvres clearly show that the regime’s
objectives are to deceive world public opinion, maintain its
control over the black majority, disrupt the unity of
national liberation organizations and sow the seeds of
disunity between the African countries and the freedom
fighters. To achieve those ends, the racist rdgime declared
the so-called internal settlement, strengthened its ties with
its traditional supporter in South Africa and expanded the
policy of “hot pursuit” and premeditated acts of aggression
against neighbouring States.

54. The Council is meeting for the second time this week
to discuss another irresponsible act committed by the illegal
racist minority regime in Southern Rhodesia. At a previous
meeting, the so-called internal settlement was considered
unacceptable by the Council and by all peace-loving
countries. This time, the illegal racist minority regime has
resorted to its usual practice of international terrorism by
invading the territory of an independent African State.
6

59. There is no doubt in our minds that the international
community in general and the United Kingdom in particular bear a grave responsibility for the deteriorating
situation in Southern Rhodesia.

67. In these circumstances, the Government and people of
Zambia in their heroic struggle against foreign aggression
have the support of all their friends, as was eloquently
stated in the communique that was unanimously approved
by the Coordinating Bureau of Non-Aligned Countries in
New York and which has been distributed to members of
the Council [see S/1259.5].

40. The complaint before the Council is very clear and
concerns a flagrant violation of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of one of the States Members of the
Organization. The Council should be able to deal firmly
with this ignominious act. It should not only condemn the
racist regime at Salisbury but should also take all appropriate measures to remove this regime, which constitutes a
threat to international peace and security.

68. It is obvious that the fundamental cause of thk
problem that the Council is now analysing is the persistence
in Rhodesia of a minority and illegal regime whose
existence has been condemned by the United Nations and
which has been neither recognized or accepted by any
member of the international community. With the connivance or support of severalWestern countries, this regime
has continued to exist since 1965 in defiance of the
innumerable resolutions adopted by the General Assembly
and by the Security Council. Its existence has meant for
millions of Africans in Zimbabwe the perpetuation of not
only colonial exploitation but of an iniquitous system of
racial oppression and discrimination. Some Western countries, insincerely alleging a desire to prevent violence, first
allowed Mr. Sinith illegally to seize control of a Territory
that is still a British colony and later tolerated his remaining
in power, in spite of the fact that for millions of Africans in
Zimbabwe and in the neighbouring countries it meant the
systematic imposition of the cruellest forms of violence
reflected daily in the assassinationof innocent civilians, the
destruction of African hamlets and villages and the constant
threat to the peace and security of the inhabitants of the
region. Those who have thus allowed the racists to win time
so as to engagein one manoeuvre after another are the ones
who are mainly responsible for a situation that is constantly
deteriorating and that threatens international peace and
security. That situation would not exist were it not that the
Smith clique was receiving military, political and financial
assistance from several Western countries, and above all
from those who pretend to play the role of sponsors of
deceptive initiatives supposedly designed to solve the
problems in that part of the world.

61. We strongly condemn the illegal racist minority regime
of Southern Rhodesia for its act of aggression against our
brothers in Zambia.
62. Egypt appreciates the heroic resistance of the frontline States and their unwavering support of the struggle of
liberation movements against the illegal regimes of Salisbury and Pretoria. We will continue to shoulder our
responsibility of supporting and consolidating the African
front-line States until our brothers in Zimbabwe and in
Namibia attain their independence.
63. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Cuba. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and make his statement.
64. Mr. ALARCON (Cuba) (interpretation from Spanish):
Mr. President, may I first of all express to you and, through
you, to the other members of the Council my gratitude for
allowing me to participate in the present debate. I should
like to avail myself of this opportunity to congratulate
Mr. Troyanovsky, the representative of the Soviet Union,
on the wise and effective manner in which he directed the
work of the Council during the month of February.
Likewise, I should like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of this body. In the
performance of this function, you are once again displaying
your recognized experience and ingenuity.

69. Some felt the need hastily to declare that the latest
manoeuvre of the Salisbury regime, the so-called internal
settlement, was a “step in the right direction”. Events have
nevertheless clearly demonstrated the direction in which
Mr. Smith’s steps were moving. Shortly before the opening
of the talks on the so-called internal settlement, Rhodesian
troops launched a wanton large-scale attack against the
territory of Mozambique. Only hours after this settlement
was reached at Salisbury, Rhodesian forces attacked the
territory of Zambia and, on the very eve of the convening
of the Security Council in order to consider the situation in
Rhodesia, racist commandos attacked Botswana. The
Governments that are to blame for all those aggressiveacts
and for each and every one of their victims are those that
have tolerated with irritating moderation the existence, of
the illegal dgime, allowed it to manoeuvre politically and
diplomatically and even encouraged its most recent attempt
to prolong a system based on the oppression of the great
majority by a handful of white settlers.

65. We have asked to be allowed to speak before the
Council to bear witness to our solidarity with the people
and Government of the Republic of Zambia. They have for
many years valiantly resisted provocations and acts of
aggression and hostility constantly being committed against
them by the racist r6gimes in southern Africa.
66. The statement made yesterday in the Council by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Zambia
[206&h meeting] clearly showed the premeditated, criminal and wanton nature of the most recent aggression
committed against the territory of Zambia by the
Rhodesian troops from 6 to 8 March. In his statement, the
Minister correctly placed this latest crime of the Salisbury
rt?gime within the context of the present situation in
southern Africa and of the manoeuvres of the racists and
their Western allies to perpetuate in the region the system
of exploitation to which the majority of the people of
Zimbabwe and of South Africa are subjected, and to
threaten and to attack independent African States, above
all, the front-line States,

70. But the blame is not merely political or moral. The
helicopters used by the Rbodesian commandos were not
manufactured in Rhodesia but in the United States. The
7

75. Today the delegation of the German Democratic
Republic has asked to be allowed to speak in order to put
on record its unswerving solidarity with the people of
Zambia and with all the victims of the barbarous actions of
the illegal Smith regime. I doubt whether anyone would
venture to dispute the fact that the recent attack by the
racist regime at Salisbury against the neighbouring State of
Zambia is an act of aggression which contravenes international law.

weapons and the war equipment used by the aggressorsin
their attack come from those who, mocking United Nations
agreements, continue directly or indirectly to supply the
illegal rdgime with the means and instruments that enable it
to attack African peoples.
71. It is for this reason that it has become essential to
mob&e the international community to make effective the
sanctions against the Rhodesian regime and to compel all
States to respect and to comply with them. In this context,
it is essential for the Security Council to adopt the
necessary measures, in accordance with Chapter VII of the
Charter, against the South African regime, so as to
guarantee that the sanctions imposed against Rhodesia are
really effective. As the Foreign Minister of Zambia has said,
the imposition of an effective oil embargo has become a
matter of particular importance and urgency. It is inadmissible that those who in the United Nations speak and vote
against colonialism and racism should continue to supply
the Smith rt?gime, through South Africa, with the oil which
enables it to mobilize its war machinery against the African
peoples. It is time that these hypocritical attitudes were
denounced and unmasked. At the present stage, when the
African peoples are waging the decisive battle in the
culmination of the century-old struggle against colonialism
and racism, there is no room for duplicity or equivocal
attitudes: either you stand with the aggrieved people and
the national liberation movements or you stand with those
who make victims of them and oppress them.

76. The Foreign Minister of Zambia has given us a detailed
picture [2068th meeting] of the course of the dastardly
attack by Smith’s mercenaries and has described it as an
unprovoked assault by the illegal rdgime on the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of a State Member of the United
Nations. Responsibility for this crime lies with the illegal
racist regime at Salisbury. My delegation is sure that the
Security Council will formulate an appropriate condemnation. We hope that the Council will decide to take further
measures, for example, the adoption of sanctions in
accordance with the Charter to meet the need that has
arisen. My delegation firmly supports the demands made by
the Foreign Minister of Zambia and the representatives of
other free States of Africa.
77. The blatant violation of the borders of Zambia by
Smith’s armed forces is not the first act of aggression
undertaken by the ruling circles in Southern Rhodesia. The
Security Council has had occasion more than once in the
past to deal with such occurrences. This has already been
mentioned here, and I have no intention of going into, detail
with regard to well-known facts.

72. In order to speed the coming of peace and justice to
that part of the world, support must be increased for the
Patriotic Front of Zimbabwe and for the armed struggle it
is carrying on, until the Smith clique has been completely
eliminated. Effective assistance must also be provided to
the front-line countries, which firmly and with dignity are
resisting the aggression and provocation of the racists. The
valiant and effective response of Zambia to the aggressor
reveals the determination of those countries to defend their
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity and to
continue their support of the national liberation movements. In that struggle, the people and Government of the
Republic of Zambia have held and continue to hold a place
of honour, On this occasion we renew to them the
assurance of the complete and militant solidarity of the
people and Government of Cuba.

78. A number of representatives have drawn attention to
the fact that the recent act of aggression by the Smith
regime against Zambia was committed literally only a few
hours after the signing in Salisbury of the so-called internal
agreement, an illegal document which contains certain
elements of the so-called Anglo-American proposals, as we
have heard here from the very lips of the authors of those
proposals. Accordingly, our doubts about the so-called
Anglo-American proposals were not as unjustified as ali
that. Rut both before and after the signing of the notorious
internal agreement which the Security Council has quite
rightly repudiated, one thing has been unambiguously clear:
the racist regime at Salisbury poses a constant threat to
peace and security. Moreover, this is something which has
been indicated repeatedly in Council resolutions, ‘Illis is
clearly a caseof a policy of steadily expanding aggression, a
visible increase in the threat not only to the peace and
security of the peoples of southern Africa but to that of the
world as a whole,

73. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of the German Democratic Republic. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
74. Mr. FLORIN (German Democratic Republic) {interprefution from Russian): Mr. President, permit me to
congratulate you on your assumption of the important post
of President of the Security Council for March and to
express my conviction that under your presidency the
Council will make a contribution to the solution of the
problems under discussion, in the interests of international
peace and security. Your great and long experience as a
diplomat will undoubtedly play its part. I should like to
thank you and the other members for allowing the
delegation of the German Democratic Republic to address
the Council.

79. If we bear in mind in this connexion the close links
between the Vorster regime and the racist regime of Smith
and also the alarming reports with regard to developments
in South Africa in the nuclear field, thanks to the support
of Western monopolies, we cannot but conclude that there
is an urgent need for energetic measures to avert ;1
catastrophe.
80. In this serious situation, we have had occasion over
and over again to note that in certain circles there is no
interest in fundamental changes but instead an attempt,
8

using every trick in the book, to preserve and support the
doomed racist Smith r&me. We have been able to see in
the last few days how this works out in practice. In the face
of the patriots in Zimbabwe and the firm solidarity of the
African countries, the representatives of the Western world
have not been able to avoid criticizing or rejecting various
aspects of the racist regime. They would have preferred
Smith to have been less clumsy and not to have conducted
himself like a bull in a china shop. Fundamentally,
however, they favour the preservation of a r6gime which
would guarantee the imperialist monopolies maximum
profits, that is, a regime of oppression and exploitation of
the overwhelming majority of the African population of
Zimbabwe.
81. We now find that, in order to camouflage this policy, a
new phrase has crept into the statements of the representatives of an imperialist State-it is what they cdl
“colonialismon the basisof ideology”, which is something
we shouldbe afraid of. Wealready heard thesewordsat the
thirty-second sessionof the GeneralAssemblyandnow we
hearthem againin the Security Council. But it is not clear
at all what is meant by this, sincewe cannot supposethat
what is meant is criticism of the policy of neo-colonialism,
which, aswe know, of courseembracesnon-recognitionof
the sovereignty of developing countries over their raw
materials.They have deliberately chosena nebulousform
of wordsin order to divert attention from their own sins
andthe neo-colonialistambitionsof imperialistpolicy.
82. Regardlessof geography, whether it be in southern
Africa or the Middle East,racist regimesare alsoattempting
to camouflagetheir aggressionby talking about “acts of
retaliation”. We find the samething repeatingitself. At one
time Hitler’s Fascistsalso describedtheir punitive expeditions againstthe anti-Fascistsfighting for liberation and
againstthe populations of other European countries as
“acts of retaliation”, One need only recall the beginningof
the SecondWorld War, when Hitler’s propagandaconcocted
terrifying tales about the murders of Germansin Poland
and allegedviolations of the frontier by Polishcitizens. In
an addressto the German people on 1 September1939,
Hitler stated that, as of that morning, Germantroopshave
been carrying out a retaliatory strike, That washow the
SecondWorld War began,

Today the peoplesthemselvesare pointing the accusing
finger and defending themselves.They are calling for
measures
againstthe aggressor.
84. The GermanDemocraticRepublichasalwaysprovided
the African peopleswith assistance
andsupportin their just
strugglefor national independence,
Weshallcontinueto do
so. This is what hasmovedus to speakhereandexpressthe
hope that the Security Council will satisfy the demandsof
Zambia.
85. The PRESIDENT: The next speakeris Mr. George
Silundika, to whom the Councilhasextendedan invitation
under rule 39 of the provisionalrulesof procedure.I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to makehis
statement.
86. Mr. SILUNDIKA: Mr. President,I shouldlike sincerely to thank you and the other membersof the Councilfor
having allowed me to speakhere on the crucial subject
before the Council, namely, the aggression
againstZambia
committed by the Rhodesianillegalr&me on 6 Marchlast.
I representthe strugglingmasses
of the peopleof Zimbabwe
under the leadershipof the Patriotic Front. It is our sad
historical lot to live with this British creation, the
RhodesianFascist regime,and it is our life-given determination to overthrow it at all costs.Weandthe front-line
States in the liberation struggle in southernAfrica are
therefore the direct witnessesof theseeventsof blatant
aggression.
87. The real issueis not whether aggression
took place.
The Minister for ForeignAffairs of the Republicof Zambia
yesterday[2068th meeting/ placedirrefutableproof before
the Council and referred to several other incursions
perpetratedby the Rhodesianregimesuchashave sooften
occurred on the sovereignterritory of his country. The
Governments of Botswana and Mozambique have also
placed before the Councilproof of seriousactsOCaagressionin their territories. The Councilhashad to dealSCVCRI~
timesbefore with gravereportsof aggression
which hasCOST.
hundredsof lives of women,childrenandagedZimbabwean
refugeesat NyazoniaandChimoioin Mozambique.

88. The realissuebeforethe Council,therefore,iswhy the
illegal, Fascistand racist rkgime of Rhodesiafeelsfree to
evermorefrequently and
83. It might be argued that today we have a completely carry out theseacts of aggression
with
such
blatant
impunity.
What
must be done to bring
different situation. That is true up to a point. At that time
to an end? The answerliesin the
the aggressors
had recourseto lies, and they haverecourse theseacts of aggression
origin and nature of the regime. It is our view that the
to liestoday too, in order to camouflagetheir crimes.What
Council should put aside diplomatic niceties and nail
is new, however, is the fact that today there existsa new
Africa with trustworthy allies; and the peoples have responsibility for these acts of aggressionsquarely and
unsparingly on the United Kingdom Government. The
acquiredexperience and it is not so easy to dupe them. In
British Governmentshouldnot be allowedto get awaywith
this regard I should like to recall the words of a joint
such seriouscrimesagainsthumanity by playing merry-gostatementissued by the Presidentsof the five front-line
round with international opinion. It cannot carry colonial
Statesdated 6 November 1979:
responsibilityfor Rhodesiaand, at the sametime, reserveto
“Coming at the sametime as imperialismis speaking itself the option to choosewhat is or is not convenient to
about a peaceful settlement, the present escalationin
its responsibility in the conduct of a l:ascistrCgimcwhose
attacks and provocations unmasksthe true imperialist existenceit hasalwaysencouraged.Nvl.hingh:n encouraged
intentionsof gainingtime to consolidatethe white racist
the Rhodcsianr6gimemore in its Ptidst actsof opprt%%ion
than the growingtrend towardssupportfor
regimesand diverting our attentiou from the m:lin issue, and aggression
it in the British Houseof Commonsand the consequent
Which
ismajority rule and independenceno~~..“~
policy of successive
BritishGovernmentsof refusingto take
direct action to removethat rbgime.
2Quotedin Englishby theSpeaker.

89. There is more to it. l”he Council has just concluded its
debate on the so-called internal settlement. We are grateful
to the Council for having taken a decisive position against
that racist settlement manoeuvre. The crux of the matter,
however, still lies in the continued existence of the
Rhodesian righe and its liberty to carry out its Political
conspiracies, such as the so-called internal settlement and
the incessant aggressions so costly to human lives in
neighbouring States. In 1965, when the world waited upon
the Labour Government of the United Kingdom to descend
on what it told the world was a rebellion, to bring it to an
end, the United Kingdom openly assured the rebel Ian
Smith that it would not take such measures. Smith got his
lease on life. This resulted in the problems with which the
people of Zimbabwe, the front-line States, the Grganization
of African Unity and the United Nations are Currently
grawlh.

92. The Security COUnCil,
for its own honour and that of
the United Nations, in the name of peace and security,
cannot afford to miss the slightest opportunity to condemn
the aggressions of the Rhodesian regime against Zambia,
and to call upon the United Kingdom Government to stop
these aggressions.
98. For our part in Zimbabwe, we should like to assure
our brothers and sisters of Zambia, Botswana and Mozam.
bique that we are resolutely committed to bringing down
the Rhodesian Fascist regime by armed struggle. We call
upon the Council to urge its members and the Membersof
the Hmted Nations as a whole-except
South Africa, ef
course-to give the Patriotic Front moral, material and
diplomatic support to bring down the Fascist regime of
Rhodesia by armed struggle. The downfall of the regime
will automatically mean genuine freedom for the peopleof
Zimbabwe, the end of all aggressions against neighbau~g
States and a step towards the freedom of southern Africa,

90. Today the Smith regime has sought-with impunityto legitimize itself by wearing a black mask, through the
so-called internal settlement. What has this Council heard?
As in 1965, the Government of the United Kingdom and
the United States have encouraged the racist regime to
believe that the only hurdle it needs to cross before gaining
international legitimacy is to contrive what can be labelled
“one man, one vote” elections. Balthazar Vorster could as
well have come to impress on the Council the fruits of his
apartheid policies in his bantustan homelands of the
Transkei and Bophuthatswana. The people of Zimbabwe
are being persuaded to see merit in the conspiracy of a
criminal racist regime. How else could the Rhodesian
regime see this approach of the United Kingdom and
United States Governments than as encouragement, as a
further lease on life? The people of Zimbabwe are being
asked to lay down their weapons in order to count the
beautiful teeth of a beast that is pouncing upon them to
tear them to pieces. Is that friendly advice? Can the
front&re States be expected to wait and watch as the beast
jumps across its borders?

94. The PRESIDENT: I am sure that Mr. Silundika would
not expect me, in my capacity as the representative of the
United Kingdom, to agree with some of the more florid
parts of the statement he has just made. We shall, however,
consider his statement carefully and, if necessary, reply to
it in due course.
95. Mr, BISHARA (Kuwait): I should like first of all,
Mr, President, to express my admiration for your patience.
I can imagine how tedious and demanding this month has
been for you, and we do not know what is in store for you
in the coming few days,
96. This is not the first time that acts of aggression
committed by the illegal regime in Southern Rhodesia
against neighbouring States have been brought to the
attention of the Security Council. As early as January 1973
the Council considered a complaint by Zambia against the
Smith regime for acts of aggression in flagrant violation of
its territorial integrity. In fact, Zambia has not been the
only victim of aggression perpetrated by the illegal Smith
regime. The Council has had the opportunity of discussing
similar complaints from Botswana, Angola and Mozam
bique .

91. There is more to it. The mass killings of the people of
Zimbabwe, the aggressions on Botswana, Mozambique and
Zambia are being carried out by racist Fascist forces which
comprise mercenaries being recruited continuously from
the United Kingdom, the United States, West Germany,
France, Belgium, Australia, New Zealand and South Africa,
How do these mercenaries escape the efficient security
network of countries which profess so much love for
freedom, peace and security? Is the recruitment of these
mercenaries to commit aggression in Africa an expression of
democracy? From where does the Rhodesian regime obtain
its materials of war and the foreign currency to pay into
these mercenaries’ foreign accounts? Is it by accident that
these mercenaries, and the transnational corporations which
finance the Rhodesian regime, come from the white West
that enslaved and colonized and has continued to exploit
black Africa for so long? The oppression of the apeopleof
Zimhabwe and the frequent aggressions of Zambia, Mozambique and Botswana are not just isolated acts of the i&gal
regime of Ian Smith; they are a co-ordinated wholesale
assault by economic, political and racist forces against the
independence struggle of the peoples of Zimbabwe,
Namibia and South Africa.

97. Zambia, Botswana, Angola and Mozambique are newly
independent States which need peace to consolidate their
independence. They need security, which is a prerequisite
for the immense tasks ahead of them in accelerating the
pace of economic and social development in their countries.
Yet Zambia, Botswana, Angola and Mozambique, and other
front-line States, do not want peace at any price. TW do
not want to compromise on principles. They cannot eajoY
freedom while they see their brethren, their kith and kin,
languishing in the chains of bondage in Southern Rhodesia.
These countries have a moral obligation, and indeed an
international responsibility, to help their less fortunate
brethren in Southern Rhodesia. Clearly, the aim of the
Smith regime in intensifying its raids of terrorism and
intimidation against these countries is to force them to
abandon their opposition to apartheid, oppression and
white-minority rule in Rhodesia.
98. The Smith regime is a rebel regime that has bee*
outlawed and declared outcast by the international corn
10

,

i

munity. The whole world is therefore entitled actively
to
support the liberation struggle of the people of Zimbabwe,
The armed struggle against the Smith regime is a struggle
against the evils of colonialism, oppression and apartheid in
Southern Rhodesia and can come to an end omy when
those evils are completely eradicated.
99. It is patently clear that Smith wants to maintain the
DUO in Southern Rhodesia at any price, It is also
evident that he will stop at nothing to prolong the life of
his decaying and decrepit regime even for one day.

stUh”lrS

100. The recent flagrant aggression by the Smith r&gime
against Zambia is a challenge not only to the front-line
countries, not only to Africa, but, indeed, to the whole
world.
101. The international community is fully aware of the
fact that one of the main causes of conflict in southern
Africa is the existence of the illegal minority racist regime
in Southern Rhodesia. The only guarantee against the
repetition of acts of aggression against Zambia and the
front-line States is the downfall of Mr. Smith and his
lieutenants.
102. It is really sad to see that Zambia has to become the
target of constant aggression merely because it upholds the
principles enshrined in the Charter and champions the cause
of freedom and independence.

108. The existence of the illegal racist regime of Ian Smith
in Southern Rhodesia constitutes a permanent source of
tension, aggression and lawlessness and poses a lasting
threat to peace and security on the African continent, It is
the duty of the Council to take all necessary measures to
uproot the causes of these acts of aggression and to
eliminate their consequences. The international community
is entitled to express clearly and firmly its demand that the
violation of Zambia’s territory must stop.
109. It is ironical that by concluding the Safisbury
agreement the Smith regime was desperately attempting to
give itself a semblance of legality. However, the nature of
the illegal regime has not changed in spite of its deceptive
mask and its abuse of the concept of majority rule.
110. The most recent example of the true nature of the
illegal regime is provided by the wanton and barbarous acts
carried out inside Zambia by the forces of Ian Smith from
6 to 8 March. Naturally, the object of such attacks is to
face the world with a fait accompli by isolating the people
of Zimbabwe from the rest of Africa and imposing the
internal settlement on them by force of arms, Seen in its
proper perspective, the aggression against Zambia is an
attempt to suppress the cause of freedom and to cement
the foundations of apartheid.
111. Most States have communicated with the SecretaryGeneral and with you, Mr. President, to demonstrate their
outrage at the murderous acts of the illegal minority
regime, expressing their solidarity with the Government and
people of Zambia and thus treating all the evil emanating
from the illegal regime as the collective responsibility of the
international community.

103. The Security Council must strongly condemn the
illegal minority regime in Southern Rhodesia for its acts of
aggression, which pose a threat to international peace and
security. The Council must also uphold the rights of
Zambia and the front-line States to help their unfortunate
kith and kin in Southern Rhodesia.

112. The difficult geographical position of Zambia makes
it particularly vulnerable to attacks by the racist regime. It
is our duty to help Zambia to stand firm in its commitment
to the cause of freedom, It has already made great sacrifices
in implementing resolutions of the General Assembly and
the Security Council and in its resolute stand against
foreign aggression. The Council must commend the Government and people of Zambia for their dedication to the
cause of freedom and human dignity in spite of the difficult
circumstances prevailing in their country. Commendation,
however, is not enough. The security of Zambia can be
guaranteed only by the downfall of the Smith regime and
the pillars of colonialism and racism on which it was
founded. The time has come to take decisive measures
against the illegal minority regime at Salisbury.

104. The Government and people of Kuwait resolutely
support Zambia and hail its firm stand in upholding the
principles of the Charter and the resolutions of the United
Nations, Zambia is indeed risking the lives and Property of
its citizens in its determination to resist the forces of
colonialism, racism and oppression.
105. The atrocities committed by the Smith racist regime
not only cause tremendous loss of life and property in
front-line States but are flagrant violations of the Charter,
serious encroachments upon the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of those States and pose a serious threat to
international peace and security.
106. Ian Smith is very much mistaken if he believes that
by wantonly sending troops into the sovereign States of
Zambia, Mozambique and Botswana he can coerce them
into abandoning their support for the just struggle of the
people of Zimbabwe.

113. The delegation of Kuwait calls UpOIl th3 SeCUritY
Council to consider the extension of sanctions to cover all
measures p,ovided for under Article 41 of the Charter. We
alsO call upon countries which have treated the sanctions
with levity to reconsider their position and to realize how
much evil and suffering is caused by their reluctance to
comply
wit11 the sanctions imposed by the Council.

107. The Government and people of Kuwait strongly
condemn the minority racist regime in Southern Rhodesia
for its brutal aggression against Zambia, firmly suPPort
Zambia in its valiant struggle against colonialism and racism
and express great admiration for the fortitude of Zambia
and its unwavering
determination to SupPOrt the just
struggle of the people of Zimbabwe in defiance of brute
force,

114. In conclusion, my delegation would like to voice its
support for any measure that may be taken by the Council
to curb the excesses of the Smith regime and eventually
lead to its overthrow. It would also support additional
meaSureS designed
to rescue Zambia from its exrstmg
11

difficulties, to eliminate the consequences of aggression on
its territory and to provide it with additional means that
would enable it to resist further aggression in the future.
115. Mr, JAIPAL (India): I should like to combine the
introduction of draft resolution S/12603 with my own
statement on the question before the Council.
116. We listened with close attention to the statement
made yesterday by the Foreign Minister of ZambiaP2068th
meetirzgJ+ We were shocked to learn of the details of the
attack mounted against Zambia by Ian Smith’s forces with
aircraft and paratroopers from 6 to 8 March. The timing of
that act of aggression by Smith lvas, as it were, a perverse
sort of celebration of the Salisbury agreement, which the
Security Council has rightly reje,q+tedas illegal and unacceptable.
117. ‘Ihis is not the first time that Smith has taken SUC~I
liberties with the sovereignty of the neighbouring Statesexcept of course the, Pretoria regime which provides solace
and support for him. Smith’s provocative actions are clearly
designed to create in the region a conflict situation in which
others would become involved. There is no doubt that
those attacks by Smith’s illegal and unrecognized group
against independent African States constitute a threat to
internation al peace and security. Our sympathies are with
the people and Government of Zambia and also of
Botswana, which was similarly attacked recently by Smith’s
forces. We congratulate both Zambia and Botswana for
their display of extraordinary restraint and patience in the
face of thoseunwarranted attacks.
118. The Foreign Minister of Zambia has said that “it is
within the power of the United Nations to help” in finding
a solution [ibid., para. 321. He is quite right. He has also
drawn attention to the root cause,namely, the continued
existenceof the iilegal factor in Southern Rhodesia.He has
called upon the United States and the United Kingdom to
take steps, through negotiations and other means, to
liquidate the illegal force in Southern Rhodesia and to
replace it by a democratic majority Government of the
people,We fully endorsehis appeal.

Charter prescribeshow violations and violators of international peace shall be dealt with. Smith .has once again
posed a seriouschallenge to the authority of the Security
Council. The sanctions have not brought him to heel.
Negotiations have only made him bold enoughto launch
attacks againsthis neighbours.
122. We are dealing here with a group of armedpersons
who have usurped power and are using it to maintain
themselvesin power. According to the statisticsavailablein
the Secretariat, when that usurpation took place in 1965
the white population of Southern Rhodesiawas210,000;
since 1965 and up to 1977, the total numberof newwhite
immigrantsamounted to 130,000,that is, an increaseof 62
per cent-all of them illegal. If we were to exclude the
white immigration that took place after 1965, as well as
women and children, we shouldfind that lessthan 50,000
white men are lording it over 6 million Africans and defying
the United Kingdom as well asthe United Nations.That is
not only illegal but it is alsoquite an intolerable situation,

123. The Council has been seizedof similar erosionsof
legality in regard to other matters-in Namibia, in the
Middle East and in Cyprus. Should it not do more than
adopt a resolution condemning the armed attacks by
Smith’s forces?
124. The draft resolution which I have the honour to
introduce on behalf of six membersof the Council in
document S/12603 follows the beaten path of previous
resolutions in strongly condemningthe armed attack by
Smith’sforces and in commendingZambiafor its continued
support of the people of Zimbabwe in their legitimate
struggle for independence, It also calls upon the United
Kingdom to take prompt and effective measuresto bring
the illegal situation to a speedyend.
125. I should like to say that the sponsors clearly
expected a much stronger resolution and would have
preferred to specify themselvescertain types of effective
action within the purview of the Charter; but they have
deliberately decided, for the present,to leavethe choice of
effective measuresto the administeringPower,namely, the
United Kingdom, They reservetheir position, however, to
revert to this question in the Council in order to consider
more effective measuresin accordancewith the Charter,
including additional action underChapterVII.

119. Until there is an agreed negotiated settlement,
somethinghasto be done by the United Nations to ensure
that there will be no more attacks by Smith’s forces. Some
form of effective deterrent has to be applied againstSmith
and his group. Zambia and Tanzania have both advocated
oil sanctionsagainstSouthern Rhodesiaand South Africa.
We agreewith them, and we feel that the Security Council
shouldseriously examine that courseof action.

126. We the sponsorshad hopedthat, in our consideration
of attacks by Smith’s forces, those who did not join in
sponsoring the draft would come up with their own
suggestionsas to how the Council might deal with those
attacks. In our opinion, it is not enoughto leave it to the
complainant to suggest remedial action or to the non.
aligned members of the Council to draft resolutions. The
responsibility for remedying the illegal situation in Southern Rhodesia and its consequences
has to be sharedby all
members. We hope that those who have not joined in
sponsoringthe draft resolution that I have introduced will
fiid it possible, even at this stage,to strengthenour draft
with a view effectively to restrainingMr. Smith’s forces, It
is in that sensethat I commendthe draft to them for their
support with a view to strengtheningour initiative.

120. As the representativeof Tanzania said the other day,
it is not enoughto adopt resolutionsthat only condemn the
attacks by Smith’s forces [ibid., para. 761. Smith has got
used to such condemnations and he will continue his
predatory attacks against his neighbours, since he thinks
they are a meansof maintaining his group in power. The
so-called internal settlement has evidently had no effect
whatsoever on Smith in the matter of his relat,ionswith his
African neighbours. He continues to show a lack of respect
or regard for the sovereignty of the neighbouring African
States.
121, But Southern Rhodesiacontinues to remain within
the system of international peace and security, and the

The meetingroseat 5.50 p.m.
2

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

Unite-l
Nations
publications
may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the world. Consult your bookstore
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
depositaires
du mondc entier. Informez-vous
aupr& de votre libraire oo adressex-vous
1 : Nations Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou GenBve.
EAIC

IIOKY’IEIT~

COMO

CONSEGUIR

ZIBAAHHJK

OPl-AHZI

PLJBLICACIONES

3Al(HtiOWbE~MHEHHbIX

DE LAS

NACIONES

HAyHH

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas est.&n en venta en librerias
y casas distribuidoras en todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirfjase
a: Naciones
Wnidas, Secci6n de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litbo

in United

Nations,

New York

Price: $U.S. 1.00 (or equivalent

in other currencies)
