VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Conference to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination and takes note of the measures contemplated by
that Government aimed at ensuring the success of the
Conference;
2. Decides, in conformity with paragraph 13 of
the Programme for the Decade for Action to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination,25 to convene the
Conference in Ghana in order to mobilize world public
opinion and adopt measures likely to secure the full
and universal implementation of United Nations decisions and resolutions on racism, racial discrimination,
apartheid, decolonization and self-determination;
3. Decides to make exception to its resolution 2609
(XXIV) of 16 December 1969 on the pattern of conferences and agrees that half of the additional cost involved in holding the Conference in Ghana shall be
defrayed from the regular budget of the United Nations;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to maintain his
contacts with the Government of Ghana concerning
future arrangements for holding the Conference at
Accra;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-second session, as a matter of high priority,
an item entitled "World Conference to Combat Racism
and Racial Discrimination".
97th plenary meeting
13 December 1976

31/79.

Status of the International Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3057 (XXVIII) of 2 November 1973, 3135 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973,
3225 (XXIX) of 6 November 1974 and 3381 (XXX)
of 10 November 1975,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General26 on the status of the International Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination;27

2. Expresses its satisfaction with the increase in the
number of States which have ratified the Convention
or acceded thereto;

3. Reaffirms once again its conviction that ratification of or accession to the International Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination on a universal basis and implementation of its
provisions are necessary for the realization of the objectives of the Decade for Action to Combat Racism
and Racial Discrimination;
4. Appeals to States which have not yet become
parties to the Convention to ratify it or accede thereto;
5. Appeals to States parties to the Convention to
study the possibility of making the declaration provided
for in article 14 of the Convention;

6. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
submit to the General Assembly annual reports concerning the status of the Convention, in accordance
2 5 Resolution 3057 (XXVIII), annex.
26 A/31/201.
2 7 Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.

99

with Assembly resolution 2106 A (XX) of 21 December 1965.
97th plenary meeting
13 December 1976
31/80.

Status of the International Convention on
the Suppression an<l Punishment of the
Crime of A partheicl

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3068 (XXVIII) of 30 November 1973, by which it adopted and opened for signature and ratification the International Convention on
the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid, and its resolution 3380 (XXX) of 10 November
1975,
Expressing its appreciation to those States which have
become parties to the Convention,
Convinced that ratification of or accession to the International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid on a universal basis
and implementation of its provisions are necessary for
the achievement of the goals of the Decade for Action
to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination,
Reiterating its firm conviction that apartheid constitutes a total negation of the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and is a crime against
humanity seriously disturbing international peace and
security,
Underlining Security Council resolution 392 (1976)
of 19 June 1976, in which the Council condemned the
Government of South Africa for its resort to massive
violence against and killings of the African people,
including schoolchildren and students and others opposing racial discrimination,
Noting that the legitimate struggle of the oppressed
African peoples against apartheid demands all necessary
assistance by the international community,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the status of the International Convention on the
Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid ;28
2. Welcomes the entry into force on 18 July 1976
of the above-mentioned Convention;
3. Appeals to all States which have not yet become
parties to the Convention to accede thereto;
4. Invites the Chairman of the thirty-third session
of the Commission on Human Rights to appoint a
group consisting of three members of the Commission
as provided for by article IX of the Convention;
5. Invites the Commission on Human Rights to
undertake the functions set out in article X of the Convention, in particular to prepare a list of individuals,
organizations, institutions and representatives of States
which are alleged to be responsible for the crimes
enumerated in article II of the Convention;
6. Requests the Secretary~General to include in his
i:ext annual report under General Assembly resolution 3380 (XXX) a special part concerning the implementation of the Convention;
7. Decides to consider annually starting with its
thirty-second session, the question ~ntitled "Status of
28 A/311209.

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

100

the International Convention on the Suppression and
Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid".
97th plenary meeting
13 December 1976
31/81.

Reports of the Committee on the Elimi•
nation of Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3057 (XXVIII) of 2 November 1973 and 31/77 of 13 December 1976 on the
Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, 3266 (XXIX) of 10 December 1974 on
the report of the Committee on the Elimination of
Racial Discrimination and 31/79 of 13 December 1976
on the Status of the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,
Having considered the reports of the Committee on
the Elimination of Racial Discrimination on the sixth
and seventh years of its activities29 submitted under
article 9, paragraph 2, of the International Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,30
Noting with appreciation the interest of the Committee, when performing its functions under the Convention, to contribute to the achievement of the objectives of the Decade for Action to Combat Racism and
Racial Discrimination,
Mindful of the undertaking of States Parties to the
Convention to engage in no act or practice of racial
discrimination against any person, groups of persons or
national or ethnic minorities, and to ensure that all
public authorities and public institutions, national and
local, shall act in conformity with this obligation, in accordance with relevant provisions of the Convention,
Noting the decisions adopted by the Committee at
its eleventh to fourteenth sessions,
l. Takes note with appreciation of the reports of
the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination;
2. Takes note also of the part of the reports of the
Committee concerning petitions and other information
relating to Trust and Non-Self-Governing Territories
and to all other Territories to which General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 applies,
and draws the attention of the relevant United Nations
bodies to the Committee's opinions and recommendations relating to those Territories;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the Committee for
the work it performs in pursuance of the provisions
of the International Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Racial Discrimination, thus contributing
significantly to the elimination of all forms of racial
discrimination;
4. Commends the Committee for focusing greater
attention on the just cause of the peoples struggling
against the oppression of the colonialist and racist
regimes in southern Africa;
5. Calls upon the States parties to the Convention
to observe fully the provisions of the Convention and
29 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/10018); and ibid., Thirty-first
Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/31/18 and Corr.1).

so Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.

other international instruments and agreements to which
they are parties concerning the elimination of all forms
of discrimination based on race, colour, descent or national or ethnic origin;
6. Welcomes the co-operation of the States parties
to the Convention with the Committee in submitting
their reports and designating representatives to be present at the meetings of the Committee when it considers
their reports;
7. Calls upon all States parties to the Convention
to provide all necessary information to the Committee
in accordance with article 9 of the Convention, taking
also into account the relevant recommendations and requests of the Committee;
8. Welcomes the Committee's participation in the
realization of the objectives of the Programme for the
Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination in accordance with its decision 1 (XI)
of 4 April 1975;
9. Invites the States parties to the Convention to
include in their reports, under article 9, paragraph 1,
of the Convention, information on the status of their
relations with the racist regimes in southern Africa,
in accordance with decision 2 (XI) of the Committee
of 7 April 1975;
10. Reminds the States parties to the Convention
of their obligations, under the Convention, as recommended by the Committee in its decision 4 (XI) of
14 April 1975, to adopt appropriate legislative, judicial,
administrative or other measures with a view to putting
an end to racism and to the vestiges or manifestations
of such ideologies wherever they exist;
11. Invites all States which are not yet parties to
the Convention to ratify or accede to it and, pending
such ratification or accession, to be guided by the basic
provisions of the Convention in their internal and foreign policies.
97th plenary meeting
13 December 1976
31/82.

Implementation of the Declaration on the
Rights of Disabled Persons

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3447 (XXX) of 9 December
1975 proclaiming the Declaration on the Rights of
Disabled Persons,
Desiring to achieve the effective implementation of
the rights and principles laid down in the Declaration,
1. Recommends that all Member States should take
account of the rights and principles laid down in the
Declaration on the Rights of Disabled Persons in establishing their policies, plans and programmes;
2. Recommends that all international organizations
and agencies concerned should include in their programmes provisions ensuring the effective implementation of those rights and principles;

3. Requests the Secretary-General to inform the
General Assembly, in the form of a summary annexed
to his reports on the world social situation, of the
measures adopted by Member States and by the international organizations and agencies concerned with a
view to ensuring the effective implementation of the
