United Nations

A/RES/56/206

General Assembly

Distr.: General
26 February 2002

Fifty-sixth session
Agenda item 102

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/56/565)]

56/206. Strengthening the mandate and status of the Commission
on Human Settlements and the status, role and functions
of the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements
(Habitat)
The General Assembly,
Recalling relevant resolutions on human settlements, in particular its
resolutions 3327 (XXIX) of 16 December 1974, 32/162 of 19 December 1977 and
34/115 of 14 December 1979,
Recalling also the Habitat Agenda 1 and the Istanbul Declaration on Human
Settlements, 2
Aware of rapid urbanization trends in developing countries and related
challenges in shelter provision, eradicating poverty and sustainable human
settlements development,
Convinced of the need for urgent action to advance the quality of life of all
people in cities and other human settlements,
Conscious of the need to achieve greater coherence and effectiveness in the
implementation of the Habitat Agenda within the United Nations system,
Recognizing that urgent steps should be taken to ensure a better mobilization
of financial resources at all levels, to enhance the implementation of the Habitat
Agenda, particularly in developing countries, with a view to improving human
settlements,
Recalling the commitments of Governments to, inter alia, promoting broad
access to appropriate housing financing, increasing the supply of affordable housing
and creating an enabling environment for sustainable development that will attract
investment,

_______________
1
Report of the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II), Istanbul, 3–14 June 1996
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.97.IV.6), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
2
Ibid., annex I.

01 49327

A/RES/56/206

Recalling also its resolution 51/177 of 16 December 1996, in which it, inter
alia, designated the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) as a
focal point for the implementation of the Habitat Agenda and called for a
comprehensive and in-depth assessment of the Centre with a view to its
revitalization,
Recalling further its resolutions 52/220 of 22 December 1997, 53/242 of
28 July 1999 and 55/195 of 20 December 2000, in which it requested the SecretaryGeneral to consider further strengthening the Centre through the provision of
requisite support and stable, adequate and predictable financial resources, including
additional regular budget and human resources,
Recalling agreed conclusions 2000/1 of the Economic and Social Council
adopted at the coordination segment of the substantive session of 2000 of the
Council, 3 and taking note of the conclusions of the Council at its substantive session
of 2001 regarding improving inter-agency coordination in the implementation of the
Habitat Agenda,
Bearing in mind the responsibilities of the Centre, as set out in paragraph 228
of the Habitat Agenda, and the establishment of the Habitat task manager system,
Recalling the Declaration on Cities and Other Human Settlements in the New
Millennium, 4 in particular paragraph 67 thereof, in which the Secretary-General was
invited to report to the General Assembly at its fifty-sixth session on options for
reviewing and strengthening the mandate and status of the Commission on Human
Settlements and the status, role and functions of the United Nations Centre for
Human Settlements (Habitat), in accordance with the relevant decisions of the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the United Nations
Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II),
Encouraged by the resumption by several Member States of voluntary
contributions to the United Nations Habitat and Human Settlements Foundation in
response to the work undertaken by the management of the Centre to revitalize the
Centre and give it a new impetus to advance the Habitat Agenda,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on options for reviewing
and strengthening the mandate and status of the Commission on Human Settlements
and the status, role and functions of the United Nations Centre for Human
Settlements (Habitat), 5 including their financial implications,
I
United Nations Human Settlements Programme
Decides to transform the Commission on Human Settlements and its
secretariat, the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat), including
the United Nations Habitat and Human Settlements Foundation, with effect from
1 January 2002, into the United Nations Human Settlements Programme, to be
known as UN-Habitat, which will have the elements described below:

_______________
3
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/55/3/Rev.1),
chap. V, para. 6.
4
Resolution S-25/2, annex.
5
A/56/618.

2

A/RES/56/206

A
Governing body
Status, composition, objectives, functions and responsibilities
1.
Decides to transform, with effect from 1 January 2002, the Commission
on Human Settlements into the Governing Council of the United Nations Human
Settlements Programme, to be known as UN-Habitat, a subsidiary organ of the
General Assembly;
2.
Also decides that the Governing Council shall propose its rules of
procedure on the basis of the rules of procedure of the Commission on Human
Settlements, bearing in mind the provisions of the present resolution, for
consideration by the General Assembly; 6
3.
Further decides that the practices regarding the participation of Habitat
Agenda partners shall be according to the relevant rules of the Economic and Social
Council with regard to participation and accreditation, that the established practices
of the Commission on Human Settlements shall be utilized and that such practices
shall in no way create a precedent for other governing bodies of the subsidiary
organs of the General Assembly;
4.
Decides that the Governing Council shall be composed of fifty-eight
members, to be elected by the Economic and Social Council for four-year terms on
the following basis: 7
(a)

Sixteen seats for African States;

(b)

Thirteen seats for Asian and Pacific States;

(c)

Six seats for Eastern European States;

(d)

Ten seats for Latin American and Caribbean States;

(e)

Thirteen seats for Western European and other States;

5.
Confirms that the Governing Council shall have the objectives, functions
and responsibilities set out in resolution 32/162 and in paragraph 222 of the Habitat
Agenda;
6.
Decides that the Governing Council shall be the intergovernmental
decision-making body for the Programme;
7.
Also decides that the Governing Council shall meet biennially and report
to the General Assembly through the Economic and Social Council;
8.
Further decides that the Committee of Permanent Representatives to UNHabitat shall serve as the Governing Council’s intersessional subsidiary body;

_______________
6

The first meeting of the Governing Council shall be conducted in accordance with the rules of procedure
and practices of the Commission on Human Settlements.
7
Existing members of the Commission on Human Settlements shall continue as members of the Governing
Council until the expiration of their original terms of office.

3

A/RES/56/206

B
Secretariat of the Programme
1.
Decides to transform, with effect from 1 January 2002, the United
Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) into the secretariat of the United
Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat), and confirms that the
secretariat of the Programme, under the direction of the Executive Director, shall be
entrusted with the responsibilities set out in paragraph 228 of the Habitat Agenda
and in resolution 32/162. The UN-Habitat secretariat shall service the Governing
Council and serve as the focal point for human settlements and for the coordination
of human settlements activities within the United Nations system;
2.
Also decides, bearing in mind General Assembly resolution 54/249 of
23 December 1999, that the UN-Habitat secretariat shall be headed by an Executive
Director at the level of Under-Secretary-General, to be elected by the General
Assembly for a term of four years upon nomination by the Secretary-General after
consultation with Member States;8
3.
Affirms that the Urban Forum is a non-legislative technical forum in
which experts can exchange views in the years when the Governing Council does
not meet, and that the Advisory Committee of Local Authorities is an advisory body
to the Executive Director;
4.
Decides that the resources for managing the Programme shall comprise
the posts and budgetary resources of the Centre, without prejudice to additional
regular budget and extrabudgetary resources that may become available;
II
Financing human settlements
1.
Confirms that the Executive Director of the United Nations Human
Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat) shall be responsible for the management of
the United Nations Habitat and Human Settlements Foundation, with due regard to
the terms of reference of the Foundation as stipulated in General Assembly
resolution 3327 (XXIX);
2.
Encourages the Executive Director to strengthen the Foundation in order
to achieve its primary operative objective, as set out in resolution 3327 (XXIX), of
supporting the implementation of the Habitat Agenda, including supporting shelter,
related infrastructure development programmes and housing finance institutions and
mechanisms, particularly in developing countries;
3.
Invites all Governments to increase their contributions to the Foundation
to enhance the capacity of the Programme to support the implementation of the
Habitat Agenda and the Declaration on Cities and Other Human Settlements in the
New Millennium; 4
4.
Encourages the Executive Director of the Programme to continue her
fund-raising appeals and initiatives for a substantial increase of Foundation
resources;

_______________
8

The current Executive Director of the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) shall
continue as the Executive Director of the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat)
until the expiration of her original term of office.

4

A/RES/56/206

5.
Calls for the active participation and collaboration of organizations and
bodies within and outside the United Nations system, including the World Bank and
regional development banks, in the activities of the Programme and its Foundation,
in particular with regard to the provision of seed capital and the financing of
operational human settlements projects and programmes, as well as developing
appropriate and innovative approaches for financing its projects and programmes;
6.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to support the Programme
through the provision of adequate regular budget resources;
III
Policy coordination
1.
Reaffirms that the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council, in accordance with relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations
and relevant resolutions, including General Assembly resolutions 48/162 of
20 December 1993 and 50/227 of 24 May 1996, together with the Governing
Council of the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat),
constitute the three-tiered intergovernmental mechanism to oversee the coordination
of the implementation of the Habitat Agenda;
2.
Emphasizes the role and importance of the implementation of the Habitat
Agenda, in particular achieving the goals of adequate shelter for all and sustainable
human settlements, in the activities and programmes of the United Nations system,
in particular in the context of common country assessments and the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework, as well as the poverty reduction strategy
papers process led by the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund;
3.
Welcomes the fact that the Programme, as the United Nations focal point
for the implementation of the Habitat Agenda, will participate in the United Nations
System Chief Executives Board for Coordination9 at all levels of its machinery;
4.
Decides that the Programme should strengthen its collaboration with the
Commission on Sustainable Development and other relevant bodies in the
implementation of the Habitat Agenda as it relates to sustainable development;
5.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General
Assembly at its fifty-seventh session on the implementation of the present
resolution.
90th plenary meeting
21 December 2001

_______________
9

Formerly known as the Administrative Committee on Coordination (see Economic and Social Council
decision 2001/321 of 24 October 2001).

5
