S/PRST/2008/40

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 October 2008
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6006th meeting of the Security Council, held on 29 October 2008, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo”, the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council condemns the recent CNDP offensive in the
eastern region of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and demands that it
bring its operations to an end. The Council welcomes the announcement by
Laurent Nkunda of an immediate ceasefire and looks to Laurent Nkunda to
ensure its effective and durable implementation, and the CNDP’s
reengagement in the Goma process. The Security Council expresses its grave
concern about the dramatic humanitarian consequences of the recent fighting.
The Council urges all parties to respect fully their obligations under
international law to protect civilians, to ensure access to the population in need
and to guarantee the safety and security of humanitarian personnel. The
Council affirms that any attack against the civilian population, including at
major population centers, is totally unacceptable.
“The Security Council urges all the signatories to the Goma and Nairobi
processes to implement their commitments effectively and in good faith. In
this respect, the Security Council calls on the authorities of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Rwanda to take concrete steps to defuse tensions
and to restore stability in the region. The Council strongly supports the efforts
of the Secretary General to facilitate the dialogue between the leaders of the
two countries and encourages him to send a special envoy tasked with this
mission as soon as possible.
“The Security Council urges the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to take effective steps to ensure that there is no cooperation
between elements of the FARDC and the FDLR. The Council also calls upon
the Governments of the region to cease all support to the armed groups in the
eastern region of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Security Council
expresses its concern at the reports of heavy weapons fire across the
Democratic Republic of the Congo-Rwanda border. The Security Council
reiterates its determination to continue to monitor closely the implementation
of the arms embargo and other measures as set out in its Resolution 1807.
“The Security Council expresses its full support for MONUC and
condemns all attacks, regardless of their perpetrators, launched against
08-57657 (E) 291008

*0857657*

S/PRST/2008/40

MONUC in the past days. The Council calls on MONUC to continue to
implement fully its mandate, in all its aspects, in particular by robust actions to
protect civilians at risk and to deter any attempt to threaten the political
process by any armed group.
“The Security Council duly notes the reinforcement of the MONUC
requested by the Secretariat of the United Nations. The Security Council will
study expeditiously that request in view of the developments of the situation
on the ground.”

2

08-57657
