S/PV.7807

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7807th meeting

Thursday, 10 November 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Seck . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Senegal)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Bessho
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Walbridge
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Gasso Matoses
Mr. Kyslytsa
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Coleman
Mrs. Carrión
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Letter dated 7 October 2016 from the Chair of the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and
Eritrea addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2016/919)
Letter dated 7 October 2016 from the Chair of the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and
Eritrea addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2016/920)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-37493 (E)
*1637493*

S/PV.7807

The situation in Somalia

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Letter dated 7 October 2016 from the Chair
of the Security Council Committee pursuant
to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009)
concerning Somalia and Eritrea addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2016/919)
Letter dated 7 October 2016 from the Chair
of the Security Council Committee pursuant
to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009)
concerning Somalia and Eritrea addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2016/920)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Djibouti,
Eritrea and Somalia to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2016/946, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
documents S/2016/919 and S/2016/920, which contains
letters dated 7 October 2016 from the Chair of the
Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 751
(1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
France, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Senegal,
Spain, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America
and Uruguay
Against:
None
2/8

10/11/2016

Abstaining:
Angola, China, Egypt, Russian Federation and
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
The President (spoke in French): There were
10 votes in favour, none against and 5 abstentions. The
draft resolution has been adopted as resolution 2317
(2016).
I now give the floor to those members of the Council
who wish to make statements following the voting.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the adoption of resolution 2317
(2016). This sanctions regime continues to play a
vital role in promoting peace and stability in the
Horn of Africa. In Somalia, it is preventing the flow
of illicit arms and cutting off Al-Shabaab’s funding.
It is preserving natural resources to the benefit of all
Somalis and for their economic empowerment, and it
is helping to provide better weapons and ammunition
management for the Somali security forces.
But renewing the resolution today is just one part of
our support to Somalia. A timely and credible electoral
process this month is critical to Somalia’s future, and
we look forward to continuing support of the incoming
Federal Government of Somalia over the coming months.
One of the key priorities for the new Government will
be a political agreement on security sector reform that
is affordable, accountable, sustainable and acceptable
to federal and regional authorities in Somalia.
Turning to Eritrea, the resolution could have looked
very different if the Government of Eritrea had wanted
it to, but the continuing lack of cooperation from Eritrea
with the Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea and
the Council left us with no choice. We could not welcome
a visit as there has been no invitation. We could not
welcome progress because nothing has changed. So we
urge Eritrea to take steps to engage constructively and
in a sustained manner with the Monitoring Group, as
mandated by the Council. We cannot be in the same
position next year.
Some Council members have questioned the lack
of movement by the Council on sanctions on Eritrea.
In the resolution, we have recognized the positive
developments. We have welcomed the release in March
of four Djiboutian prisoners of war who had been held
since 2008. We have recognized the lack of evidence of
Eritrean support for Al-Shabaab, and we have expressed
an intention to review the measures on Eritrea in six
16-37493

10/11/2016

The situation in Somalia

months’ time. But without the cooperation of Eritrea,
in compliance with the resolutions of the Council, our
hands are tied. Council members that regret the lack of
movement on this sanctions regime should look to only
one place — Eritrea.
The resolution has regional implications, and as
penholder we took extensive steps to engage with all
of the relevant regional stakeholders so that we could
balance the views of the Council and of the region. It is
therefore particularly disappointing that some Council
members felt that they could not support it, despite
those extensive efforts.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China has been closely following the situation in the
Horn of Africa and welcomes the progress made by
the Federal Government of Somalia in promoting the
political process and reconstruction. We commend the
African Union and the countries of the region for their
contribution to the fight against the terrorist group
Al-Shabaab.
We call on the international community to continue
to help Somalia in its State-building efforts. We support
the African Union Mission in Somalia and the Somali
National Army in their efforts to speedily achieve
peace and stability in the Horn of Africa. The Horn
of Africa is geographically important, and peace and
stability there have a direct bearing on the interests
of the countries of the region, which should live side
by side as neighbours and belong to an interdependent
community with a shared future and intertwined
interests. They all face the important task of achieving
economic development and improving the benefits to
their people, which will require a peaceful and stable
environment. Harmony benefits the countries of the
region, whereas confrontation harms them.
China sincerely hopes that the countries of the
region will take into account the bigger picture of peace
and stability in the Horn of Africa and the fundamental
interests of its peoples, strengthen good-neighbourly
relationships, promote unity and cooperation, and
reconcile their differences through dialogue and
consultation, which are in the common interests of all
the countries of the region.
The sanctions set out in the relevant resolutions of
the Security Council are not conducive to achieving
the aforementioned objectives. China hopes that the
Security Council will take the changes on the ground
into account, continuously revisit the relevant content

S/PV.7807

of its resolutions, and make timely adjustments. China
also hopes that the relevant country will adhere to
the principle of maintaining friendly relations with
its neighbours, heed their legitimate concerns and
adopt practical measures to improve relations with its
neighbours so as to achieve common security, mutual
benefits and win-win outcomes.
China is ready to continue to play its constructive
role in achieving peace, stability and development in
the Horn of Africa.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): Today, the Security Council
has adopted resolution 2317 (2016), renewing the
mandate of the Monitoring Group on Somalia and
Eritrea. Angola supports the Monitoring Group and
welcomes its tireless efforts to engage with all the
parties and contribute to the improvement of the
security situation in the region and to the compliance
of United Nations Member States with the sanctions
regime imposed on Somalia and Eritrea.
And yet, Angola abstained in the voting today. We
would like to outline the reasons for our vote.
Regarding Somalia, the activities of the Monitoring
Group have contributed significantly to improving the
security situation in the country, as mandated by the
Council. Regarding Eritrea, it should be noted that, for
the third consecutive year, the Monitoring Group has
found no evidence of Eritrean support to the Somali
terrorist group Al-Shabaab. The sanctions regime
has proven to be fruitful, but it must be terminated
when the reasons for its establishment no longer exist.
That should be done through a process in which the
Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea continues
to inform the Security Council on the situation and
support the international community’s efforts to bring
stability to the Horn of Africa.
A constructive proposal has been put forward for
the establishment of a road map conducive to changing
the sanctions regime, based on conditions to be agreed
by the Security Council. That proposal would be an
additional encouragement to the Government of Eritrea
to engage further with the international community.
The proposal has not been given due consideration,
which we deeply regret. We take note of the efforts of
the penholder to bring more balance to the text. We
hope that in future, more constructive engagement
among members of the Security Council will achieve
the necessary unity among all its members.

16-374933/8

S/PV.7807

The situation in Somalia

Ms. Coleman (United States of America): The
United States strongly supports resolution 2317
(2016), which targets many of the most serious causes
of instability in the Horn of Africa and mandates
the United Nations Somalia and Eritrea Monitoring
Group to continue its crucial work. Renewing that
mandate reflects the Security Council’s understanding
that sanctions regimes are an important part of the
international community’s comprehensive response to
the situation in the Horn of Africa.
First, on Eritrea, I would like to point out that,
while Eritrea calls for the lifting of United Nations
sanctions, as have several members of the Council, the
lack of engagement by Eritrea with the United Nations
Monitoring Group — under a Security Council Chapter
VII mandate — is not the path to lifting sanctions.
Eritrea has not been forthcoming with information with
regard to its support to regional armed groups. And,
while the Monitoring Group has not found evidence
of Eritrea’s support to Al-Shabaab, it is difficult to
corroborate that information, because the Monitoring
Group has not been allowed to visit the country in
five years. While Eritrea has released some Djiboutian
prisoners of war, it has not been forthcoming with
information on any remaining such prisoners. That lack
of cooperation must change if the Council is to take
seriously Eritrea’s calls to lift sanctions.
Turning to Somalia, during the 21 September highlevel meeting on Somalia, Council members widely
affirmed that Somalia had transitioned from State failure
to State-building. Today Somalia stands at a critical
junction to solidify its political and security gains. That
is why the United States strongly supported language
in the resolution that reflects the Security Council’s
commitment to eliminate all sources of funding for
Al-Shabaab, a group that continues to attack innocent
civilians and to threaten the peace and stability of both
Somalia and the region. The resolution also supports
the Government’s efforts at security-sector reform,
including developing a professional army.
We also support the resolution because it
acknowledges several of the Government’s goals,
including its intention to seek greater international
recognition and support for its efforts to address
extensive illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing
in waters where it has jurisdiction. It also makes clear
that the mismanagement of public funds in Somalia
will undercut the credibility of governance, the gains
made in the country and its prospects for future growth
4/8

10/11/2016

in Somalia. By supporting the full implementation
reflected in today’s resolution, Member States would
help to promote the long-term peace and stability of the
broader region.
In conclusion, Somalis are laying the foundation
for a more stable, representative and inclusive
Government. The United States stands by Somalia and
the international community. The Council must remain
engaged to ensure that Somalia and the region achieve
a more peaceful future. We thank Council members for
joining with us in sending that strong message today.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Like other members of the Security Council,
we would love to see the swift establishment of
solid peace and stability in Somalia and Eritrea and
throughout the entire Horn of Africa. However, we
were forced to abstain in the voting on resolution 2317
(2016) for the following reasons.
Support by Eritrea to the Al-Shabaab terrorist
group and the border dispute between Djibouti and
Eritrea were the main criteria for imposing restrictive
measures on Asmara in 2009. Since then, however,
the situation on the ground has changed significantly.
In its reports three years in a row, the Monitoring
Group concluded that there was no evidence of Eritrea
providing assistance to Al-Shabaab and that the
border dispute with Djibouti has been settled through
Qatar’s mediation. Allegations that Eritrea is allegedly
supporting regional armed groups are uncorroborated.
It therefore looks as if the reasons that led to the need to
impose sanctions simply no longer exist. The sanctions
regime against Eritrea has not taken that into account,
and they have remained unchanged. In that regard,
perhaps the time has come to draw up a road map
for the gradual lifting of sanctions against Eritrea, as
suggested by a number of delegations in the course of
work on the resolution.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like briefly to explain the reasons that prompted my
delegation to abstain in the voting on resolution 2317
(2016), concerning extending the sanctions regime on
Somalia and Eritrea and on prolonging the mandate of
the Monitoring Group.
We would have liked the wording used in the
resolution to be more balanced in the light of the
information contained in the Monitoring Group’s report,
namely, the lack of any evidence of Eritrea’s support
to Al-Shabaab, as well as the positive developments
16-37493

10/11/2016

The situation in Somalia

with regard to Djibouti prisoners. We think that clearer
criteria should be used when the Security Council takes
the necessary steps to review the sanctions imposed
against Eritrea — criteria that could encourage the
country to cooperate with the Council by showing
a clear commitment to uphold its various obligations
under Council resolutions. That should be done with a
view to promoting peace and security and stability in
the Horn of Africa, as well as to resolve all the concerns
of the countries of the region, in particular with regard
to the humanitarian aspect. In that regard, priority
should be accorded to providing information on the
fate of the Djibouti soldiers who disappeared during
military operations.
Allow me to state that our abstaining in the voting
is fully in line with our constant position on the issue of
sanctions. Sanctions must be used not as an end in and
of themselves, but as a necessary temporary measure
with clear limits used to achieve a political goal. It is
unacceptable for sanctions to continue endlessly and
without any time-bound criteria. It is also important
that we deal with sanctions in a sufficiently flexible
manner so that they can be reviewed in line with new
information on the ground.

S/PV.7807

sanctions seem, for some permanent members, to be an
end in themselves rather than mechanisms to resolve
political problems that arise.
Sanctions ought to be a political instrument that
achieve a specific objective. They should not become
a mechanism used for the collective punishment of a
country. In the case of Eritrea, sanctions should have
a clear road map towards a conclusion. By maintaining
prolonged sanctions, as we are currently doing, there
is no political purpose beyond serving the national
interests of members of the Council or of regional
situations that, as bilateral issues between countries,
cannot be addressed as a multilateral issue to which we
apply sanctions with a specific objective in mind.

With regard to Somalia, my delegation underscores
yet again the importance of accepting the provisions set
out in the resolution with a view to ending the provision
of weapons to terrorist groups and cut off their sources
of funding, so as to allow for effective counter-terrorism
efforts and restore peace and security in the country.

We are concerned that in most cases, the Sanctions
Committee uses the opinions and observations of the
Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea at their whim.
In some cases, when the Group says that something
warrants sanctions, even without objective evidence,
the Sanctions Committee immediately accepts the
Group’s opinion as valid, rather than one they need to
consider more closely before taking action. We think
it is the opposite. The Group submits a professional
opinion — and I take this opportunity to acknowledge
and express appreciation for the Monitoring
Group — indicating that we ought to lift sanctions
against Eritrea. However, neither the penholder nor
some of the members of the Sanctions Committee
wish to heed the recommendations coming from the
Monitoring Group because they believe that they are
insufficient. There seems to a be double standard with
which we deal with the opinions of the Monitoring
Group. Sometimes we accept its opinions when it suits
the penholder countries to maintain sanctions against a
country, yet whenever it presents an opinion contrary to
the interest of those countries, as in the case of Eritrea,
suddenly that opinion is insufficient.

Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela abstained in the voting on resolution
2317 (2016), for we believe that the part referring to
Eritrea, as presented to us, is unfair. As Chair of the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907
(2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea, we have been
working closely on that issue for almost two years. This
is the last time that we will be participating in a vote
on this text. We are obliged to say that what is taking
place in the Committee is another clear example of how

In the final report of the Monitoring Group, it
was very clear in the case of Eritrea that for the third
consecutive year there was no evidence whatsoever
that Eritrea was collaborating with or lending any
support to Al-Shabaab. It was clearly stated that there
was no evidence. The Committee has always received
information related to groups in various countries of
the region, but it does not take such information into
account. That is the first, very important element of the
Monitoring Group. I do not know what else we want to
receive from the Monitoring Group, but it seems clear

Despite the efforts made and the flexibility we
demonstrated to achieve the compromise we wanted,
the resolution presented to the Council today did
not include the proposals of some Council members,
including my delegation. They included ideas reflecting
the trends to which I have just referred. That is why we
were unable to vote in favour of the resolution.

16-374935/8

S/PV.7807

The situation in Somalia

that there is no cooperation between Al-Shabaab and
Eritrea, which was the original cause of the sanctions.
Furthermore, in our final report we recognized the
cooperation of the State of Qatar. Here we wish to thank
the Permanent Representative of Qatar, Ambassador
Al-Thani, for his efforts to mediate between Djibouti and
Eritrea, both to resolve the issue of the border dispute,
which is in a signed agreement between the countries,
as well as to obtain the release of prisoners of war,
which we welcome. That was a positive development
in the Committee. The Ambassador of Qatar promised
that Qatar would continue to mediate effectively and
directly in an ongoing manner with those countries. In
any normal situation, those elements would have been
enough, not to lift the sanctions because it would need
a road map but to at least establish a mechanism that
would eventually lead to the lifting of the sanctions
following an assessment.
We have been very concerned and have always
expressed those concerns in debates about the
Monitoring Group’s methodology and transparency.
What is the road map that ensures that a country can
have a sanctions regime against it lifted? Here we only
seek to come up with a mechanism. The delegation
of China offered a very significant proposal that laid
out a time frame during which we could work towards
lifting sanctions against Eritrea. We believe that we
should lift sanctions against Eritrea if we can draw up a
road map. The proposal of China garnered the support
of five countries, which is a sign important number.
The penholder seems to believe that the proposal is not
appropriate and that there is not sufficient reason to do
so, and therefore the adoption of that balanced proposal
did not take place.

10/11/2016

does regarding its positive steps forward or the
report of the Monitoring Group. It does not make
sense — the meetings, the initiatives and so on and
so forth. Eventually, the decision comes down to one
or a few permanent members. That is something we
need to review.
With respect to the issue of Somalia and Eritrea, we
support elements of resolution 2317 (2016) because we
believe that Somalia continues to need all the support
of the Sanctions Committee in order to take on its
upcoming challenges. In the case of Eritrea, it seems
to us that the Sanctions Committee and the Security
Council must demonstrate sufficient flexibility and
political capacity to understand that the situation in the
Horn of Africa is changing rapidly and that there are
huge dangers facing the entire region. The fundamental
danger in that area is the threat of expansion of terrorism.
That is not just a threat to the Horn of Africa. It is also a
threat to the global North and the Middle East. We call
on the Council to constructively set about resolving that
type of issue and to ensure that the reports or the work
of the Sanctions Committees do not become mere red
tape. At the end of the day, only one or two permanent
members will have their way. It signals defeat because
it means that the penholder could not achieve consensus
on the subject. We did not vote against the resolution
because a regional situation exists that must resolved.
In addition, there was only one minor mention — albeit
important — about the issue of evaluating the lifting
of sanctions.

Even though the draft was not adopted, it was at
least the beginning of steps in the right direction. That
is why we decided to abstain in the voting on resolution
2317 (2016). Until there is something new to give us
reason to believe that we can extricate ourselves from
the situation we cannot offer our support. We lament
the situation and do not see how the issues at hand can
be resolved within the framework of the mandate of
the Sanctions Committee. We have always said that the
Sanctions Committees have had to have an immediate
political aim. They cannot always be used way of
delivering collective punishment.

I would also like to remember here Ambassador
Girma Asmerom Tesfay — a good friend and an
Ambassador who represented his country’s interests
well — who regrettably died without seeing his country
freed from an issue that caused him so much concern.
Once again, I would like to extend our condolences
to the delegation of Eritrea and make an appeal in
the interest of all the countries of Africa so that the
continent can have greater tangible support from the
Security Council to resolve its problems. Seventy per
cent of the sanctions committees are against African
countries and, in the majority of cases, the former
colonial Powers are heading those sanctions committees
against Africa. We should think about that. We in Latin
and South America will continue working in line with
our capacities to achieve political solutions to all of the
terrible conflicts that affect our brother countries.

It does not seem to matter much in the decision
on the resolution or in the Committee what Eritrea

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Eritrea.

6/8

16-37493

10/11/2016

The situation in Somalia

Mr. Giorgio (Eritrea): I would like to thank you,
Sir, for giving my delegation this opportunity to address
the Security Council. Allow me to also congratulate
Senegal on assuming the presidency of the Council for
the month of November.
Eritrea believes that, once again, the Security
Council has committed a grave injustice against the
people of Eritrea by extending the unjustified sanctions.
There is no reason to maintain sanctions against Eritrea,
as the justification for them being imposed has long
been proved non-existent, a fact that has been asserted
by the Somalia/Eritrea Monitoring Group. In four of
its reports, including during its present mandate, the
Monitoring Group affirmed that there is no evidence of
Eritrean support to Al-Shabaab in Somalia.
With regard to Djibouti, Eritrea remains committed
to the mediation by the State of Qatar, which resulted
in the release of all Djiboutian prisoners of war last
March. The report (see S/2016/920) of the Monitoring
Group makes it clear that all its interlocutors mention
only seven prisoners of war in Eritrea, who are all
accounted for. For its part, Eritrea has confirmed that
there are no more Djiboutian prisoners on its hands. In
the light of the reports of the Monitoring Group and
serious developments in the region, it is incumbent
upon the Security Council to lift the unfair, unjust
and counterproductive sanctions on Eritrea without
further delay.
Eritrea is keenly aware that, failing to find any
substantive argument to continue the sanctions, some
members of the Council have resorted to procedural
matters, such as, in particular, the inability of the
Monitoring Group to visit Eritrea. Truth be told, that is
not the real reason for their determination to keep the
sanctions in place. In fact, some of them have made it
clear that even if the Group were to visit Eritrea, they
would still not support the lifting of the sanctions.
The sanctions, which have been in place for the
past seven years, have been detrimental not only to
Eritrea but also to the Horn of Africa region. It has
encouraged zero-sum approaches and imparted a sense
of impunity to some countries and emboldened them to
violate international law as well as to externalize their
problems instead of cooperating with their neighbours
to address the serious challenges of regional peace
and security. Unfortunately, once again, the Security
Council has missed an opportunity to contribute
positively to regional peace, stability and amity, by

S/PV.7807

maintaining the sanctions on Eritrea. For its part,
Eritrea will continue making its positive contribution
to regional peace, stability and security in the Horn of
Africa and the Red Sea regions.
In conclusion, Eritrea wishes to sincerely thank
those delegations that advocated for the immediate
lifting of the sanctions and those who have dissociated
themselves from today’s unfair and unwarranted
resolution 2017 (2016).
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Djibouti.
Mr. Doualeh (Djibouti): At the outset, Djibouti
wishes to express its profound gratitude to the members
of the Council for this opportunity to offer Djibouti’s
perspective on the status of the mediation between
Djibouti and Eritrea and to share some recent negative
developments that constitute a violation of the Security
Council’s repeated demand that Eritrea cease arming,
training and equipping armed grounds, including
Al-Shabaab.
Djibouti feels compelled to make this contribution
today because Eritrea has often offered a misleading
and deceptive account of the progress made on the
implementation of the 2010 mediation agreement signed
by Djibouti and Qatar, in an unconvincing attempt
to justify a call for the rescinding of the sanctions
imposed on Eritrea by resolutions 1907 (2009), 2023
(2011), 2044 (2012) and 2317 (2016), just adopted today.
In various forums, Eritrea has often cynically
characterized the border dispute with Djibouti as one of
the pretexts under which the sanctions were justified and
invoked the 10 June mediation agreement facilitated by
His Highness the Emir of Qatar as a purported basis for
rescinding sanctions. But it would be no exaggeration
to state that the assertion that Eritrea is fully committed
to Qatari mediation process is dishonest and not proved
by the facts.
With respect to prisoners of war, the mediation
agreement includes a single provision that each State
promptly provide a list of names and identification
numbers of all prisoners of war and other missing
persons held in its custody. Djibouti did just that.
Nearly six years have passed and Eritrea still refuses to
provide the list or otherwise account for the remaining
Djiboutians it has in its custody, incommunicado, and
in the most inhuman and degrading conditions for the
past eight years. Djibouti was hopeful that the release

16-374937/8

S/PV.7807

The situation in Somalia

of four prisoners of war earlier this year would signal
a radical departure from past practices and induce a
change in the behaviour of the State of Eritrea. Denial,
obfuscation and procrastination belong to the past.
The Secretary-General, and indeed the international
community as a whole, welcomed that development
as positive and expressed hope that tangible progress
would be made — but that hope quickly vanished.
Instead of honouring its international obligations
and commitments, Eritrea has continued to conduct
activities aimed at destabilizing the region and inciting
violent strife in Djibouti, as documented in the report
(see S/2016/920) of the Somalia/Eritrea Monitoring
Group, but has also provided weapons and ammunition
to Al-Shabaab in Somalia. We have provided evidence
of that to the Monitoring Group and the members of
the Security Council and we stand ready to provide
additional information. It is in violation of Security
Council resolutions and runs counter to our collective
efforts. That justifies the strengthening of sanctions,
not rescinding them.

8/8

10/11/2016

In its most recent open debate (see S/PV.7802), the
Security Council carefully analysed the magnitude of
the threats posed by asymmetrical attacks by terrorists
and other armed groups targeting peacekeepers. Once
again, Djibouti just recently lost soldiers to such attacks
in Somalia. But, of course, we will continue to support
our brothers and sisters in Somalia at this critical
juncture of the political process.
We all face competing priorities as developing
countries. One wonders why a developing country
with so many challenges would divert precious funds
destined for its development efforts to undertake
activities that aim at undermining peace in the region.
In conclusion, allow me to thank the members of
the Security Council for their continued vigilance and
support for the legitimate goals pursued by Djibouti,
in particular the settlement of the border dispute with
Eritrea and the release of all 13 prisoners of war.
The meeting rose at 10.50 a.m.

16-37493
