S/PV.9046

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9046th meeting

Thursday, 26 May 2022, 10.50 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mrs. Gasri
Mr. Biang
Mrs. Hackman
Mr. Asokan
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. Ochoa Martínez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Kariuki

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-36202 (E)
*2236202*

S/PV.9046

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

part, bold reforms on the part of the PA and increased
donor support, those economic challenges will continue.

The meeting was called to order at 10.50 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Israel to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in the meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Tor
Wennesland, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process; Mr. Daniel Munayer, Executive Director
of Musalaha; and Ms. Robi Damelin, Spokesperson,
Parents Circle.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Wennesland.
Mr. Wennesland: Allow me at the outset to
acknowledge the killing of the revered PalestinianAmerican journalist Shireen Abu Akleh as she covered
events in Jenin on 11 May. Her death brought together
Palestinians and countless others around the world in
grief and anger, while serving as another reminder of
the devastating human cost of this conflict. I send my
deepest condolences to her family and reiterate the
Secretary-General’s condemnation of all attacks on
journalists and his call to the relevant authorities to
carry out an independent and transparent investigation.
Those responsible must be held to account.
Regrettably, recent weeks have been filled with
the familiar patterns of daily violence, including
armed clashes, settlement expansion and evictions,
demolitions and seizures of Palestinian structures, as
well as a deadly terrorist attack in Israel. Meanwhile,
the financial situation of the Palestinian Authority (PA),
compounded by the constraints of the occupation, the
absence of serious Palestinian reforms and unclear
prospects for donor support, is dire and requires urgent
attention. Without meaningful policy steps on Israel’s
2/26

26/05/2022

In Gaza, efforts by the United Nations and
international partners to improve Palestinian lives,
along with measures taken by Israel to ease the pressure
and facilitate more economic activity, have enabled the
fragile ceasefire to continue. Keeping things calm,
however, is neither sufficient nor sustainable. More
needs to be done to alleviate the humanitarian crisis
and lift Israeli closures, in line with resolution 1860
(2009). The persistence of those conflict drivers and
the absence of real political will to change course have
empowered extremists and are eroding the perception
among Palestinians and Israelis that a resolution of the
conflict is achievable. Those dynamics, combined with
the financial crisis, are converging and intensifying
dangerously. While immediate steps to reverse the
negative trends and support the Palestinian people
are essential, a better coordinated and more strategic
approach by the parties and the international community
is needed. Economic relief must be expanded and made
more sustainable.
An agreed and updated regulatory framework for
the Israeli-Palestinian economic relationship is not
only vital to bringing meaningful economic dividends
for the Palestinians, but it would also add a tangible
political perspective to those economic steps. However,
that approach must be combined with political and
security steps that address core conflict drivers and
ultimately lead us towards an end to the occupation and
the achievement of a negotiated two-State solution.
The daily violence has continued throughout the
occupied Palestinian territory. During the reporting
period, 10 Palestinians, including one woman and three
children, were killed by Israeli security forces during
demonstrations, clashes, search-and-arrest operations,
attacks and alleged attacks on Israelis and other
incidents, and 346 Palestinians, including five children,
were injured. Israeli settlers and other civilians
perpetrated 57 attacks on Palestinians resulting in the
death of one Palestinian child and 24 injured, along with
damage to property. In all, four Israeli civilians and one
member of Israeli security personnel were killed, and
22 civilians, including five women and three children,
and 20 Israeli security forces officers were injured by
Palestinians in shooting and stabbing attacks, clashes,
the throwing of stones and Molotov cocktails and other
incidents during the reporting period. In total, there
22-36202

26/05/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

were 80 attacks by Palestinians on Israeli civilians,
causing injuries and damage to Israeli property.
On 29 April and 5 May, violent confrontations
between Israeli security forces and Palestinians took
place at the holy sites in Jerusalem, with Israeli security
forces using physical force to disperse Palestinians.
Forty-four Palestinians were injured. On 29 April,
armed Palestinians shot and killed an Israeli civilian
guard in the settlement of Ariel. Israeli forces arrested
two suspects on 30 April. On 5 May, two Palestinians
from the Jenin area killed three Israeli civilians and
wounded four others with axes in a terrorist attack in
the Israeli city of Elad. Israeli security forces arrested
the perpetrators on 8 May.
Also on 8 May, a 17-year-old Palestinian reportedly
carrying a knife climbed a fence to enter the Israeli
settlement of Tekoa and was shot and killed by a
resident. Hamas later claimed him as a member. The
same day, Israeli security forces shot and killed a
Palestinian man attempting to cross the security fence
near Tulkarm. On 11 May, Israeli security forces shot
and killed a 16-year-old Palestinian in Al-Bireh, where,
according to eyewitnesses, some 30 Palestinian youths
were throwing stones at Israeli security forces.
Following terrorist attacks in Israel that killed 18
people over the past two months, Israeli security forces
have continued intensive search-and-arrest operations
in the occupied West Bank, particularly around Jenin,
which have led to clashes, including with armed
Palestinian militants, in which many Palestinians have
been killed and injured. In that context, on 30 April, a
Palestinian man was shot and killed by Israeli security
forces in the village of Azzun, near Qalqilya. The man
reportedly threw a Molotov cocktail at the soldiers.
According to a video, he was shot in the back while
running away.
On 11 May, the journalist Shireen Abu Akleh
was shot and killed while covering an Israeli security
forces operation in Jenin, in which Palestinian militants
exchanged fire with Israeli security forces. Another
journalist was shot and injured in the same incident.
Both were wearing press vests and helmets. Scenes of
violence during Abu Akleh’s funeral procession, where
Israeli police entered the hospital and subsequently
beat pallbearers and other mourners with batons, were
deeply distressing and offensive and widely condemned.
On 15 May, the funeral of an 18-year-old Palestinian,
who had died the previous day from injuries suffered on

S/PV.9046

22 April during clashes with Israeli security forces at
the holy sites, also led to confrontations between Israeli
police and Palestinians in East Jerusalem.
On 20 May, during a search operation in Jenin,
during which there was an exchange of fire, Israeli
security forces shot and killed a 17-year-old Palestinian,
reportedly while he was throwing a Molotov cocktail.
On 24 May, Israeli security forces shot and killed a
16-year-old Palestinian and injured more than 20 others
in Nablus during clashes near Joseph’s Tomb. Israeli
security forces said that they fired at the Palestinian,
who had thrown a Molotov cocktail at them and Jewish
worshippers at the site.
Settler violence continued during the reporting
period. On 26 April, Israeli settlers erected a tent on
private Palestinian land near the Ma’ale Adumim
settlement. When asked to leave, the settlers attacked
and injured four Palestinians, including a 68-year-old,
with multiple fractures. During the reporting period, in
eight separate incidents, Israeli settlers, accompanied
by Israeli security forces, entered five Palestinian
towns, resulting in 57 Palestinians injured. In the town
of Hares, west of Salfit, a young Palestinian was injured
by live ammunition, reportedly by one of the settlers,
while two others were shot by Israeli security forces
with rubber-coated metal bullets.
I reiterate that the perpetrators of all acts of
violence must be held accountable and swiftly brought
to justice. There is no justification for acts of terrorism
and violence against civilians. Such acts must clearly
be condemned by all. I also reiterate that security forces
must exercise maximum restraint and use lethal force
only when strictly unavoidable in order to protect life.
On 22 May, the Jerusalem Magistrate’s Court
cancelled an order by Israeli police temporarily banning
from the holy sites three Jewish Israelis who performed
prayers there. The judge stated that his ruling did not
“determine anything regarding freedom of worship” at
the holy sites. Following an appeal by Israeli police,
the Jerusalem District Court overturned the decision
on 25 May. In her decision, the judge noted that the
right to freedom of worship “is not absolute, and should
be superseded by other interests, among them the
safeguarding of public order”.
In another worrying development, on 12 May,
for the first time in some seven months, the Israeli
authorities advanced plans for more than 4,000 housing
units in settlements in Area C of the occupied West

22-362023/26

S/PV.9046

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Bank, approximately one third in outlying locations.
Those include the retroactive approval of two outposts,
illegal also under international law.
On 28 April, Israel’s Supreme Court rejected
a petition against the construction of 31 settlement
housing units in an apartment complex in Hebron. If
built, those units would be the first new settlement
construction in the city in nearly 20 years.
On 15 May, the Israeli Supreme Court rejected four
petitions against a highly controversial plan to construct
a cable car between West Jerusalem and the Old City,
continuing worrying trends in and around Jerusalem.
I reiterate that all settlements are illegal under
international law and remain a substantial obstacle
to peace. I urge the Israeli authorities to cease the
advancement of all settlement activities and refrain
from actions that fuel instability and undermine
the prospects for the establishment of a viable and
contiguous Palestinian State.
Despite a notable reduction during Ramadan,
the Israeli authorities demolished, seized and forced
owners to demolish 40 Palestinian-owned structures in
Area C and 12 in occupied East Jerusalem, as well as
two structures in Area A, displacing 98 Palestinians,
including 50 children. The demolitions were carried out
citing the lack of Israeli-issued building permits, which
are nearly impossible for Palestinians to obtain.
On 25 April, the Jerusalem Magistrate’s Court
accepted the appeal of a Palestinian family against its
pending eviction in the neighbourhood of Sheikh Jarrah
in East Jerusalem, ordering the case to be reconsidered
by the Israeli authorities, while an eviction freeze
remains in place.
On 4 May, the Israeli High Court of Justice decided
to allow the implementation of eviction orders issued to
1,200 Palestinian residents, including 500 children, in
Masafer Yatta, in the southern part of the West Bank.
In its ruling, the Court said that permanent structures
in that area did not exist when it was declared a firing
zone by the Israeli military in the 1980s, almost 40
years ago. The Palestinian residents dispute that claim.
I am deeply concerned by the potential implications
of the High Court’s ruling and the humanitarian toll
on the communities in question if eviction orders are
carried out. I call on the Israeli authorities to end the
displacement and eviction of Palestinians in line with
Israeli obligations under international humanitarian
4/26

26/05/2022

law, and to approve plans that would enable Palestinians
to build legally and address their development needs.
On 10 May, the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for
the Coordination of the International Assistance to
Palestinians met in Brussels, with a focus on key
economic files, including PA fiscal reform, enhancing
PA revenues and improved trade and water and
energy supplies.
Turning to Gaza, the United Nations continues to
deliver vital humanitarian and development assistance,
as well as to make efforts towards further easing
restrictions on the movement of people and goods
into and out of the Gaza Strip. Plans are in place to
support the revitalization of Gaza’s fishery sector,
including facilitating the entry of dual-use items under
the Gaza Reconstruction Mechanism. The success of
that initiative could pave the way for a further easing of
restrictions, including in the agriculture, industry and
health sectors. To improve oncology services in Gaza
and reduce the debt burden on the PA from medical
referrals, the United Nations is leading preparations for
a five-year operational plan for oncology, which will
include prevention, treatment and palliative care.
Between 3 and 14 May, the Israeli authorities closed
the Erez pedestrian crossing between Gaza and Israel
except for humanitarian cases. The decision followed
the firing of several rockets from Gaza towards
Israel in April, as well as incitement by senior Hamas
leaders calling on Palestinians to carry out attacks
against Israelis.
Turning to the Golan, the ceasefire between Israel
and Syria continues to be generally maintained in a
volatile environment, with continued violations of
the 1974 Disengagement of Forces Agreement by the
parties. That includes the 11 May firing by the Israel
Defense Forces (IDF) across the ceasefire line and the
continued presence of Syrian armed forces in the area
of separation. The parties must respect their obligations
under the Agreement and prevent an escalation of
the situation.
In Lebanon, parliamentary elections were held on
15 May. Local and international observers expressed
some concern over incidents of vote buying and
electoral violence. The United Nations looks forward to
the swift formation of a new Government to implement
Lebanon’s urgent recovery and reform agenda.
The United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
convened a tripartite meeting on 19 May with
22-36202

26/05/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

representatives of the Lebanese Armed Forces and the
IDF. Major General Lázaro called on the parties to look
forward to practical arrangements, including to mark
points along the Blue Line as previously agreed.
In my previous briefing to the Council (see
S/PV.9021), I raised concerns about the potential
for violence during Ramadan but made clear that a
serious escalation was avoidable. Thanks to efforts
by all parties, a major outbreak of violence was, in
fact, avoided. However, trends in the West Bank have
deteriorated. As Jerusalem Day, on 29 May, approaches,
with the planned provocative flag march through the
Muslim quarter in the Old City, I again urge authorities
to take wise decisions to minimize confrontation and
the risk of more violence and escalation. I reiterate that
the status quo at Jerusalem’s holy sites must be upheld
and respected.
More broadly, I am extremely concerned that the
current dynamics, particularly in the occupied West
Bank, could spiral out of control at any time. I encourage
leaders on both sides to make difficult, but critical,
decisions that will take us back from the brink and help
stabilize the situation. Irresponsible and provocative
language and incitements to violence must stop.
Positive Israeli economic measures with regard to
the Palestinians are regularly undermined by parallel
negative steps, such as settlement advancement,
demolitions and continued violence. At the same
time, the dire fiscal and financial forecast facing the
Palestinian Authority looms, amid a lack of prospects
for real institutional reform.
We must push beyond the paradigm of managing
the conflict and move towards resolving it. There are
tangible, ongoing arrangements that can be regularized
and expanded immediately if there is political will.
I remain actively engaged with Israelis,
Palestinians, the States of the region and the broader
international community and urge them to take action
that will lead us back to the path of negotiations that
will end the occupation and establish two States, in line
with United Nations resolutions, international law and
bilateral agreements.
The President: I thank Mr. Wennesland for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Munayer.
Mr. Munayer: My name is Daniel Munayer. I
was born and raised in Jerusalem. I come from an old

S/PV.9046

Palestinian Christian family from the city of Lydda.
Through the Eastern Orthodox Church, we can trace
our presence in the land for 800 years.
Today I am the Executive Director of Musalaha,
which means reconciliation in Arabic. We do
reconciliation between Israelis and Palestinians, as
well as between Muslim and Christian Palestinians.
The way we do reconciliation is by taking groups
together to the desert, where they meet for the first
time. After spending five days together in the desert,
we have a series of workshops in which we address
various subjects, such as conflict, identity, obstacles to
reconciliation and history and narrative.
After our participants go through this process, we
then ask them to go back into the community, to engage
with the people in society, to deal with the core issues
of the conflict and to co-resist the injustices that exist
in our society.
But in reality, on the ground, Israelis and
Palestinians who go back home go back to very different
political realities. Many of our Palestinian participants
go back to a military occupation, and many of them
are still living in refugee camps. Many of our Israeli
participants go back to Tel Aviv or other cities where
the conflict is almost not felt.
I would like to highlight three distinct areas that
are damaging our ability to make an impact regarding
reconciliation back home — civic space, freedom of
religion and belief and accountability.
In terms of civic space, the ability to meet and
engage together positively is shrinking. In addition, civil
society within Ramallah, Bethlehem and Jerusalem are
cut off from each other, and there is very little ability
for them to engage with one another.
A major factor that hinders our ability to do
reconciliation is the imbalance of power. I come from a
neighbourhood in Jerusalem where there is the Jewish
neighbourhood and the Palestinian village. There was
a joint initiative to bring people together to discuss the
core issues that exist in our village and neighbourhood.
The main issues, according to the Palestinians, are
house demolitions and obtaining building permits. On
the Israeli side, the primary concern was too many
stray cats.
I also want to reiterate that there are students in Tel
Aviv University who were protesting with Palestinian
flags. In response to that, there was a member of

22-362025/26

S/PV.9046

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Knesset who stood up in front of the whole Parliament
and said, “Do not forget what happened to you in 1948”.
These are concerning and disturbing comments
made by politicians.
On my second point — freedom of religion and
belief — as an organization, we believe that religion
and faith can be used as a positive means of engagement
and build bridges between people. Yet we can see that
Israel is trying to turn this into a religious conflict.
Worshippers were attacked during prayers in Al-Aqsa
Mosque. The Mosque itself — the third holiest site
in Islam — was damaged. Palestinian Christians had
limited access and were even denied access to the
Church of the Resurrection and the Old City. Church
land was confiscated, and attacks were carried out
during religious ceremonies. The attack carried out
during Shireen Abu Akleh’s funeral in a church hospital
is a case in point. It speaks to the need for protection
and the freedom of the press.
The third area I would like to bring up is
accountability. In our model, reconciliation is not
possible without justice. Reconciliation means
upholding human rights. Reconciliation means
working towards equality. Reconciliation means
ending the occupation. We need international pressure,
intervention and accountability to protect the residents
of Jerusalem — our participants, who are going back
to their homes and are facing threats of demolitions
and settler and police violence. We heard about what is
happening in Masafer Yatta, with Israel’s High Court of
Justice ruling, but also in Silwan, 90 per cent of which
has been zoned for Solomon’s Garden, which would
leave only 10 per cent of the housing not demolished.
As a civil-society organization, Musalaha is
committed to supporting a just political solution
through non-violent and positive engagement, gender
equality and the participation of women and advocating
for a just solution from the bottom up. But I urge the
Security Council to play its role in applying pressure
from the top to the bottom.
The President: I thank Mr. Munayer for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Damelin.
Ms. Damelin: I did not come here to bring dialogue,
show PowerPoint presentations or make wonderful
statements about intellectual ways to end this conflict.
I came here to speak to the hearts of one and all because
that is what I can do. I am one of the victims, but I
6/26

26/05/2022

do not call myself a victim. I have become a victor of
what is happening in a conflict that should have ended
long ago.
We could sit here and give a comparison of
suffering, and I could give counterarguments. But the
fact is that people are dying. Sixty-eight children died
in Gaza. Who will remember their names? Does anyone
here know any of their names?
It is very difficult for me to sit here and not talk
about the reality of what it is to lose a child. When the
army came to tell me that my son had been killed by a
Palestinian sniper, one of the first things that I said was:
“You may not kill anybody in the name of my child”.
That has been the work I have been doing ever since.
I joined the Parents Circle-Families Forum, an
organization of more than 600 families that have
all lost an immediate family member to the conflict.
What we see as a vision is to create a framework for
a reconciliation process to be an integral part of any
political peace agreement. We signed all kinds of stuff
on the White House lawn. Everybody held each other
and it all looked very charming. But the people were
never involved. We have to do something to bring the
realization that without that reconciliation, there will
never be peace. At best, there can be a ceasefire until
the next time.
I joined the Parents Circle after I had been to
a weekend in East Jerusalem with other bereaved
Palestinian mothers. I looked into their eyes and, I
suddenly realized that we shared the same pain and
that I stood over the same grave for my own child as
Bushra stood over for her child. The tears that fell in
that grave were the same colour. And if we together
could stand on the same stage and talk in the same voice
for reconciliation, for non-violence and for getting out
of the occupied territories, would that not be the most
powerful statement and an example to others? Making
political statements is all very well. It is all very well
being pro-Israel or pro-Palestine, but what are people
doing with that? They are importing our conflict into
their country and creating hatred between Jews and
Muslims. So if a person cannot be a part of the solution,
I would urge that person to leave us alone.
Come to Israel and Palestine, come and see what is
happening on the ground. Listen with empathy. Come
and watch one of our dialogue meetings or one of our
women’s groups. Go into an average Israeli school of
17-year-olds, a Palestinian and an Israeli. Normally, I
22-36202

26/05/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

would have sat next to the Palestinian. I found it rather
strange that we had to sit separately, because that is the
way that we work. If one were to go into an average
Israeli school of 17-year-olds and ask the children
who has ever met a Palestinian, the answer would be
nobody. Or if one were to ask who speaks Arabic, the
answer would be maybe one person in the whole class.
Or if one asked who has been overseas, the answer
would be maybe 80 per cent of the kids. And yet they
have never met a Palestinian. They have never met the
humanity in the other. And suddenly, they hear a story
of transformation, of loss, of somebody who got up at
four o’clock in the morning and faced the indignities
of going through a checkpoint to come to their school
to talk about non-violence and change — to talk about
their own story. Suddenly, there is a human being. And,
by the way, they do not all become Martin Luther King,
but they do have a sense of who is on the other side.
I often go into many homes in the West Bank — and
not only me. I am here as a person, but I represent 600
families. When I go into a Palestinian home, they
look at me quite aggressively in the beginning. But
when I tell my personal story, there is an emotional
breakthrough because they suddenly see the humanity.
What also happens is that they join the Parents Circle.
And it is not only for bereaved people. We work mainly
on the ground with parallel narratives that many of the
countries —as I look around me — could well learn
from some of our projects. I want to bring hope because
I listen to youth talking, and all that I can sense is a
comparison of suffering and a lack of hope.
I want to tell the Council a short story about hope.
We have a very active women’s group in the Parents
Circle. I came to talk to a group of Palestinian women
one Saturday morning and asked them: “What is it that
you really need?” They said: “We need money. We
want to earn our own living”. I ask Council members
to consider that it is not very easy to be a peacemaker
if one does not have money to pay for school for one’s
children or for food to put on the table. I asked those
women then what they loved to do, what their passion
was. One of them liked to arrange flowers, another to
style hair, another to sew, another to take photographs,
another loved being an accountant. I said: “Let us open
a wedding planning business”. And guess what? The
light suddenly came back into the eyes of those women.
Do not forget that any Palestinian who belongs to the
Parents Circle is already a leader working against the
tide. Imagine the light that comes into a woman’s eyes
when she knows she has a future profession. Last week,

S/PV.9046

14 women started to take a course to get certified and
then, to have a profession. Imagine how joyful that is
in these terribly dark times. We will do two weddings
for brides who cannot afford to pay, as a beginning to
this programme.
That initiative brings hope. We started a parallel
narrative course this week. There are many things
happening on the ground that many people are probably
not aware of. I wish that instead of sitting around this
table, everyone would take themselves off and come to
understand that there is hope, because I can confidently
say in this Chamber that if there is no hope, there will
never be peace. It is a remarkably important equation
for any peace-seeking work. Please look into the work
of any of so many organizations. Two weeks ago,
we organized a memorial ceremony on the official
memorial day for Israeli soldiers. But we conduct an
alternative ceremony, with Palestinians and Israelis
coming to tell the stories of their losses. One Palestinian
whose son had been killed donated his son’s organs to
Israeli hospitals. Imagine what that is like for an Israeli
who has never heard a story like that to be exposed
to it. By the way, 200,000 people tuned in online to
that ceremony.
This is a very important step for us to make and for
people to listen to. The Palestinians in our organizations
joke that if Hamas kidnaps them, they would be returned
in half an hour because they talk so much.
I am grateful for this small opportunity to brief the
Council, but it would be so much better if its members
could listen with empathy.
The President: I thank Ms. Damelin for her briefing.
I would like to draw the attention of speakers to
paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line
with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the United States.
Let me start by thanking Special Coordinator
Wennesland for his briefing. We strongly support his
continued close engagement with all parties as we work
to foster dialogue. I also thank Ms. Robi Damelin and
Mr. Daniel Munayer for their briefings on reconciliation
efforts between Israelis and Palestinians. That work
is vital to building confidence in one another. As our

22-362027/26

S/PV.9046

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

civil-society briefers reminded us, dialogue is essential
to understanding and cooperation, and we welcome
efforts to increase collaboration between the parties.
I really appreciate that Ms. Damelin reminded us of
the importance of hope — hope for a future and hope
for peace.
With that aim, the United States was pleased
to participate in the recent meeting of the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee, and we welcome the tangible
announcements, including a joint commission on water
and working-level discussions related to financing
and taxation. These types of discussions play an
important role, and we fully support these efforts. But
even as we push for dialogue and cooperation, we must
also call out any and all violence.
The string of recent terrorist attacks against Israelis
has been horrific. After the attack in Elad earlier this
month, 16 children will never see their parents again.
We know that feeling. We deplore these terrorist
attacks. Violence is never the solution.
We also mourn the heart-wrenching killing of
Palestinian-American journalist Shireen Abu Akleh
on 11 May. Shireen was a widely respected veteran
reporter whom I had the pleasure of meeting. She was
a role model for many aspiring journalists, particularly
women and girls, and her work was followed closely
by those who care about the region. We strongly
condemn her killing, and we call for an immediate,
thorough, transparent and impartial investigation, and,
upon the conclusion of an investigation, we expect full
accountability for those found responsible.
In the region and around the world, journalists play
a fundamental role in the free flow of information, ideas
and opinions. Their work is essential to inclusive and
tolerant societies. We will continue to prioritize media
freedom and defend journalists’ ability to do their job
without fear or threats of violence or unjust detention.
Shireen’s killing is a tragic loss and an affront to press
freedom everywhere.
Compounding this loss was the violence at
Shireen’s funeral procession on 13 May, and we have
directly shared our concern with Israel with regard to
the troubling footage of Israeli police intruding on the
procession. Every family deserves to be able to lay their
loved ones to rest in a dignified and unimpeded manner.
The violence following Shireen’s killing and funeral
only adds to the increasing tensions we witnessed during
the convergence of Ramadan, Passover and Easter last
8/26

26/05/2022

month. That included multiple terrorist attacks against
Israel and rockets fired from Gaza and Lebanon, which
we also condemn in the strongest terms. We appeal to
all sides to work cooperatively to lower tensions and
honour Shireen, by redoubling efforts to promote peace.
It is important to refrain from unilateral actions
that exacerbate tensions and jeopardize a negotiated
two-State solution. This includes the situation in
Masafer Yatta, and other evictions, which we continue
to monitor closely and about which we continue to
voice our concerns. When such actions violate the law,
the perpetrators, whether Israeli or Palestinian, should
be held accountable by the relevant authorities.
I would like to now shift our focus to how Russia’s
unprovoked war of aggression in Ukraine is affecting
food insecurity in the region. As we have made clear
in the Security Council, Russia is actively impeding
Ukrainian farmers and blocking food exports. We know
this is having a particularly devastating impact on the
Middle East and Africa. This makes the work of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), which supports
vulnerable populations on the ground, more critical
than ever. Member States must keep this in mind as we
approach next month’s pledging conference. Too often,
supportive statements by Governments for UNRWA
are not accompanied by financial contributions.
We strongly encourage States to join us in funding
UNRWA so it can ensure that those in need receive
support to cope with rising food prices and so that it
can continue to provide education and health care to
Palestinian refugees.
At the same time, we invite Member States to
join us in promoting UNRWA’s efforts to strengthen
its effectiveness and financial sustainability. We will
continue to work with UNRWA to bolster the Agency’s
accountability, transparency and consistency with
humanitarian principles, including neutrality. Only
in this spirit of cooperation among Member States,
but especially between Israelis and Palestinians, can
we pursue equal measures of freedom, security and
prosperity for Israelis and Palestinians alike.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Coordinator Wennesland for his briefing. I
22-36202

26/05/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

have also listened attentively to the briefings presented
by Mr. Daniel Munayer and Ms. Robi Damelin.
During the past month, the security situation in
the occupied Palestine territory remained turbulent,
with multiple clashes between Israeli security forces
and Palestinians, resulting in a continued increase in
Palestinian civilian casualties. Attacks against Israeli
civilians also occurred from time to time. Religious
believers in the occupied territories, be they Muslims or
Jews, were unable to celebrate their religious holidays
in peace and tranquillity.
The various factors contributing to the rising
tensions between Palestine and Israel were brought into
sharp relief just recently. A number of these factors are
still fermenting. We are extremely worried about this.
The recent developments between the two sides have
raised a red flag for the international community and
call for well-tailored solutions.
The current situation once again gives witness
to the importance of upholding the status quo of holy
sites. Holy sites carry the collective sentiments of
religious believers and have seen multiple incidents of
bloodshed. China calls on all the parties concerned to
learn from history, jointly safeguard the historical status
quo of religious sites, respect Jordan’s custodianship of
the holy sites and refrain from any unilateral action to
change the status quo.
Jerusalem Day is just around the corner. We call
on all parties concerned to exercise maximum restraint
and avoid the resurgence of conflict.
The current situation between Palestine and Israel
is further testimony to the importance of achieving
common security. On 11 May, the Palestinian-American
journalist Shireen Abu Akleh was killed while covering
Israeli security operations in the West Bank city of Jenin.
The Security Council issued a press statement strongly
condemning the killing and demanded an immediate,
thorough, transparent, impartial and fair investigation
(SC/14891). We note with concern the latest reports
on the incident. We urge relevant parties to carry out
an investigation and publish their conclusion without
delay, as called for by the Council.
We note with equal concern that yet another
16-year-old Palestinian boy was shot and killed by
Israel in the West Bank the day before yesterday. Every
civilian killed by conflict in the occupied territory
leaves behind a broken family. The ever-rising number
of civilian casualties only aggravates the animosity

S/PV.9046

between Palestinians and Israelis and undermines
mutual trust. Palestine and Israel cannot unneighbour
each other; they have a stake in one another’s security.
They should find a way to live side by side in harmony
and shared security. Israeli security forces should abide
by the principle of proportionality in law enforcement
and not use excessive force.
The current situation between Palestine Israel
shows once again the importance of implementing
international parameters. Building settlements in the
occupied territory violates international law, disrupts
the contiguity of the occupied Palestinian territory and
compromises the prospects for a two-State solution.
China is concerned about Israel’s announcement
of a new settlement-construction plan and urges
Israel to stop all settlement activities, as required by
Council resolutions.
A two-State solution is the fundamental way
forward for achieving peace between Palestine and
Israel and must be observed and implemented. Only by
realizing such a solution and restoring the legitimate
rights of the Palestinian people can we break the cycle
of violence. The international community cannot
substitute crisis management for a just solution when it
comes to the question of Palestine. The relevant parties
with major influence on the question should uphold
objectivity and impartiality, prioritize the fundamental
interests of the Palestinian people and the countries
of the region and take practical steps to advance the
Middle East peace process.
Palestine is facing existential and development
challenges. The international community should
take concrete action to help Palestinians fight the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, develop the
economy and improve people’s livelihoods, with a view
to achieving economic independence at an early date.
The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East has made positive
contributions to improving humanitarian conditions
for Palestinian refugees. The international community
should consolidate its political support for the Agency
and make effective efforts to ease its financial problems.
COVID-19 vaccines, as part of an aid package from
China to the Agency, have recently arrived in Jordan,
Syria and Lebanon to be used to vaccinate Palestinian
refugees in those countries.
I would like to conclude by reiterating China’s
support for the establishment of a fully sovereign

22-362029/26

S/PV.9046

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and independent Palestinian State, based on the 1967
borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital, living
side by side in peace with Israel, and our support for the
Arab people and Jewish people developing alongside
each other. We also underline our support for the
common development of both Arabs and Jews. China
will continue to play a constructive role alongside the
international community with the aim of achieving
a settlement of the Palestinian question as soon
as possible.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Tor Wennesland, the United
Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, for his report on the situation in the
Middle East.
Concern is growing about yet another escalation
in tensions in the occupied Palestinian territories
thanks to a recurrence of acts of violence, primarily
in Jerusalem, in connection with the oppression of
Christian and Muslim believers and the restriction of
their access to the holy sites. We want to point out once
again that it is unacceptable to violate the historical and
legal status quo of the holy sites of Jerusalem and we
emphasize the stabilizing role played by the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan, which is historically responsible
for their protection.
In parallel, the Israeli authorities are conducting
direct military actions and operations in the West Bank
and the Gaza Strip, the most recent of which ended in
the tragic death of the Palestinian journalist Shireen
Abu Akleh. In that regard, we support the Palestinian
leadership’s demand that a thorough and objective
investigation into the circumstances of her death be
carried out.
It is clear from the Special Coordinator’s briefing
that the already explosive situation is being exacerbated
by the illegal, unilateral steps taken by Tel Aviv
to create irreversible realities on the ground. Over
the past year, more than 12,000 housing units were
approved through the expansion of existing settlements
and the construction of new ones, while more than
1,000 Palestinian homes have been demolished. The
confiscation of land and forced evictions of Palestinian
families continue, and olive groves are being cut down.
There has been an increase in settler attacks, as well
as in the disproportionate use of force by the Israeli
military. Against that backdrop, Tel Aviv’s intention
to double the number of Israelis living in the Jordan
Valley and the Syrian Golan Heights by 2026 can be
10/26

26/05/2022

regarded as a de facto annexation of a large area of the
occupied Palestinian territories.
The international community is virtually
ignoring those systematic violations of the rights of
the Palestinians, which clearly reflects the double
standards of Western countries where the provisions
of international humanitarian law and the protection of
human rights are concerned. We are seeing the same
thing in relation to the situation in Donbas. It is also
regrettable that a number of our Western colleagues
do not shy away from using other matters to divert
the attention of the international community from the
sabotage of the Israeli-Palestinian settlement. We heard
the United States representative once again tell the tired
old story that the global food crisis is Russia’s fault. We
would ask the United States to stop trying to mislead
everyone and to remove the sanctions it imposed
through its own volition and which are hindering the
distribution of food. The world will breathe a sigh
of relief.
In the current context, we consider our primary
task to be achieving real stability on the ground and
restoring the political horizon so as to revive the Middle
East peace process on the basis of the internationally
recognized terms of reference, whose central element is
a two-State solution. At the same time, we firmly believe
that a settlement is possible only through the launch of
direct negotiations between the parties. In that context,
the restoration of inter-Palestinian unity through the
platform of the Palestine Liberation Organization is
vital. We welcome and support Egypt’s corresponding
initiatives aimed at establishing a dialogue between
the major political forces in Palestine, as well as
Algeria’s plans to host the next round of talks between
representatives of Fatah and Hamas. Our proposal for
holding the next inter-Palestinian meeting in Moscow
still stands.
For our part, we continue to cooperate with the
Palestinians and Israelis, as well as all interested
international and regional players that are ready to
work together within the framework of the Middle
East Quartet. We would like to note the importance
of coordinating international mediators with regional
partners directly interested in achieving a Middle East
settlement. That is what prompted Russia’s initiative
to hold a broader ministerial meeting of the Middle
East Quartet with key members of the League of
Arab States. However, we consider the United States’
desire to monopolize the peace process and impose
22-36202

26/05/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

so-called economic peace on the Palestinians, rather
than meeting their legitimate aspirations to create their
own independent State, to be counterproductive, as is
Washington’s unwillingness to join the activities of the
Quartet of international mediators.
Given the deteriorating situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories, it is vital to ensure that the
effective efforts of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East continue
to provide comprehensive humanitarian assistance to
the Palestinians in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, as
well as to the Palestinian refugees in neighbouring Arab
countries. We call on international donors to give the
Agency’s work more active support, considering that
it has been the main international structure providing
assistance to Palestinians in the areas of education,
health care, social support, infrastructure and living
conditions in refugee camps since 1949.
In that context, the Western organizers’ decision not
to invite Russia to the meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee for the Coordination of International
Assistance to Palestinians is baffling. Russia has
played an active role in the Committee’s work on an
ongoing basis since it was founded in 1993 and has
made a significant and recognized contribution to
creating a solid foundation for the implementation of a
solution involving two States, Israel and Palestine. It is
clear that this position has nothing to do with a genuine
quest to find solutions to the conflicts in the Middle
East and North Africa. Any attempt to exclude Russia
from the process of resolving the Palestinian question,
the situation in Syria or any other Middle East crisis
would be counterproductive. Russia and the countries
of the Middle East and North Africa share deep, stable
and undeniable historical ties untainted by a legacy of
colonialism, unlike the case with Western States. We
intend to continue making an active contribution to
resolving the acute conflicts in that part of the world
and strengthening mutually beneficial relations with
all the countries of the region, which represent a vital
element of a multipolar world.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I would like to thank
Mr. Wennesland for his sobering briefing earlier and to
recognize our Israeli and Palestinian colleagues with
us at the table this morning. I particularly wanted to
address our civil-society briefers, Ms. Robi Damelin
and Mr. Daniel Munayer, to say that their work and their
words today deserve our attention. More importantly,
they deserve our support. We have listened carefully,

S/PV.9046

with the empathy that Ms. Damelin asked for, and I
would like to say that it is rare to hear such sincere
and refreshing briefings at the beginning of a Council
debate. I thank the presidency for arranging that.
We have one clear message today, which is to call
for urgent de-escalation. All duty-bearers, including
the international community, have a role to play.
We must be clear, however, that there are concrete
steps that Israel, as the occupying Power, can take
to de-escalate the situation. Ireland reiterates the
importance of protecting the status of the holy sites
in Jerusalem and its full respect for Jordan’s custodial
role. We share Tor Wennesland’s concerns that the
forthcoming Jerusalem Day flag march will escalate
tensions. We call on all those concerned to ensure that
it passes peacefully.
Yet again, Mr. Wennesland has reported on deeply
disturbing developments, and Ireland condemns the
recent terrorist attacks in Israel, most recently in Elad
on 5 May. We have consistently said that there is no
justification for terrorism, the victims of which deserve
justice. Ireland also condemns all loss of civilian life in
the occupied Palestinian territory. We call on Israel to
address disproportionate security responses, as seen in
Jerusalem, Jenin and elsewhere.
We deplore the shocking killing of Al-Jazeera
journalist Shireen Abu Akleh and the excessive use of
force by the police at her funeral. We call for a swift and
independent investigation to bring the perpetrators to
justice. Freedom of the media is essential, and journalists
must be protected, as affirmed by the Security Council
in resolutions 2222 (2015) and 1738 (2006).
Illegal settlement expansion by Israel continues.
Ireland condemns the decision of the Israeli Higher
Planning Council to advance plans for the construction
of more than 4,000 housing units in the West Bank. We
urge the Israeli authorities to reverse that decision.
Those settlements clearly violate international law.
They undermine prospects for a two-State solution and
are a major obstacle to a just, lasting and comprehensive
peace. The latest decision, as well as the demolitions and
evictions affecting the Palestinian populations in East
Jerusalem and Area C, directly threaten the viability of
a future Palestinian State and are underlying causes of
tension and violence.
In common with its European Union partners,
Ireland is deeply concerned about developments in

22-3620211/26

S/PV.9046

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Masafer Yatta, which could amount to the forcible
transfer of approximately 1,200 Palestinians and the
demolition of their homes. Ireland urges Israel to
cease evictions and demolitions, including of donorfunded structures, in line with its obligations under
international law and international humanitarian law.
The economic situation of the Palestinian people
and the fiscal position of the Palestinian Authority
remain dire. That has a destabilizing effect. Structural
constraints for the sustainable development of the
Palestinian economy must be removed. The Palestinian
Authority must be further supported in its reform
efforts, and the trend of declining donor support must
be reversed. Ireland remains deeply concerned about
the situation in the Gaza Strip and encourages the
Israeli authorities to ensure that essential infrastructure
projects can resume.
We renew our call on Israel to lift the blockade
on the Strip and commend regional partners for their
ongoing support. We also commend the United Nations
system, in particular the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), for its support to the Palestinian people in
extremely challenging circumstances. In this year’s
UNRWA mandate renewal, we urge the international
community to match the political commitments to
Palestine refugees with the funding required for the
Agency to carry out its work.
While today our immediate focus is urgent
de-escalation, a credible political horizon remains both
vital and urgent. Economic and development measures
on their own are not sufficient. In order to advance
prospects for the resumption of a genuine and inclusive
political process, Ireland calls for confidence-building
measures. Israel, as the occupying Power, has a
particular responsibility — for example, to refrain
from the excessive use of administrative detention
and release those who continue to be detained without
formal charge.
Ireland also reiterates its call for the release of the
mortal remains of Hadar Goldin and Oron Shaul to their
loved ones so that they can have some closure, as well
as for the release of the two Israeli civilians detained in
the Gaza Strip. Those and other measures could assist
with resuming a meaningful political process, without
which future generations of Israelis and Palestinians
will remain caught in a vicious cycle of occupation
and conflict.
12/26

26/05/2022

Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank Special Coordinator
Wennesland for his remarks and for being here with
us today in person. I also want to thank Robi Damelin
and Daniel Munayer for their poignant and thoughtprovoking remarks.
We remain deeply concerned about the rising
tensions, especially in East Jerusalem and the West
Bank. It is essential for tensions to be lowered and
for the threat posed by extremists to be controlled.
The historic status quo of the holy sites must also
be upheld. We condemn all acts of terrorism, and all
acts of incitement and violence against civilians are
unacceptable. In addition, as we have already noted
in the Security Council, journalists must be protected.
Their work is essential to peace and democracy.
We condemn the killing of Al-Jazeera journalist
Shireen Abu Akleh and support the call for a thorough,
transparent and impartial investigation. The scenes
from her funeral procession in Jerusalem were deeply
disturbing. Funeral processions must be shown the
utmost respect, and civilians must always be protected.
We reiterate our call on the Israeli authorities to halt
all settlement expansions, evictions and demolitions.
We urge Israel to revoke the plans to demolish several
villages in the Masafer Yatta area, which will forcibly
evict approximately 1,300 Palestinians. Israel should
also refrain from carrying out the announced plans
to advance thousands of new housing units in the
West Bank.
Norway and the European Union convened the Ad
Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of the
International Assistance to Palestinians (AHLC) on
9 to 10 May in Brussels. The aim of the AHLC is to
help build the foundation of a Palestinian State and help
realize the two-State solution. Transferring authority
to the Palestinian Authority (PA) is a key element of
that process.
The AHLC commended the parties for the positive
achievements realized since their meeting held in
Oslo in November 2021. For example, the pilot for
the electronic transfer of value-added tax has been
launched. Barriers to trade between Palestine and
Jordan are being removed. And access for Palestinians
to the Israeli labour market has been increased from
both the West Bank and Gaza. There are also new
arrangements that provide more water and more
wastewater treatment, and more goods are entering and
being exported from Gaza.
22-36202

26/05/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Those steps are important for the development,
economic growth and sustainability of the Palestinian
Authority. However, the AHLC is impatient to see more
progress. Announcements by the PA of unrealistic
wage increases are causing concern and the muchneeded reforms aimed at balancing the budget cannot
wait any longer.
The PA remains in a deep financial and political
crisis. The two parties must further intensify their
cooperation to stabilize the Palestinian economy,
increase revenues to the PA and facilitate economic
growth. Israel must also reduce the restrictions imposed
by the occupation, avoid escalatory actions and take
more active steps to strengthen the PA.
We call on all the parties to use the constructive
spirit built by the AHLC to further address the
underlying causes of the conflict and make progress
on the political track. A political horizon is urgently
needed. Improvement of the economic situation alone
will not resolve the conflict. The two-State solution
remains the only viable solution to secure the rights,
safety and prosperity of both Israelis and Palestinians.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I thank Special Coordinator
Tor Wennesland for his presence here this morning and
for his briefing. I also listened keenly to the observations
made by Mr. Daniel Munayer and Ms. Robi Damelin.
Constructive inter-ethnic and intercultural grass-roots
engagements can, and do, contribute to coexistence
despite, and within, the current fragile situation.
The implications of the escalating acts of violence
in the past few months in Tel Aviv, at the Al-Aqsa
Mosque and in Jenin are still being felt on the ground,
as indicated by Special Coordinator Wennesland, at an
extremely high cost to both Palestinian and Israeli lives.
In view of the upcoming 28-29 May Jerusalem Day
events, we urge all parties to exercise restraint in both
action and rhetoric before, during and after the events.
We also call on all parties involved to continue
affirming in word and demonstrating in action that the
status quo of Jerusalem continues to be maintained.
Kenya welcomed the Council’s recent press
statement on the killing of the Palestinian-American
journalist Shireen Abu Akleh (SC/14891). As we join
in the call for an immediate, thorough, transparent and
impartial investigation into her killing, we urge that the
process does not lose sight of the contextual issues in
which such tragic events continue to occur.

S/PV.9046

Kenya welcomes any constructive and practical
steps that seek to secure the full implementation of
the Council’s resolutions. Those include any efforts,
whether at the official or the grass-roots level, that
contribute to the creation of a conducive environment
for a negotiated peaceful settlement, including the
final-status negotiations, and the actualization of the
two-State solution with a viable Palestinian State based
on the 1967 lines.
It is for that reason that we continue to condemn
actions and entities that weaken the path to stabilization
and enhance negative trends on the ground. The
continuing attacks and inciteful rhetoric by Hamas,
the Palestinian Islamic Jihad and affiliated militias
underscore not only the destabilizing effect of terrorism,
but also that terrorists and militias are actors with no
incentive to consider or engage in the peace agenda. As
we have stated before, the Council needs to go beyond
condemnation of such acts and reinforce facilitation
and capability mechanisms to address their continuing
entrenchment and destructive operations.
High-level outreach and engagement by the
Secretary-General and the Office of the Special
Coordinator with the top officials of the Israeli
Government, the Palestinian Authority and key
neighbouring States, including Jordan and Egypt, will
continue to remain critical. The important work of
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force also
remains vital to the stability of the subregion.
The 12 May decision by the Israeli authorities to
advance plans for more than 4,000 housing units in the
West Bank is concerning. As we have stated before,
the advancement of settlements, the increasing settler
population and clashes, arbitrary displacements and
forced evictions, including the recent decision by the
Israeli High Court regarding the Palestinian residents
of Masafer Yatta, will continue to create a hurdle for
the path of peace and the normalization of relations
between Israelis and Palestinians. We call for the
cessation of Israeli settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, in line
with obligations under international law.
Inasmuch as peacebuilding is a rare terminology
when it comes to the peace and security efforts in
the Middle East, we encourage more focus on efforts
that contribute to conflict prevention, mediation and
recovery efforts and that address critical challenges,

22-3620213/26

S/PV.9046

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

26/05/2022

such as State fragility and socioeconomic development
in both Gaza and the West Bank.

settlement expansion and evictions in the occupied
Palestinian territories.

The meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of the International Assistance to
Palestinians held in Brussels earlier this month under
Norway’s leadership is an important platform for such
conversations. We welcome the high-level participation
by both the Palestinian Authority and Israeli officials
and note that the meeting touched on strengthened
cooperation on various critical issues, including water,
energy, trade and the overall improvement of the fiscal
situation of the Palestinian Authority.

This ongoing cycle of violence only moves us
further away from the peaceful solution that both
Israelis and Palestinians deserve. We urge the parties
to return to dialogue and take urgent steps to make
progress towards peace.

Kenya looks forward to localized, sustainable and
tangible outcomes from such meetings and strengthened
synergies among peace, security and peacebuilding
when it comes to the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank the Special
Coordinator, Robi Damelin and Daniel Munayer for
their insightful and powerful briefings. Sadly, the
world’s attention has been drawn repeatedly to the
fragile situation in the Middle East this month.
We started with an appalling terror attack on
innocent Israeli citizens in Elad as they celebrated their
Independence Day. Our thoughts remain with the three
victims and their families. We condemn the recent
attacks against Israelis in the strongest possible terms,
and reaffirm that the United Kingdom stands with
Israel in the face of terrorism and violence.
We then witnessed the tragic killing of the
veteran Palestinian-American Al-Jazeera journalist
Shireen Abu Akleh in Jenin and the deeply disturbing
scenes of the disproportionate use of force by Israeli
police at her funeral. We urge a swift, transparent
and impartial investigation into those events and
meaningful accountability.
The United Kingdom is a strong defender of media
freedom. The work of journalists across the globe is
vital, and they must be protected when carrying out
their critical work.
We also saw the advancement of more than 4,000
settlement units in the West Bank and the increased risk
of eviction of more than 1,000 Palestinians in Masafer
Yatta. We are clear that, in all but the most exceptional
of circumstances, settlements, demolitions and forced
evictions are illegal under international humanitarian
law. We call on the Israeli Government to halt all
14/26

We saw evidence of the value of dialogue and
collaboration at the meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee for the Coordination of the International
Assistance to Palestinians, chaired by Norway,
in Brussels this month. We were pleased to see
commitments from the parties to advancing economic
cooperation. The United Kingdom is fully supporting
those efforts and is ready to support further. To be
clear, we believe momentum on economic issues must
be in tandem with political commitment to make
progress towards peace. We reaffirm, as we did with
our partners at the Group of Seven Foreign Ministers
meeting this month, our commitment to a negotiated
two-State solution, which envisions both Israel and a
viable Palestinian State, living side by side in peace and
security and mutual recognition.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank the Special
Coordinator for his briefing and his continued efforts
in fulfilling his mandate.
Every time we meet on this issue, we look for good
and positive news from the Middle East. It does not
come often, but it does, such as the recent meeting of the
Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of the
International Assistance to Palestinians in Brussels. We
support calls for a more strategic approach to address
the Palestinian Authority’s economic and fiscal crisis.
We also welcome the increase in the number of
work permits as part of recent Israeli decisions to make
improvements to access and movement. Such initiatives
contribute to improving Palestinian livelihoods and
easing tensions. They help to build confidence and trust
among the parties.
But they should also be sustained and
become irreversible. Increasing economic integration
requires updating the regulatory framework governing
the relationship between the Israeli and Palestinian
economies in order to avoid exacerbating asymmetries
that are there.
We are deeply troubled by recent developments
marred by tension and violence. We strongly condemn
22-36202

26/05/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the murder of Israeli citizens in terrorist attacks. Such
despicable acts undermine trust, polarize communities
and reverse gains. Like every country, Israel has
the right to defend itself against terror through
proportionate action.
We condemn in the strongest terms incitements to
violence, such as the recent one from Hamas’ leader in
Gaza, who called on Palestinians to commit attacks using
a “cleaver, ax or knife”. We urge Palestinian Authority
leaders to be the first to denounce such unacceptable
postures. Violence only begets more violence, in a
never-ending cycle, feeding only extremist ideas.
We are shocked and saddened by the killing the
Al-Jazeera journalist Shireen Abu Akleh in Jenin.
We urge both Palestinian and Israeli authorities to
cooperate on carrying out a thorough, fair and impartial
investigation so as to ensure accountability, as called
for by the Council. Unfortunately, Shireen Abu Akleh
is not the first journalist to be killed, but we fervently
hope that she will be the last to lose her life in the line
of duty. We must do everything in our power to protect
journalists in their noble mission of pursuing the truth
and informing the public.
We have time and again called on the parties to
avoid any action that may undermine efforts, however
timid, towards understanding. We have seen it so many
times: it takes a great deal of effort to build trust, and
it takes only a second to destroy months and even
years of effort, and bring back tension and violence
with their painful toll in human lives. Parties should
resist and refrain from any acts that push the two-State
solution away.
The opponents of peace on both sides would use
every occasion to bring and maintain the Middle
East peace process to an unsustainable impasse. We
are concerned about the announcement of plans for
building new settlements and the court decision to
evict more Palestinians from their homes. All of that is
wrong. Settlements are illegal under international law.
These unilateral actions further undermine trust
between Palestinians and Israelis, without which
peaceful coexistence is impossible. They shatter hopes
for the creation of a viable and contiguous Palestinian
State that lives in peace with a democratic Israel. We
urge both parties to continue their close contacts and
cooperation in as many areas as possible to help break
and reverse the trend of vicious cycles that widen the
gap between them.

S/PV.9046

People are tired of endless cycles of tensions and
violence. They need perspective and visibility. As
we heard today, they need hope to project and build
their futures. We have seen so often before that lowintensity violence can erupt in a major conflagration
of violence, which takes everyone back to square one,
squandering years of tireless efforts to bring the parties
closer together. This requires patience, wisdom, vision
and leadership.
It also requires time, because time loses its
meaning if it is not properly or purposefully used. We
were heartened by the accounts from the civil society
representatives, Ms. Damelin and Mr. Munayer, in
particular their vision and efforts aimed at reconciliation.
What we heard from them is not only a wish but a real
contribution for change, understanding and peace. And,
yes, peace is made with hope, through daily efforts on
the ground, in the neighbourhood, through people-topeople contacts, by knowing and accepting others by
coming together.
There is no alternative to peace through
negotiations, which is the only way to advance towards
the resolution of the longest conflict in modern history,
where Israelis and Palestinians can enjoy their equal
rights and freedoms in peace and prosperity.
Mr. Asokan (India): I thank the United Nations
Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland, Mr. Daniel
Munayer and Ms. Robi Damelin for their briefings.
The events during the holy period of Ramadan
have illustrated the potential volatility surrounding the
holy sites in Jerusalem. Provocative actions or rhetoric
must be avoided, and the historic and legal status quo
in the holy sites in the city must be respected and fully
preserved. A concerted diplomatic effort is also required
to deal with the root causes of the recent tensions and
ensure that the situation does not deteriorate again.
Violent attacks and the killing of civilians have
continued in Palestine and Israel. We strongly condemn
such acts, which have resulted in an increasingly high
number of casualties, including women and children.
Immediate steps must be taken to ensure the complete
cessation of violence. Resolution 2334 (2016) calls upon
parties to prevent all acts of violence against civilians,
including acts of terror, and to refrain from provocative
acts of incitement and inflammatory rhetoric. Any
action that unduly alters the status quo on the ground
and undercuts the viability of the two-State solution
must be eschewed.

22-3620215/26

S/PV.9046

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We are following the developments in Masafer Yatta
with concern. Tensions have risen over the potential
legal eviction of the Palestinian families in the area,
which includes children. We appeal for the status quo
to be maintained in Masafer Yatta, in the interests of
peace and stability.
The continued precarious financial situation of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) remains another
matter of concern, as the Agency’s lack of funding can
adversely affect the delivery of humanitarian services
to the Palestinian refugee community in Palestine and
elsewhere. In this regard, we welcome the convening of
the Ad Hoc Committee of the General Assembly for the
announcement of voluntary contributions to the Agency
in June. We hope that the international community will
pledge adequate funding to help UNRWA overcome
the financial crisis. Over the last four years, India
contributed $20 million to the Agency, and it has also
pledged another $5 million for UNRWA’s programme
budget for the year 2022.
Recent incidents have underscored that the
security challenges could quickly reverse any gains
made in the socioeconomic sectors unless there is a
political dialogue between Israel and Palestine. An
early return to the peace process by launching credible
direct negotiations, while addressing the security and
economic challenges, is an immediate necessity.
India has consistently called for direct peace
negotiations between Israel and Palestine based on the
internationally agreed framework, taking into account
the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people for
statehood and Israel’s legitimate security concerns.
The absence of direct negotiations is not conducive to
securing long-term peace and will only increase the
risk of recurrence and escalation of violence.
Let me conclude by reiterating India’s firm and
unwavering commitment to the two-State solution
and the peaceful resolution of the Palestine question.
India has always supported a negotiated two-State
solution leading to the establishment of a sovereign,
independent and viable State of Palestine living within
secure and recognized borders, side by side and at
peace with Israel.
We call on the United Nations and the international
community to prioritize reviving peace negotiations
between Israel and Palestine. India stands ready to
support all international efforts aimed at achieving
16/26

a comprehensive and
Palestinian question.

lasting

26/05/2022

solution

to

the

Mrs. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): I join others
in thanking Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland for his
briefing, and Ms. Robi Damelin and Mr. Daniel Munayer
for their respective testimonies and courageous efforts
for peace.
I would like to stress three points. First, France
strongly condemns the terrorist attacks that have hit
Israel in recent weeks. We will never compromise on
Israel’s security.
Secondly, France is concerned about the continuing
deterioration of the situation in the Palestinian
territories. The multiplication of facts on the ground is
making the prospect of a two-State solution ever-more
remote, even though it remains the only one capable of
bringing about a just and lasting solution in the quest
for peace.
Together with our European partners, we have
expressed our deep concern about the decision of the
Israeli authorities to move forward with plans to build
more than 4,000 housing units in many West Bank
settlements. We have called on them to reverse this
decision, which is a flagrant violation of international
law and an obstacle to peace, and we now reiterate
this call.
The recent Israeli Supreme Court decision paves the
way for the eviction of more than a thousand Palestinians
in Masafer Yatta, including more than 500 children,
which, if these orders are implemented, would be the
largest forced transfer since 1967. We therefore call on
Israel not to proceed with the demolitions and evictions
of Palestinians, including in Masafer Yatta, as such acts
would run counter to international humanitarian law, in
particular the Fourth Geneva Convention.
Thirdly, France remains concerned about the
significant risk of escalation. The Security Council has
strongly condemned the death of Shireen Abu Akleh
while she covered an operation conducted by Israeli
security forces in Jenin. A transparent investigation
must be carried out as soon as possible, and those
responsible must be held to account. We also reiterate
our dismay at the unacceptable violence perpetrated
during her funeral at Saint Joseph’s Hospital in
Jerusalem, which is under French protection.
We also call for the utmost restraint in Jerusalem
on the occasion of the holding of the flag march to be
22-36202

26/05/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

held next Sunday. A revision of the route of the march
would be appropriate with a view to reducing tensions.
It is also necessary to preserve the historical status quo
of the holy sites, and we recall Jordan’s special role in
that respect.
There is an urgent need to restore the political
horizon for the relaunching of negotiations on the basis
of the agreed parameters, relevant Council resolutions
and international law. The Council obviously has a
role to play and must encourage the parties to return
to the path of dialogue. In that regard, we welcome
the constructive discussions between the parties at the
most recent meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of International Assistance to
Palestinians, and we hope that they will lead to tangible
results and political momentum.
France remains determined to work towards the
revival of the Middle East peace process. We will also
continue to support the Palestinian people and the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, as well as Palestinian civil
society, in the face of the many challenges yet to
be overcome.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank the United Nations Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Tor Wennesland,
for his comprehensive briefing and his tireless efforts
to calm the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories. We also thank Mr. Daniel Munayer and
Ms. Robi Damelin for their impactful briefings and all
their critical efforts to support reconciliation between
the two sides.
The current situation is marked by high tensions
and characterized by uncertainty. Amid continued
provocations and the accompanying deterioration of the
humanitarian, security and political conditions, there
are grave concerns regarding potential escalations
in the upcoming period that could prove difficult to
control. In response to those developments, we must
consider formulating short-, medium- and long-term
solutions. In that regard, we would like to highlight the
following points.
First, all parties have a responsibility to exercise
restraint, reduce tensions and refrain from any steps that
might inflame the situation on the ground, especially
around the holy sites in the city of Jerusalem. As a top
priority, the continual confrontations in the cities of the
West Bank must be stopped.

S/PV.9046

The killing of journalist Shireen Abu Akleh and the
subsequent responses at both the local and international
levels confirm the fragility of the current situation. It
also sheds further light on the impact of the conflict,
which continues to result in a human toll among
innocent civilians, especially women and children.
The Security Council press statement on the killing
of Ms. Abu Akleh (SC/14891) confirms the current
consensus that it is necessary to closely monitor the
situation, underlining the need to urgently address such
serious developments.
In that regard, we reiterate our strong condemnation
of that killing, as well as the importance of an
impartial, independent and transparent investigation
into her death. We also believe that necessary measures
must be taken to ensure the non-recurrence of such
incidents in future so as to protect the lives of innocent
people and journalists during conflicts, in line with
international law.
Similarly, the recent decision to force more than
1,000 Palestinians to leave their homes in Masafer
Yatta, located in the south of the West Bank, will further
exacerbate security and humanitarian conditions for
the population. Not only is that an illegal practice but
it also undermines peace efforts and should therefore
be halted.
Secondly, we must take urgent and proactive
measures in the Council to help maintain calm and
prevent another cycle of conflict. It is necessary to
intensify contacts and diplomatic endeavours with and
between the Palestinian and Israeli sides to discuss
ways of restoring calm and building confidence
between them.
In particular, local and regional coordination
should be strengthened to maintain the historic and
legal status quo of the holy sites in Jerusalem. In that
context, we stress the important role of the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan as the custodian of the city’s Islamic
and Christian holy sites.
While we seek to rectify the current situation, our
attention should not be distracted from the political
process, which is suffering from a prolonged stalemate
and requires serious steps forward to be taken. In that
regard, it is possible to reactivate several international
initiatives that have sought to catalyse dialogue between
the two parties during the past few years. The primary
goal for all must be the return of the parties to direct and
serious negotiations that lead to a political settlement

22-3620217/26

S/PV.9046

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

based on the two-State solution and the establishment
of an independent and sovereign Palestinian State
along the 4 June 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, living side by side with Israel in peace and
security and mutual recognition.
Thirdly, we underscore the need to address the
difficult humanitarian conditions facing the Palestinian
people, especially given the increasing levels of food
insecurity due to inflation and rising global food prices.
Both sides must be encouraged to reach understandings
that improve the economic and living conditions of the
Palestinian people.
In that context, we welcome Israel’s decisions
to ease the restrictions imposed on the movement of
Palestinians and to approve additional work permits.
We look forward to building on those steps, which
are necessary to improve the worsening conditions,
in order to contribute to confidence-building and the
creation of an environment conducive to achieving
peace in the region.
We also underscore the important role of the
Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
International Assistance to Palestinians, chaired by
Norway, in promoting economic development efforts in
the occupied Palestinian territory.
In conclusion, we stress that the time has come to
take courageous political steps to spare the Palestinian
and Israeli peoples from any further suffering.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank the
United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, Mr. Tor Wennesland, for his informative
briefing. I also wish to thank Mr. Daniel Munayer and
Ms. Robi Damelin for their moving testimonies. I
welcome the presence of the Permanent Representative
of Israel and the Permanent Observer of Palestine.
The death of American-Palestinian journalist
Shireen Abu Akleh on 11 May was truly a tragedy,
which was exacerbated by the indecent acts of violence
at her funeral, when the procession was interrupted
by incidents that represented an attack on dignity and
respect for the dead. We were deeply shocked and
saddened by that series of events and wish to condemn
them. We call for an independent investigation to
shed light on the exact circumstances surrounding the
tragedy and to establish responsibility. That crime must
not go unpunished.
18/26

26/05/2022

Human suffering does not discriminate on the basis
of nationality, religion, culture, skin colour, geography
or ideology. The heartfelt appeals just made by Ms. Robi
Damelin and Mr. Daniel Munayer call on our humanity
and for the need to shed our preconceived ideas and act
without delay, with hope as our guide. The suffering that
has become the daily lot of the Palestinian population
does not spare Israeli families. In the face of such
suffering, our humanity cannot remain indifferent.
Lieutenant Hadar Goldin, who was kidnapped
only hours after the declaration in August 2014 of the
ceasefire negotiated by the United Nations and the
parties concerned, represents another dimension of the
same human suffering and indiscriminate violence that
characterizes the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. Almost
eight years later, neither his remains nor any sign of life
has been sent to his family, which is losing hope of even
giving him a proper burial.
The issues relating to the identification and return
to families of human remains are critical for both sides,
as they contribute to establishing an environment of
trust between the parties, which is essential to building
peace. It goes without saying that the return of bodies
is a major point of disagreement between the two
communities, given that the remains of victims killed
in various security incidents are being withheld by the
belligerents in violation of international humanitarian
law. That issue is especially sensitive as it concerns
respect for funeral rites, which are an integral part of
the culture and identity of both parties.
The continuing human suffering of the Palestinian
and Israeli peoples is the responsibility of everyone — the
parties to the conflict and the international community.
The flagrant violations with impunity of Security
Council resolutions do not contribute to calming the
situation. Pursuing the policy of expanding illegal
settlements, demolishing homes and evicting families
is increasing the volatility of the security situation in
the occupied Palestinian territories. Approximately
1,200 people, including 580 children, are currently at
risk of forced eviction and the loss of their property,
livelihoods and access to water and sanitation and
education facilities.
The situation is all the more worrisome in the light
of the current humanitarian crisis observed on the
ground. We note with interest the visit to the region of the
delegation led by the Acting Humanitarian Coordinator,
Samer Abdel Jaber, to meet with Palestinian residents
who are at risk of forcible transfer.
22-36202

26/05/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Gabon calls on the Israeli and Palestinian
authorities to show restraint and commit to taking
confidence-building measures to give peace a better
chance. Today more than ever, there is a need to
strengthen regional and multilateral cooperation with a
view to resolving the conflict, which has caused untold
suffering to the civilian populations for too long. In that
regard, we welcome the recent visit by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Turkey to Israel and Palestine.
We call on the Middle East Quartet to step up its
efforts to encourage the Israeli and Palestinian leaders
to resume, in good faith, an inclusive dialogue, in
which all segments of society, including women, should
participate. The establishment of the State of Palestine
is an essential step to bringing the peace process to a
successful conclusion, which will have an overarching
impact on the entire region.
We reaffirm our full support for the two-State
solution. Gabon hopes that the rapid resumption of
Israeli-Palestinian negotiations will achieve a real and
lasting peace, based on respect for the principles agreed
by the parties and in keeping with the provisions of
international law.
In conclusion, we reiterate our full support for
Special Coordinator Wennesland and his tireless
efforts to bring the conflict to a peaceful conclusion
and reaffirm our vision of a two-State solution that
requires the firm political will and commitment of the
parties, as well as the engagement of the international
community, including regional actors.
Mr. Ochoa Martínez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I am grateful for the briefings by
Special Coordinator Wennesland and the very moving
presentations by Ms. Damelin and Mr. Munayer. I
also welcome the presence of the delegations of Israel
and Palestine.
Given what we have just heard, the need to end
the cycle of violence is clear. Concerning the death of
Palestinian-American journalist Shireen Abu Akleh in
Jenin on 11 May, Mexico reiterates its condemnation
of attacks against civilians, including journalists
and media personnel, and urges the promotion and
protection of freedom of the press and the right to
access information, in accordance with resolution 2222
(2015). Mexico demands an immediate, thorough and
independent investigation of the incident, offers its
condolences and deplores the violence that took place
at her funeral.

S/PV.9046

My country also condemns the launching of rockets
from Gaza and attacks against Israeli citizens, the most
recent of which took place in Elad and resulted in the
death of three people. Those incidents have added to
a growing list of such attacks this year alone. We join
Ms. Damelin in what she said earlier. We urge Israeli
and Palestinian religious, political and social leaders to
refrain from inflammatory rhetoric and incitement.
Concerning the announcement by the Israeli
Government of the construction of 4,000 new housing
units in the West Bank, we stress that the continued
expansion of Israeli settlements restricts the freedom
of movement, dispossesses the Palestinian population
of its natural resources and territory, runs contrary to
international law and constitutes an obstacle to achieving
peace. We call for ending settlement expansion.
Similarly, we are deeply concerned about the Israeli
Supreme Court ruling of 4 May upholding the legality
of the forcible transfer of 1,200 Palestinian residents of
Masafer Yatta. Such a ruling constitutes a violation of
residents’ rights and sets a dangerous precedent as it
contravenes international legal obligations.
Despite each one of those challenges, we welcome
the recent meeting held by the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee for the Coordination of the International
Assistance to Palestinians, chaired by Norway. We
acknowledge the assistance provided by the donors
to the Palestinian Authority. We also welcome the
economic development measures promoted by Israel
for Gaza. However, they are not sufficient to address
the grave humanitarian situation and it is therefore
imperative to lift the blockade of the Strip.
We note the precarious financial situation of the
Palestinian Authority, which continues to worsen. We
call on the Palestinian Authority to implement pending
reforms that will enable it to reduce its fiscal deficit.
In conclusion, Mexico reaffirms its position
in support of a two-State solution that addresses
Israel’s legitimate security concerns and allows for
the establishment of a sovereign, politically and
economically independent Palestinian State, living
side by side in peace with Israel within secure and
internationally recognized borders, in accordance
with international law and the relevant United
Nations resolutions.
Mrs. Hackman (Ghana): Let me first thank
the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process, Mr. Tor Wennesland, for his briefing on the

22-3620219/26

S/PV.9046

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

overall volatile situation in the Middle East, including
the question of Palestine, as well as for highlighting
the measures being taken to restore calm and work
towards a peaceful solution of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. We are also grateful to Ms. Robi Damelin,
of the Parents Circle-Families Forum, and Mr. Daniel
Munayer, Executive Director of Musalaha, whose
personal experiences, as we heard, reinforce the need
for a peaceful settlement and reconciliation between
the two peoples. We welcome the participation of the
Israeli and Palestinian representatives in this meeting.
The collective aspiration of the Security Council
for Israel and Palestine to live peacefully, side by side
as two sovereign States within secure borders and with
a shared capital in Jerusalem, should not be obscured
by the highly degenerative environment witnessed in
recent months. Rather, the Security Council, working
in concert with regional actors, must seek to play an
enhanced role in reinvigorating the Middle East peace
process, with a view to stemming the rising violence
and moving on to facilitate a renewed and constructive
dialogue on a political horizon that would ultimately
lead to the two-State solution.
We join the international community in expressing
our strong discontent over the killing of the PalestinianAmerican journalist Ms. Shireen Abu Akleh, who
was fatally shot in the line of duty in Jenin, and we
deeply regret the disruption of her funeral procession,
which turned an otherwise solemn ceremony into
yet another scene of pandemonium. We offer our
sincerest condolences to her family and loved ones.
Like civilians, the killing of journalists in conflict
situations constitutes a fundamental breach of the rules
of international humanitarian law, for which there must
be accountability.
We note with concern the continuing confrontations
and violent clashes at Jerusalem’s holy sites. While
urging religious tolerance and peaceful coexistence
among worshippers of the different faiths, we stress the
need for the legal and historical status quo to be upheld.
We urge restraint from unilateral actions that
threaten the peace and obliterate the possibility of the
two-State solution in the future.
The recent spate of terrorist attacks, which continue
to ramp up the death toll of innocent civilians, remains a
source of concern. We condemn, in particular, the 5 May
attack that occurred in the central Israeli city of Elad,
killing three Israelis and leaving four others wounded,
20/26

26/05/2022

following the celebration of Israel’s independence. The
canker of terrorism that plagues Israel and Palestine
can be eliminated only through a coordinated response
that addresses the root causes.
We have further taken note of the mounting
economic difficulties arising from insufficient
revenue and an increased absence of donor funding.
The International Monetary Fund has detailed the
Palestinian economy as having a dire outlook and
requiring transformational reform with efforts from the
Palestinian Authority, Israel and the donor community.
We therefore welcome the ongoing support extended
by the Israeli Government, including the increase in
the number of work permits issued to Gaza residents,
trade measures and infrastructure projects. In that
regard, we also welcome the further commitments
made by donors within the framework of the meeting
of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination
of the International Assistance to Palestinians held in
Brussels this month and commend the leadership of
Norway, the European Union and the United States.
We highlight the plight of the 5.5 million registered
Palestinian refugees in the expectation that increased
funding support for the work of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East will be realized during the meeting of
the Ad Hoc Committee for the purpose of announcing
voluntary commitments, to be held on 23 June.
We encourage the leadership of the Palestinian
Authority to work with the Israeli Government towards
the return of all fallen Israeli soldiers, including
Lieutenant Hadar Goldin, as part of the process to build
confidence and enhance dialogue for peace.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate Ghana’s
commitment to continuing to support a meaningful
peace process, which would eventually provide the
framework for the prosperity of the peoples of Israel
and Palestine and for the peace of the wider Middle
East region.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I thank
Mr. Wennesland for his comprehensive updates
provided to the Council today. I thank the other briefers
for their informative and compelling accounts. My
delegation welcomes the representatives of Israel and
Palestine to this meeting.
Brazil remains concerned about the situation of
recurrent violence, including in and around holy sites in
Jerusalem, as well as the series of attacks perpetrated
22-36202

26/05/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

against Israeli civilians. We are concerned that the
events planned for next week might further worsen this
already tense situation.
We reiterate that refraining from incitement and
inflammatory rhetoric is of the utmost importance, as
is the proactive engagement of political, religious and
community leaders to restore calm. Places of worship,
especially a place of such religious significance as the
Holy Esplanade, must not be battlegrounds.
The safety and security of religious sites is an
essential component of freedom of religion or belief and
should be preserved at all costs. Brazil is also concerned
about attempts to challenge the historic and legal status
quo of the holy sites in Jerusalem. Upholding the status
quo is fundamental, as is maintaining the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan’s special role as the custodian of the
Muslim holy places.
Brazil profoundly laments the death of the
Palestinian-American journalist Shireen Abu Akleh
while reporting from the West Bank, and we support
the calls for accountability. Full, transparent and
independent investigations should be undertaken with
the cooperation of all parties involved.
There can be no justification for any attacks against
journalists or media workers. They are considered
civilians under international humanitarian law and
must be protected, as reiterated by resolution 2222
(2015), unanimously adopted by the Council.
The work of journalists, such as Ms. Abu Akleh,
is indispensable to preserving the fundamental right
to freedom of expression and to the free flow of
independent and accurate information in times of peace
or war.
The episodes of violence and excessive use of force
during her funeral were also disturbing. In that regard,
Brazil recognizes Israeli efforts, through the local
police, to investigate the facts and ensure accountability
for those responsible.
As we are all aware by now, spiking international
prices for food is impacting humanitarian assistance
efforts everywhere. Without additional funding,
the World Food Programme and the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA) will not be able to maintain
their regular humanitarian assistance to Palestinian
refugees, which can have a destabilizing impact on
the ground. Brazil supports the many ongoing efforts

S/PV.9046

to raise the funds necessary for UNRWA to continue
to fulfil its indispensable role. As Mr. Wennesland
has warned, lack of humanitarian assistance can have
a destabilizing impact on the ground, diminishing the
already dim prospects for peace.
Continuing to act proactively in the search for
lasting peace in the Middle East is not optional for the
Security Council; rather, it remains an imperative. We
urge Israeli and Palestinian leaders to engage with each
other, be it directly or through the mediation instruments
offered by the United Nations and by regional partners.
The current situation is the result of years of
frustration with the lack of progress in finding a lasting
solution to the conflict. Returning to a credible political
process within the framework of a negotiated two-State
solution is a priority shared by all, and the Security
Council should spare no effort in promoting it.
The President: I would like to again draw the
attention of speakers to paragraph 22 of presidential
note S/2017/507, which encourages all participants in
Council meetings to deliver their statements in five
minutes or less, in line with the Security Council’s
commitment to making more effective use of
open meetings.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): At the outset, allow me to
congratulate again the United States for its presidency
of the Council and for convening today’s briefing.
Allow me also to thank the Special Coordinator for
his briefing and unstinting efforts for peace, and to
acknowledge the briefers, Ms. Robi Damelin and
Mr. Daniel Munayer, for being with us. I also thank
them for their contribution. I totally agree with
Ms. Robi when she calls on the Security Council to
come and see the situation on the ground. The Council,
which is involved in deliberating on the question of
Palestine every month, should go and see reality on the
ground. I totally agree with Ms. Damelin, and I hope
that the Security Council will listen to her call. Words
aim to convey a reality to those who do not witness
that reality. I fear that words, repeated time after time,
may lose some of their power. I therefore urge Council
members to look at the realities these words describe.
When we speak of forcible displacement, imagine a
family living every single day in fear of being uprooted
from its home, the nightmares that haunt a child, the
ache a powerless parent feels. As we speak, 1,200

22-3620221/26

S/PV.9046

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

people, including 500 children, are going through this
in Masafer Yatta. The reason given by Israel is that the
area has been designated as a firing zone for military
training — a firing zone — as if they needed more
training in how to kill us. The real reason is to seize a
maximum amount of Palestinian land with a minimum
number of Palestinians living on it. The real reason is
annexation and colonialism.
When we speak of extrajudicial killing and the
targeting of civilians, imagine raising children,
seeing them grow, developing their personality and
formulating their dreams, while living with the fear that
any day might be their last. Imagine being the parents
of Ghaith Yameen, a 16-year-old old boy who, at his
young age, had already written down what should be
done if he were to die. Imagine how it would feel once
his premonition became reality after occupation forces
shot him in the back of his head. His testament was this:
“If I were to die, do not put me in the freezer: I never
liked the cold. Find a place to bury me alongside
other kids: I do not like to be alone. Come visit me
and talk to me: I will be listening. And do not cry:
I do not want for anybody to be sad or cry because
of me.”
Our children are being killed, arrested, displaced and
harassed every day. The Council must protect them
from a war waged against one Palestinian generation
after another.
Speaking of colonial settlements, imagine that in
whatever direction Palestinians look, they see armed
settlers and occupation forces, and they wake up and
see settlements being built on their land where they are
forbidden to build. They see one family after another
being uprooted from their ancestral homes. And they
go to sleep, knowing their houses might be next. Israel
pursues annexation thousands of settlement units at
a time.
We have been facing aggression, annexation and
occupation for decades. Our people have been victims
of war crimes and crimes against humanity for decades.
What will the international community do about it?
What will it you do about it, Madam President? When
should we expect the next shipment of weapons to help
us defend ourselves and our country? What is the next
batch of sanctions that will be enacted? When is the
next visit of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court, and how many dozen investigators should we
expect? When is the next summit on accountability,
22/26

26/05/2022

and should we expect even more pledges of infinite
resources and political will to hold Israel accountable?
This is the reality our people endure every day:
forcible displacement and replacement, dispossession,
denial of rights, discrimination and death, from the day
they are born to the day they die, and beyond. And they
try to find life somewhere in between and succeed. But
there are no consequences for those inflicting such pain
and suffering on millions of people.
Why do those who condemn Israeli actions shield
them from the consequences? And how do they
believe that Israel would ever change its behaviour
as long as they do shield them? Business as usual by
the international community means colonialism and
apartheid as usual by Israel.
Shireen was an exceptional human being, but her
killing is unfortunately not an exception. She kept
telling the stories of her people, hoping that by making
them known she would somehow help alter the course
of history. She was killed because she never abandoned
this belief, even though, regardless of how many times
she told that story, it kept happening again and again,
one child at a time, one home at a time, one acre of
land at a time. Shireen’s killing is the story — the same
story she was telling. The difference is that this time
the world knew the victim.
We are not being killed because of what we do,
but because of who we are. We are not being killed by
mistake, but as part of a grand design aimed at making
sure that we all understand no one is safe, so that we
all live with fear in our hearts and surrender. There is
no immunity for a Palestinian journalist, a president, a
health worker, a United Nations staff member, a farmer,
a child, a baby, a pregnant mother, an elderly person,
a professor, a dual citizen, a Minister, an officer or a
judge. If you are a Palestinian, you are a legitimate
target, and Israel can decide if you get to live or die.
There is no immunity for any Palestinian and full
impunity for every Israeli. And yet some are worried
about Israeli security, when not a single Palestinian
enjoys safety anywhere.
Council members were outraged when Israel
attacked Shireen’s funeral. They were distressed and
surprised. Well, Israel attacked another funeral a couple
of days later. The Israeli war against Palestinians does
not stop at death.
Israel often speaks of the need to release withheld
Israeli bodies, calling the practice of withholding
22-36202

26/05/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

bodies barbaric. It does so while withholding the bodies
of hundreds of Palestinians, some of which have been
detained for decades. This practice deprives their loved
ones from the ability to bury them in dignity. They
must be remembered.
Shireen’s killing was not an exception. Israel
was prompt to accuse the victim, instead of taking
responsibility for a long-standing shoot-to-kill policy
that found its ultimate expression in the killing of
Shireen. The Security Council rightly called for
accountability, but Israel has enjoyed impunity for so
long that it does not know what the hell the Council is
talking about. What Israel fails to grasp is that, while
this has been its policy for decades, the Palestinians are
still there fighting to live in freedom and dignity on
their ancestral lands.
Shireen is the story. It is a story of resilience and
determination against all odds. It is a story of triumph,
even in death. Her people mourned and honoured her,
and they buried her in her hometown, Jerusalem, our
capital, regardless of how many crimes Israel commits.
Those carrying her coffin were ready to be harmed, and
they did not drop it. They prevailed over fear and death,
just as she did.
We want peace for ourselves and for others. But we
will not surrender, as there cannot be peace between
a prisoner and a jailer. We want freedom, we deserve
freedom, and we are entitled to freedom. Supporting
our quest for freedom is the duty of all members of the
Council; it is the only path to peace. We are choosing
the peaceful path. We ask that the Security Council
help us to prove that that path leads to freedom.
Often in the halls of the United Nations, I hear
about all the obstacles to achieving peace. Let us take
a step in the right direction and then another, and then
peace will be within reach. I ask the Council to take a
step in support of Palestinian freedom, recognize the
State of Palestine, help to consolidate the 1967 borders,
including in Jerusalem, assist communities to live and
thrive on their land, make sure that there is a cost for
Israel for building illegally on our land, and make sure
there is none for Palestinians to build on their own land.
The Council should take a step to ensure accountability
and end impunity, take a step to protect innocent
Palestinian civilians being killed every day, and take
a step to uphold the historic status quo at Al-Haram
Al-Sharif.

S/PV.9046

The Security Council spoke in a strong and united
manner after the killing of Shireen, condemning the
killing and calling for accountability and the protection
for journalists. It took a small step in the right direction,
which we appreciate and which the family of Shireen
appreciates. I talked to her brother just this morning,
before coming to the Security Council, and he expressed
his gratitude and appreciation for the Council’s unified
position in condemning the killing of Shireen. Let us
take the next step and the next. Let us force Israel to
correct its course.
I want to inform the Council that the Prosecutor
General of Palestine issued the report on Shireen’s
assassination today. A copy of that report was shared
with the United States Administration. A copy will be
shared with Shireen’s family and with Al-Jazeera. After
we know who assassinated Shireen Abu Akleh, we need
to move to hold that person or persons accountable.
In a matter of weeks, Israel announced 4,000 new
settlement units and forcible displacement in Masafer
Yatta, killed dozens of Palestinians, many of them
children, and announced an Israeli flags march in
occupied East Jerusalem. The Israeli choice is clear:
aggression, annexation and apartheid. Israel will
continue spreading fire and complaining about the
forest burning. The Security Council can continue
trying to extinguish the next fire and the next one and
the one after that, or it can stop Israel from setting fire
in the first place.
Shireen deserves justice, and our people deserve
justice. Our lives matter, our freedom matters, and our
dignity matters.
May our dear Shireen rest in peace, and may our
people one day live in peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mrs. Furman (Israel): Let me first express my
deepest condolences for the tragic murder of innocent
children and teachers in Texas. As Israelis, our hearts
bleed at the news of this horrific tragedy, and our
prayers are with you, Madam President, and with your
country, at this very difficult time.
Just a couple of weeks ago, Israel celebrated its
seventy-fourth Independence Day. From the north to
the south and from the east to the west, Israelis — Jews,
Muslims, Christians and Druze — celebrated nearly
three quarters of a century of independence. Together,

22-3620223/26

S/PV.9046

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

all Israelis were proudly celebrating the vibrant
democracy that is Israel and the bounding achievements
of a young State.
Yet, tragically, our Independence Day festivities
were cut short. In the final hours of one of the most
joyous days on Israel’s calendar, Oren Ben-Yiftah,
Yonatan Habakuk and Boaz Gol were brutally murdered
by inhumane Palestinian terrorists wielding axes and
knives. These three men were loving fathers, and
their murders have left behind 16 orphans — another
16 orphans to be added to the long list of shattered
families — widows and orphans, parents and siblings,
family and friends — whose loved ones were savagely
taken from them by bloodthirsty Palestinian terror.
Since the beginning of 2022, nearly 800 Palestinian
terror attacks have been committed against Israelis, in
which over 100 were wounded and 19 were murdered.
This number cannot be allowed to grow. No more
families should endure the gaping hole that a murdered
loved one leaves behind.
There is a question that is begging to be asked: what
is it that drives a 19-year-old terrorist to take up an axe
and murder innocents in cold blood, to hack another
human being to death with animal-like brutality?
Well, let me tell you, Madam President, the answer is:
words — inciteful, hateful venomous words. A mere
week before this horrific attack, Yahya Sinwar, the
leader of Hamas in Gaza, spewed poisoned and called
on Palestinian youth, saying,
“whoever does not have a gun should prepare his
cleaver, axe or knife to murder Jews”.
Could this be a coincidence? Of course, it is not.
The incitement that is spread by Palestinian leadership
directly correlates with violent acts of terror perpetrated
against Israelis. In fact, just this week, following the
non-stop flow of incitement, a Hamas cell was arrested
in Jerusalem shortly before it carried out several
devastating terror attacks, including a plot to murder a
member of Israel’s parliament.
The very same incitement that we hear from
Hamas leaders is also being spread across the region
by the radical Ayatollah regime in Iran, their puppet
Hassan Nasrallah and his Iranian-funded terror army,
Hizbullah. When calls are made for the destruction
of the State of Israel, it is no surprise that terror is on
the rise.
24/26

26/05/2022

But the deep-seated hatred needed to murder is
not born overnight; rather, it is the result of decades of
incitement. Take, for example, the Palestinian Authority.
Its leadership lovingly embraces terrorists while
continuing to pay lifelong salaries to their families.
An entire generation of Palestinians has grown up on
a narrative of hostility. They are taught to hate in their
school textbooks, a fact that the European Parliament
recently condemned. They are incited by their political
leaders. They are fed a narrative that promotes terror,
idealizes violence and rewards murderers.
Following the recent brutal terror attack in Tel Aviv
in which three Israelis were murdered, Akram Rajoub,
the Governor of Jenin, in a personal appointment by
President Abbas, labelled the shooter “a Fatah fighter”
rather than the terrorist that he was. He even visited the
terrorist’s family and praised his actions.
Following the terror attack in Bnei Brak, at the end
of March, in which three Israelis and two Ukrainians
were murdered, Ata Abu Rumeileh, the Fatah secretary
in Jenin, called the terrorist “a courageous Fatah leader
and a source of inspiration”. Unfortunately, contrary to
what was mentioned today in the Council, terror is felt
in all Israeli cities, from Be’er Sheva to Tel Aviv, from
Elad to Jerusalem. The poison that is rotting the minds
of an entire generation, at the hands of both Hamas
and the Palestinian Authority, is directly causing
innocent Israeli blood to be spilled while destroying
the future of young Palestinians. That incitement must
be condemned.
Nevertheless, I am disturbed to see that not only
is that incitement and the lies that support it not
condemned; it is also spread, and often, by members
of this body.
Throughout the month of Ramadan, more than
1 million Muslims peacefully prayed on the Temple
Mount. Yet dozens of Palestinian extremists co-opted
that time of peaceful prayer and used it as a pretext
to incite violence. While those thugs rioted, threw
stones, shot fireworks and hurled firebombs, all from
within their houses of prayer, those who had come to
pray peacefully were endangered, and Israeli security
forces were forced to intervene. Our police acted with
exemplary restraint. They protected the people and did
precisely their job: they restored law and order.
Yet the Palestinian Authority, Hamas, the Islamic
Jihad and the Popular Front for the Liberation of
Palestine used Israel’s protective measures to fuel and
22-36202

26/05/2022

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

inflame more incitement and violence. They created
a twisted libel blaming Israel for the violence that
the terror groups themselves had incited. Many in the
international community began spreading those false
narratives. By spreading those lies, the international
community gave them legitimacy, and, as a result of
that unfounded legitimacy, more violence ensued. A
vicious cycle was created, a cycle that 19 Israelis paid
for with their lives.
To the international community, I will be clear.
The time has come to immediately stop adopting the
narrative of terrorists before the facts are clear. Member
States now have a fresh chance to right that recurring
wrong. Next week, as we heard this morning, Israel will
be holding its annual flag parade in Jerusalem. That
yearly event is a routine, non-violent, non-provocative
celebration that has held an unchanged route for more
than 30 years, which by no means violates the status
quo. Just like all previous years, this year will be
no different.
Nevertheless, terror organizations such as Hamas
and others are constantly looking for ways to poison
their followers so that they wreak havoc and commit
acts of terror against Israelis, all for political gain.
The Jerusalem flag parade is no different. A peaceful
event has been twisted into an attack on Jerusalem by
Palestinian terror groups. That could not be further
from the truth.
Sadly, that utter distortion of reality does not
surprise me. It is expected. What does surprise me is
how once again some in the international community
are rushing to adopt the sick narrative of terrorists
before even hearing out the democratic State of Israel.
The flag parade is an act of Israeli pride — pride in our
State, pride in our capital and pride in Zionism — yet
it has been condemned and deemed as provocation by
some Member States. No country in the world would
imagine preventing its citizens from marching with
the national flag on the streets of its capital city. The
double standard is absurd. Israel refuses to capitulate to
demands so detached from reality.
Enough is enough. I urge the Council to finally cease
and desist from adopting such dangerous narratives.
Promoting the lies of Hamas and Hizbullah legitimizes
them, and, once they are legitimized, violence will
occur. Do not let next week’s parade become a pretext
for adding more names to the long list of Israeli victims
of terror.

S/PV.9046

All people, whether Jewish, Christian, Muslim
or of any other denomination, hold the right to enjoy
the holy city of Jerusalem, and that right will always
be upheld.
Israel, as a vibrant democracy, is fully committed
to the freedom of worship. That was made clear on the
Temple Mount, just as it was made clear at the Holy
Fire ceremony at the Church of the Holy Sepulchre, in
which thousands of Christians participated. Israel does
everything and will always do everything to ensure that
all religions can pray peacefully and safely at their holy
sites. Israel is fully committed to the status quo on the
Temple Mount. Nothing will change that.
Despite the incitement, falsehoods and acts of
terror, Israel will consistently advance and promote
significant measures to benefit the Palestinian people.
A record number of Palestinian workers are being
allowed into Israel. Joint meetings are being held at the
highest level on the topics of defence, health, energy
and environmental issues, all in order to map out
further collaboration.
Israel is making that effort for the simple reason that
we want dialogue. After all, dialogue and cooperation
are how one builds trust, and trust is how one builds
peace. But that trust-building goes much further than
the Palestinians. The Middle East is transforming at
lightning speed. In a region where only two years ago
Israel had nearly no relations with our neighbours, our
circle is partnership is growing, and our collaboration
is deepening every single day.
Israel and the United Arab Emirates have concluded
negotiations on a free-trade agreement between our
nations, but the newfound peace between us goes much
further than business ties. It is a deep, people-to-people
peace. We are committed to one another on a personal
level. That is why it was a given that President Herzog,
Israel’s highest-ranking official, would be the one to
travel to Abu Dhabi to convey Israel’s condolences on
the passing of Sheikh Khalifa Bin Zayed Al Nahyan, of
blessed memory. That is what a peace built on trust looks
like. But, as I said, our circle of peace is expanding.
Just this week, for the first time in 15 years, Turkey’s
Foreign Minister visited Israel in order to strengthen
ties between the Jewish State and yet another Muslim
country. That is the future, but, more importantly, that
is Israel, a country always striving for peace.
Yet while Israel extends a hand in peace to any
willing partner, the Palestinians have proved time and

22-3620225/26

S/PV.9046

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

again that the only hand that they wish to extend is a
hand of violence, terror and incitement.
The tragic death of Shireen Abu Akleh was yet
another example of placing the blame on Israel before
any of the facts were made clear. The narrative of lies
spun by the Palestinians placing the blame squarely on
Israel’s shoulders before an investigation could yield
any results politicized a heartbreaking situation.
Therefore, before more lies are spread on the global
stage, I would like to make the facts clear. Ms. Abu
Akleh lost her life while covering, in real time, the
counter-terrorism operation in Jenin, which had been
undertaken in the light of the deadly wave of terror
attacks against Israel in recent weeks emanating from
the Jenin, in attempts to prevent further attacks. During
the counter-terrorism operation, Palestinian gunmen
fired extensively, recklessly and indiscriminately at
Israeli forces.
Following the tragic death of Ms. Abu Akleh,
Israel, as a country that views the freedom of the press
as of the utmost importance, swiftly called for a joint
impartial Israeli-Palestinian investigation to uncover
the facts and promote accountability. Israel asked for
the bullet in order to conduct a forensic analysis and
proposed conducting a joint investigation.
However, the Palestinian Authority has publicly
objected all of Israel’s offers, choosing instead to act
as judge, jury and executioner, while undermining any
form of due process or justice. Nevertheless, Israel
has conducted a thorough, independent investigation
of the incident. What is needed is a transparent joint
investigation, and we call on the Palestinian Authority
to cooperate in order to get to the truth. The only reason
that anyone would refuse a joint investigation is if they
had something to hide.
Before I conclude, I must mention once again what
I said at the open debate that you, Madam President,
organized yesterday (see S/PV.9042). This week I
met Leah and Simcha Goldin, the parents of Second
Lieutenant Hadar Goldin, who was abducted and

26/26

26/05/2022

murdered by Hamas in 2014 during the humanitarian
ceasefire. I accompanied the Goldin family as it met
with Member States to aid them in bringing their son’s
body home for burial.
But, sadly, the Goldins are not alone. For the past
eight years, Hamas has held the bodies of both Hadar
Goldin and Oron Shaul, who was abducted and killed
a week before Hadar. Moreover, Hamas is holding two
Israeli civilians hostage — Avera Mangistu and Hisham
Al-Sayed — without disclosing any information on
their well-being. Kidnapping by Hamas is not a matter
that can be lightly joked about, and we request that
Council members treat it as such. This blatant disregard
for international law and deliberate targeting of the
civilian population must end. It must end now.
The incitement to terror that is claiming the lives
of Israelis must be condemned in the strongest terms
possible. It must cease, and the Council must not allow
such evil to go unchecked. The indoctrination of a
generation of Palestinians at the hands of their political,
education and religious leaders directly results in
bloodshed and cannot continue. But if the Council
does not condemn the blatant incitement to terror, I
urge that, at the very least, it refrain from spreading or
validating the narratives that promote incitement. By
repeating the lies spread by terror groups or accepting a
narrative fabricated before the facts are even clear, the
false legitimacy of the lies is strengthened, and Israelis
pay for that with their lives.
The time has come for the Council to take a strong
and clear stand against Palestinian incitement. The time
has for the Council to aid us in bringing our hostages
and the bodies of our soldiers home. We can wait no
longer. The time to act is now.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I shall now adjourn the meeting
so that the Council can continue its discussion in
closed consultations.
The meeting rose at 1.25 p.m.

22-36202
