General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

262

report on the techniques and procedures used in the
elaboration of multilateral treaties, taking into consideration the observations of Governments and of the International Law Commission on the subject,
Aware of the heavy burden which active involvement
in the process of multilateral treaty-making places upon
Governments,
Convinced that the most rational use should be made
of the finite resources available for elaboration of multilateral treaties,
Taking into account statements made at the current
session in the debate in the Sixth Committee, 21
I. Takes note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral, 22 and of the views of Governments and of the
International Law Commission contained in the addenda thereto, 23 on the review of the multilateral treatymaking process;
2. Invites Governments and international intergovernmental organizations to submit by 31 July I 981 their
observations on the report of the Secretary-General,
taking into account the specific questions contained in
section IV thereof, as well as their comments on any
other aspect of the subject, as they consider desirable:
3. Requests the Secretary-General to make his
report and its addenda widely available to other interested organizations which are active in the preparation
and study of multilateral treaties, and to invite them to
comment on the subject of the report;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to collate and
arrange the material received pursuant to General
Assembly resolution 32/48, with a view to its possible
publication;
5. Also requests the Secretary-General to prepare
and publish new editions of the Handbook of Final
Clauses 24 and the Summary of the Practice of the
Secretary-General as Depositary of Multilateral Agreements;25
6. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit
to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session a
report containing the replies received pursuant to paragraphs 2 and 3 above, as well as a topical summary of
the debate at its thirty-fifth session:
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session the item entitled "Review of the multilateral treaty-making process".

95th plenary meeting
15 December 1980

35/163.

Report of the International Law Commission

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the International Law
Commission on the work of its thirty-sixth session/"
Emphasizing the need for the progressive development
of international law and its codification in order to
make it a more effective means of implementing the purposes and principles set forth in the Charter of the
"Ibid.. Thirty-fifth Session, Six1h Committee, 55th. 60th-64th, 73rd
and 75th meetings: and ibid.. Sixth Commillee. Sessional Fascicle.
corrigendum.
"A/35/312 and Corr. I.
"A/35/312/Add.l and 2 and Add.2/Corrl.

"ST/LEG/6.
"ST/LEG/7.
1
•

Official Records of 1he General Assemhii'. 7111rtr,/ijih Ses.1ion.
Supplement No. 10 (A/35/10).

United Nati•Jns and in the Declaration on Principles of
International Law concerning Friendly Relations and
Co-operation among States in accordance with the
Charter of the United N ations 27 and to give increased
importance to its role in relations among States,
Noting with appreciation that at its thirty-second session the International Law Commission, pursuant to
General Assembly resolutions 33/139 of 19 December
1978 and 34/141 of 17 December 1979, completed the
first reading of the addendum to the draft articles on
succession of States in respect of matters other than
treaties and of the draft articles on treaties concluded
between States and international organizations or between international organizations, as well as the first
reading of the set of articles constituting part one of the
draft on responsibility of States for internationally
wrongful acts,
Noting further with appreciation the progress made by
the International Law Commission in the preparation of
draft articles on the law of the non-navigational uses of
international watercourses, and on jurisdictional immunities of States and their property, as well as the work
done by it regarding the status of the diplomatic courier
and the diplomatic hag not accompanied by diplomatic
courier and international liability for injurious consequences arising out of acts not prohibited by international law,
Recognizing the importance of referring legal and
drafting questions to the Sixth Committee, including
topics which might be submitted to the International
Law Commission, thus enabling the Commission
further to enhance its contribution to the progressive development of international law and its codification,
I. Takes note of the report of the International Law
Commission on the work of its thirty-second session;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the International
Law Commission for the work accomplished at that session:
3. Approves the programme of work planned by the
International Law Commission for l981; 2x
4. Recommends that, taking into account the written
comments of Governments and views expressed in
debates in the General Assembly, the International Law
Commission should, at its thirty-third session:
(a) Complete, as recommended by the General
Assembly in resolution 34/141. the second reading of
the draft articles on succession of States in respect of
matters other than treaties, adopted at its thirty-first and
thirty-second sessions:
(b) Commence the second reading of the draft articles on treaties concluded between States and international organizations or between international organizations:
(c) Continue its work on State responsibility with
the aim of beginning the preparation of draft articles
concerning part two of the draft on responsibility of
States for internationally wrongful acts, bearing in mind
the need for a second reading of the draft articles constituting part one of the draft:
(d) Continue its work on international liability for
injurious consequences arising out of acts not prohibited hy international law:
(e) Proceed with the preparation of draft articles on
the law of the non-navigational uses of international
· Resolution 2625 (XXV). annex.
·, Sec Official Records of the Genaal Assemhl_i-. Thirty-jijih Session.
S11pplrn1en1 :Vo 10 (A _1, 1 Ill). chap. IX. ,eel. A.

IX.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

watercourses and on jurisdictional immunities of States
and their property, taking into account the replies to the
questionnaires addressed to Governments as well as information furnished by them;
(/) Continue its work on the status of the diplomatic
courier and the diplomatic bag not accompanied by diplomatic courier, with a view to the possible elaboration
of an appropriate legal instrument;
5. Recommends further that the International Law
Commission should continue its study of the second
part of the topic of relations between States and international organizations;
6. Endorses the decisions of the International Law
Commission requesting observations and comments on
the provisions adopted on first reading of the draft articles on succession of States in respect of matters other
than treaties, 29 on treaties concluded between States and
international organizations or between international organizations30 and on responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts; 3 '
7. Urges Governments to respond as fully and expeditiously as possible to the requests of the International Law Commission for comments and observations on its draft articles and questionnaires and for
materials on topics on its programme of work;
8. Welcomes the considerations and recommendations contained in the report of the International Law
Commission on questions having a bearing on the
nature, programme and methods of work of the Commission and the organization of its sessions with a view
to the timely and effective fulfilment of the tasks entrusted to it;
9. Reaffirms its previous decisions concerning
research projects and studies required by the work of the
International Law Commission and the increased role of
the Codification Division of the Office of Legal Affairs
of the Secretariat, as well as those concerning the need
for continuing provision of summary records of the
Commission's meetings;
lO. Expresses confidence that the International Law
Commission will continue to keep the progress of its
work under review and to develop the methods of work
best suited to the speedy completion of the tasks entrusted to it;
l l. Reaffirms its wish that the International Law
Commission will continue to enhance its co-operation
with legal organs of intergovernmental organizations
whose work is of interest for the progressive development of international law and its codification;
12. Expresses the wish that seminars will continue to
be held in conjunction with sessions of the International
Law Commission and that an increasing number of
participants from developing countries will be given the
opportunity to attend those seminars;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to the
International Law Commission, for its attention, the
records of the debate on the report of the Commission at
the thirty-fifth session of the General Assembly and to
prepare and distribute a topical summary of the debate.

95th plenary meeting
I 5 December I 980
"Ibid., Supplement No. /0 (A/35/10). para. I 5.
rn Ibid., para. 55.
.
" Ibid., para. 31.

35/164.

263

Report of the Special Committee on the Chart er of the United Nations and on the
Strengthening of the Role of the Organization

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its support for the purposes and principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling its resolutions 686 (VII) of 5 December
1952, 992 (X) of 21 November 1955, 2285 (XXII) of
5 December 1967, 2552 (XXIV) of 12 December
1969, 2697 (XXV) of 11 December 1970, 2968 (XXVII)
of 14 December 1972 and 3349 (XXIX) of 17 December
1974,
Recalling also its resolutions 2925 (XXVII) of
27 November 1972, 3073 (XXVIII) of 30 November
1973 and 3282 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974 on the
strengthening of the role of the United Nations,
Recalling especially its resolution 3499 (XXX) of
15 December 1975. by which it established the Special
Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on
the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization,
and its resolutions 31 /28 of 29 November 1976, 32/45 of
8 December 1977, 33/94 of 16 December 1978 and
34/147 of 17 December 1979,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee, 12
Noting that significant progress has been made in fulfilling the mandate of the Special Committee,
Noting also the progress of the debate held during the
thirty-fifth session on the item entitled "Peaceful settlement of disputes between States", included in the
agenda in pursuance of General Assembly resolution
34/102 of 14 December 1979, especially concerning the
consideration of the draft Manila declaration on the
peaceful settlement of international disputes,.11
Recognizing the importance and usefulness of the
µ.epertoire of the Practice of the Security Council and the
Repertory of Practice of United Nations Organs as the
principal sources of records for the analytical studies of
the application and interpretation of the provisions of
the Charter and of the rules of procedure made thereunder,
Noting the importance that pre-session consultations
among the members of the Special Committee and other
interested States may have in facilitating the fulfilment
of its task,
Considering that the Special Committee has not yet
completed the mandate entrusted to it,
1. Takes note of the report of the Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on the
Strengthening of the Role of the Organization:
2. Decides that the Special Committee should continue its work in pursuance of the following tasks with
which it is entrusted:
(a) To list the proposals which have been made or
will be made in the Committee and to identify those
which have awakened special interest;

(b) To examine proposals which have been made or
will be made in the Committee with a view to according
priority to the consideration of those areas on which
general agreement is possible and to make recommendations thereon;
"Ibid., Supplement No. 33 (A/35/33 and Corr.!).
'' Ibid., para. 159.
