A /73/PV.85

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-third session

85th plenary meeting

Tuesday, 28 May 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Espinosa Garcés . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ecuador)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Ke (Cambodia),
Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.30 a.m.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The Acting President: Members will recall that
at its 65th plenary meeting, on 22 December 2018,
the General Assembly concluded its consideration of
agenda item 74. In order for the Assembly to take action
on draft resolution A/73/L.85, it will be necessary to
reopen consideration of agenda item 74.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to reopen consideration of agenda item 74?
It was so decided (decision 73/504 B).
The Acting President: Members will also recall
that, at its 3rd plenary meeting, on 21 September 2018,
the General Assembly decided to allocate agenda item
74 to the Third Committee.
To enable the Assembly to take action expeditiously
on the draft resolution, may I take it that the Assembly
wishes to consider agenda item 74 directly in plenary
meeting and proceed immediately to its consideration?
I hear no objection.
It was so decided.

Agenda item 74 (continued)
Promotion and protection of human rights
Draft resolution (A/73/L.85)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Poland to introduce
draft resolution A/73/L.85.
Mr. Czaputowicz (Poland): It is a great honour
for me to address the General Assembly under agenda
item 74 to introduce draft resolution A/73/L.85, entitled
“International Day Commemorating the Victims of Acts
of Violence Based on Religion or Belief”. The draft
resolution was submitted on behalf of nine countries:
Brazil, Canada, Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Nigeria, Pakistan,
the United States and my own country, Poland.
I would like to warmly thank the core group
countries and all other delegations for their engagement
throughout the process of negotiations on the draft
resolution. The positive spirit of cooperation during the
negotiation was vital to the successful outcome.
The world has been experiencing an unprecedented
rise in violence against religious communities and
people belonging to religious minorities. Over recent
months, we have been witnessing appalling acts of
violence related to religion or belief. The recent attacks
on mosques in Christchurch, New Zealand, and the
targeted Christian communities in Sri Lanka on Easter
Sunday have reminded us in a tragic way that the
freedom of religion is a fundamental human right and
that hatred towards religious groups may lead to the
mass killing of innocent people.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-15288 (E)

*1915288*

A/73/PV.85

As reports of civil society organizations estimate,
one-third of the world’s populations suffers from some
form of religious persecution. Religious persecution
exists in many forms. Acts of terror are intended to
intimidate members of religious communities and, as
a result, hold them back from practicing their faith
in their chosen places of worship. In some countries,
religious practice is forbidden even at home. In
others, the representatives of religious minorities
are refused funerals. In some other States, organized
groups target minority communities. Cases of police
abduction and murder of religious leaders, their
disappearance, resettlement, torture and beating based
on religious belief are only some examples of the
persecution and discriminatory behaviours directed at
religious minorities.
Poland has a centuries-long tradition of peaceful
coexistence of various religious groups. We are
therefore particularly sensitive to the protection of
religious freedom. The right to freedom of thought,
conscience and religion — commonly referred to as a
right to freedom of religion or belief — is a universal
right of every human being. This right is a cornerstone
of many other rights. Any acts of violence against people
belonging to religious minorities cannot be accepted.
The draft resolution before us designates 22 August
as the International Day Commemorating the Victims
of Acts of Violence Based on Religion or Belief. The
establishment of the International Day is being put
forward to honour the victims and survivors who too
often remain forgotten. The draft resolution relates not
to any specific religion or belief, but to all religions
whose members are victims of violence. The draft
resolution seeks to raise awareness of the importance
of respect for religious diversity and inclusion. We
strongly believe that the new International Day will
help to create an inclusive platform for Member
States, international organizations and civil society to
engage in activities to commemorate victims and assist
survivors. We hope that it will help to combat hate
crimes and acts of violence related to religion or belief
and will further strengthen interreligious dialogue. The
draft resolution may play an educational role as well,
by promoting respect for religious diversity, inclusion
and mutual understanding between different religious
and belief groups.
The establishment of the International Day
Commemorating the Victims of Acts of Violence
Based on Religion or Belief will complement other
2/9

28/05/2019

important international instruments such as the United
Nations Alliance of Civilizations or the Declaration on
the Rights of Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic,
Religious and Linguistic Minorities.
Poland will work closely with the international
community to safeguard religious freedoms and protect
those who are intimidated or persecuted because of
their religion or belief, including by various forms
of meetings dedicated to the protection of religious
minorities in armed conflict. Let us demonstrate
together our commitment to ensuring freedom of
religion and belief.
I would also like to thank the Member States
sponsoring this draft resolution of great importance to
the international community, and I look forward to its
adoption by consensus.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/73/L.85, entitled
“International Day Commemorating the Victims of
Acts of Violence Based on Religion or Belief”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to those delegations listed
therein, the following countries have also become
sponsors of draft resolution A/73/L.85: Afghanistan,
Albania, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belgium,
Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon,
the Central African Republic, Colombia, the Congo,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Djibouti, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Estonia, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Hungary, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Kazakhstan, Kiribati, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia,
Libya, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mali, Malta, Monaco,
Montenegro, Morocco, New Zealand, North Macedonia,
Norway, Oman, Panama, Paraguay, the Philippines,
Portugal, Qatar, the Republic of Korea, the Republic
of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sri Lanka, the State of Palestine, Thailand, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and Uzbekistan.
19-15288

28/05/2019

The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/73/L.85?
Draft resolution A/73/L.85 was adopted (resolution
73/296).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor
for explanations of position following the adoption of
the resolution, I would like to remind delegations that
explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Al Khalil (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): My country’s delegation has joined the
consensus on resolution 73/296, entitled “International
Day Commemorating the Victims of Acts of Violence
Based on Religion or Belief”. Such acts of violence are
dangerously on the rise, which requires us to adopt a
more serious and effective stance to ensure that they
do not become a dangerous phenomenon that would be
difficult to contain at the international level.
My country’s delegation expresses its deep
concern regarding the scale and gravity of such acts
of violence in many parts of the world. We caution
against certain electoral practices and agendas, as
well as provocative calls by extreme political parties,
ideological movements and groups based on racism,
xenophobia and persecution. Furthermore, my country
condemns all hate speech, words of provocation and
distortions of religious beliefs intended to incite
discrimination, animosity or violence through the print
media, the audio-visual press and the electronic media
or by exploiting political and religious platforms or any
other means. My country, Syria, refuses to accept the
pretext of some who defend such dangerous practices,
whereby they believe that expressing extreme ideas is
part of the freedom of religion or the right to express
their opinions.
It is time for all of us to consider taking practical
steps that go beyond rejection and condemnation so as
to ensure that all Governments prohibit such activities,
prosecute perpetrators and monitor any financial
support given to individuals and institutions that
participate in those activities.
In speaking about the phenomenon of acts of
violence based on religion or belief, we cannot fail
to mention the dangerous phenomenon of global
terrorism. We reiterate our strong condemnation of
all terrorist activities and practices, as we are aware
of their devastating effects, which prevent people from

A/73/PV.85

enjoying all their fundamental rights and freedoms.
In addition, they have direct effects on the stability
of States and the prosperity of peoples, as well as
international peace and security.
My country’s Government believes that respecting
the principles of international law, the provisions of
the Charter of the United Nations and the resolutions
of international legitimacy, as well as promoting the
genuine, undistorted values and practices of multilateral
and preventive diplomacy is now more than ever
decisive and necessary in addressing the challenges
posed by the erosion in confidence of the peoples of the
world in the possibility of establishing a balanced and
innovative world order that can eliminate terrorism,
violence, hatred, extremism and crime and achieve the
Sustainable Development Goals without politicization
or double standards, while confronting the policies of
certain Governments that have political, economic and
global influence. Those Governments impose their
will on international activities and exploit the tools at
the disposal of the Organization to serve their narrow
and private interests and to cover up their practices
in contradiction of the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter, including interference in the
internal affairs of other Member States and the use or
threat of use military aggression.
In fighting the terrorism carried out by Da’esh,
Al-Qaida, the Al-Nusra Front and other terrorist groups
associated with them, the Syrian Arab Republic has
seen tens of thousands of its citizens lose their lives.
The Syrian people have suffered unprecedented pain at
the hands of terrorism and the phenomenon of foreign
terrorist fighters sponsored by certain Governments,
while other Governments have closed their eyes to the
situation. In addition, the unilateral coercive economic
measures imposed by some Governments against the
Syrian people are among the main reasons for the
paralysis of our economic situation, the destruction of
our infrastructure, emigration and the displacement of
hundreds of thousands of Syrians inside and outside
their country.
In drawing attention to those difficult realties, we
wish to sound the alarm and make a sincere call for
rebuilding trust among our States through seriously
and undoubtedly addressing any policies or practices
that cause the spread of global terrorism. We should
be working together to eradicate the seeds of hatred,
violence and extremism.

19-152883/9

A/73/PV.85

The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position following the
adoption of the resolution.
Mr. Smith (United States of America): The United
States thanks Poland and other members of the core
group for their leadership and spirit of cooperation in
establishing the International Day Commemorating the
Victims of Acts of Violence Based on Religion or Belief
(resolution 73/296). We are pleased to offer our support
to this timely initiative.
Recent tragic events, such as the bombings of
Christian churches in Colombo, the killings at mosques
in Christchurch, the attack at Poway synagogue in San
Diego, the ethnic cleansing of Rohingya Muslims in
Burma, the execution of Sunni Kurds in Iran, and past
atrocities like the genocide of Yezidis and Christians
in areas controlled by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant underscore the need for the establishment of
this day. There is an urgent need for the international
community to come together to condemn violence
based on religion or belief and remember the many
innocent victims of these heinous acts.
Countries must work across borders to advocate for
the rights of members of religious-minority communities
and to protect freedom of religion or belief wherever it
is threatened. The United States is proud of our long
history of promoting freedom of religion or belief,
domestically and globally, for all — without regard to a
specific religion or group of people. Religious freedom
is enshrined in our Constitution, and we are committed
to building a world in which no one fears violence or
persecution due to his or her beliefs.
In July 2018, the United States convened the
first-ever Ministerial to Advance Religious Freedom,
bringing together civil society, Government officials,
international organizations, and religious leaders
to facilitate dialogue and establish areas of mutual
cooperation for future action. The Potomac Plan
of Action, issued by Secretary Pompeo at the
conclusion of the Ministerial, called for the creation
of the international day we are now establishing. This
summer, we will build upon the momentum established
in 2018 by convening the second Ministerial to Advance
Religious Freedom, in Washington, D.C.
In addition, we are encouraging regional followup conferences. The United Arab Emirates and Taiwan
have already hosted events, and we thank them again
for doing so. We also continue to support the Istanbul
4/9

28/05/2019

process, which is designed to combat intolerance and
discriminatory actions through open dialogue among
Governments, civil society and religious leaders,
with full respect for freedom of religion or belief and
freedom of expression. We encourage Member States
to consider hosting Istanbul process meetings and
workshops to demonstrate their own commitment to
upholding freedom of religion or belief. With that, let
me reiterate our gratitude for Poland’s leadership on
this effort.
Resolution 73/296 reminds the world that people
continue to suffer all over because of their faith. We
continue to call attention to one of the world’s most
horrific denials of freedom of religion or belief: in the
Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region of the People’s
Republic of China, more than a million Uyghurs,
ethnic Kazakhs, Kyrgyz and other members of Muslim
minority groups have been arbitrarily detained in
camps since April 2017. There are disturbing reports
of forced labour, torture and deaths in these camps.
Chinese authorities are restricting religious freedom by
labelling peaceful religious practices as manifestations
of religious extremism and terrorism.
We call upon all Member States to speak out
against the egregious human rights abuses and religious
persecution by the People’s Republic of China. China’s
repressive campaign in Xinjiang is not about terrorism
and follows a long history of religious, linguistic and
cultural oppression. The Chinese Communist Party has
exhibited extreme hostility to all religious faiths since
its founding. This repression has intensified under the
current policy of Sinicizing religion. We call on all
Member States to press the Chinese Government to
close its camps and respect the rights of Muslims, as
well as the rights of Christians, Tibetan Buddhists, and
Falun Gong practitioners.
The United States looks forward to continuing to
work with Member States bilaterally and multilaterally
in 2019 and beyond to advance international religious
freedom. We stand ready to support Member States in
improving their own record of religious freedom and
will not hesitate to press countries to reform oppressive
laws and policies. It is our goal that individuals from
all walks of life and all parts of the world are free to
practice — or not practice — a religion or belief of their
choosing, without fear of interference, intimidation,
or violence.
19-15288

28/05/2019

Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to welcome the presence of His
Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Poland.
I also thank Poland very much and other countries for
their valuable contributions in preparing resolution
73/296, adopted today.
There has been an unprecedented worldwide rise in
acts of violence committed against people based on their
religion or belief. In recent times, millions of people have
fallen victim to intolerance, discrimination, negative
stereotyping, stigmatization and acts of violence based
on religion and belief. This is a violation of their basic
rights and undoubtedly affects their ability to live in
peace, security and freedom in their societies.
One example of this phenomenon is the rise of the
right-wing extremist political movements and parties in
many countries of the world, which has led to a worrying
increase in incitement and hate speech that targets
everything different. Those parties and movements
operate by establishing political and social programmes
that incite hatred and social exclusion against religious,
ethnic or national groups. They use distorted ideas,
misconceptions and unjustified fears to achieve their
narrow political and electoral objectives, leading in
turn to an unprecedented increase in discrimination,
racism and xenophobia, including against migrants,
while leading also to Islamophobia and acts of violence
against people based on their religion or belief.
The recent attacks on Christian worshipers in
Sri Lanka and before that on Muslim worshipers in
Christchurch, New Zealand, have proved that the
phenomenon of targeting people based on their religion
or belief has become a global one that is not limited
to a certain region, people, group, religion or race; it
is rather a phenomenon that threatens humankind in
its entirety.
Egypt condemns in the strongest terms all terrorist
acts and other acts of violence committed against
people based on their religion or belief whatever the
motive, place or time, and whoever the perpetrator.
Those horrific terrorist acts, which targeted peaceful
worshippers, killing and injuring hundreds of them,
compel the international community to assume its
primary responsibility for making concerted efforts to
decisively address terrorism, violence and ideological
extremism. We must make genuine efforts to promote
and anchor peaceful coexistence, tolerance and
acceptance of others, including by prohibiting the use

A/73/PV.85

of modern media by extremists and terrorist groups,
while preventing them from promoting ideologies that
incite violence against various religious groups.
In conclusion, I want to thank all countries that
sponsored resolution 73/296, which emphasizes once
again our joint commitment to addressing all acts
of violence based on religion or belief. It designates
22 August as the International Day Commemorating
the Victims of Acts of Violence Based on Religion or
Belief and reaffirms our joint commitment to fighting
all acts of violence based on religion or belief in order
to honour the memory of the victims of such violence.
Mr. Duque Estrada Meyer (Brazil): Brazil is
pleased to be part of the core group that submitted
resolution 73/296 for consideration by the General
Assembly, as we join everyone in the Hall today in
condemning violence, terrorism and extremism in all
its forms, including when individuals are targeted on
the basis or in the name of religion or belief.
Today we are remembering people who were
targeted for professing their faith. The memory of these
victims should live in our hearts and minds every day,
not only as a sign of respect, but also as a warning
of the nefarious consequences that hatred, bigotry
and prejudice can produce if left unchecked. Faith is
something that speaks to our very core as individuals. It
is often a fundamental part of our identity as individuals
and of the communities we live in. This is why these
violent acts are so abject — they are directed against
the very essence of what makes us who we are. It is our
shared values that are on the line, which prompts a call
for all of us to stand together in condemning violence,
extremism and hate rhetoric.
In an era of turbulence and uncertainty, interfaith
dialogue may provide an important remedy to violence.
Religious communities offer a reminder of the core
principles of our common humanity. The spread of
the values of empathy, compassion, forgiveness and
altruism are needed today more than ever, and it is
through that interfaith dialogue that we can hear one
another and learn together how to understand and care
for one another.
Brazil’s recent history shows that interfaith dialogue
should not be feared and that it can actually contribute to
development and to a more tolerant society. In the past
30 years, Brazil has increased its religious diversity. A
country that was predominantly Catholic has today a
population of which 40 per cent profess other religions.

19-152885/9

A/73/PV.85

Those changes have happened in an environment of
peace and mutual respect. Brazil can therefore serve
as an example of the virtuous cycle that can arise from
religious freedom, peace and development.
Securing that harmonious coexistence, however,
requires continuous effort. As our societies are
constantly changing at an unprecedented speed,
our commitment to peace should be renewed daily.
Poverty, religious radicalism and conflict can interact
in the worst way. Conversely, development, peace
and religious diversity can reinforce each other in a
positive way.
Through the creation of this commemorative event,
when we pay tribute to those who have fallen victim to
intolerance, let us highlight our similarities rather than
our differences, let us remember our unity rather than
our discord and let us promote love rather than hatred.
Mr. Hassani Nejad Pirkouhi (Islamic Republic
of Iran): Islamophobia is gradually overtaking other
forms of bigotry, hateful speech and attitudes, mostly
thanks to populist politicians and media complacency.
It is becoming more difficult to practice as a Muslim,
to dress as a Muslim and even to look like a Muslim.
Muslim women and girls, in particular, are becoming
easy targets for hateful and discriminatory attacks.
Islam and Muslims are being scapegoated and
victimized across many countries, both individually
and in communities that, time and again, have claimed
the high ground of respect for human rights and
moderation. This stigmatization and discrimination
have led many people, particularly young people, to be
disenfranchised from their communities.
The United States is a typical case where populist
and ultranationalist politicians are stirring up
prejudice and intolerance against vulnerable people,
including Muslim individuals and communities. When
supremacists and neo-Nazis are hailed as “very fine
people”, one can easily imagine the consequences.
I conclude by thanking Poland for presenting
resolution 73/296 and conducting its negotiations in
an open and inclusive manner. Its consensual adoption
reflects the global will to stop the victimization of
individuals and religions in a world in which tolerance
and moderation are under attack by myopic politicians
and irresponsible media platforms.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of Observer State of the Holy See.
6/9

28/05/2019

Monsignor Grysa (Holy See): My delegation would
like to thank Poland for its leadership in proposing and
negotiating resolution 73/296, entitled “International
Day Commemorating the Victims of Acts of Violence
Based on Religion or Belief”.
The Holy See follows with great concern the
escalation of acts of violence against religious
communities. Pope Francis has on many occasions
expressed his spiritual and paternal closeness to the
victims of such acts, including to the victims of recent
attacks in Sri Lanka; Christchurch, New Zealand;
Poway, California; and most recently, to the victims of
attacks against Catholics in Burkina Faso.
Resolution 73/296 and the international day it
establishes are an opportunity for the international
community to focus on the victims and to strengthen
efforts to eradicate such violence and acts of terrorism
targeting persons because of their religion or belief.
The joint declaration, entitled “Human Fraternity
for World Peace and Living Together”, which Pope
Francis and the Grand Imam of Al-Azhar, Sheikh
Ahmad Al-Tayyeb, signed in Abu Dhabi on 4 February,
resolutely declares that
“religions must never incite war, hateful attitudes,
hostility and extremism, nor must they incite
violence or the shedding of blood”.
Those tragic realities are the consequence of a deviation
from religious teachings. Therefore, people, not
religions, should be blamed for those acts of violence.
The response cannot be any form of retaliatory justice,
but must rather be a clear condemnation of such acts
and an authentic dialogue among the various religious
communities on the basis of the joint and unequivocal
belief that killing others in the name of God offends
God himself.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position.
One delegation has asked to speak in exercise
of the right of reply. I would like to remind him that
statements in the exercise of the right of reply are
limited to 10 minutes for the first intervention and to
5 minutes for the second intervention, and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Chu Guang (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
expresses its strong opposition to and dissatisfaction
with the statement made just now by the United
19-15288

28/05/2019

States representative, who levelled unwarranted and
groundless accusations against China’s religious
policies and practices.
China is a unified country of multiple ethnicities.
We have 56 ethnic groups living harmoniously on
Chinese soil. The Chinese Constitution protects the
freedom of religious belief. In the Xinjiang Uyghur
Autonomous Region of China, we have been actively
promoting and protecting citizens’ rights and freedom
of religious belief, in accordance with the law.
The Chinese Government has set up vocational
education and training centres as a preventive counterterrorism measure. Their purpose is to eradicate
terrorism and violent extremism and to eliminate their
breeding grounds so that the people of Xinjiang can live
in peace and stability, thereby protecting their human
rights and freedoms from attack by violent extremism
and terrorism. Another purpose of the vocational
education and training centres is to teach the official
languages of the country, as well as vocational skills and
national laws and regulations, which also contributes to
the eradication of poverty.
These centres are boarding schools rather than
camps. The trainees can go home every week and be
visited by their families, and their religious beliefs are
protected in accordance with the law. On a number of
occasions since the end of last year, China has invited
diplomats from many countries and representatives of
international organizations and the media to visit the
Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region, including the
vocational education and training centres, after which
many have said that the true situation in the centres is
vastly different from its portrayal in the Western media.
The United States representative accused the
Chinese Government just now of oppressing the
culture and language of the Autonomous Region. I
must therefore stress that the Chinese Government
attaches great importance to protecting the culture
and language of ethnic minorities. There are five
languages on China’s currency, the yuan, one of which
is Uyghur. The proceedings of the local Government
of the Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region, the local
people’s congress and all of its meeting documents
are published in the languages of the various ethnic
groups. We also have simultaneous interpretation into
the languages of the local ethnic groups when we hold
such conferences and use the ethnic minority languages
when the National People’s Congress is in session.

A/73/PV.85

If that represents oppression of the language and
culture of ethnic minorities, I do not know what kind of
measures the United States Government takes to promote
the language and culture of its own ethnic groups. As
far as I know, in the current and previous sessions of
the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, many
indigenous peoples, including Hawaiians and native
Americans, have accused the United States Government
of killing indigenous peoples, extinguishing their
languages and cultures and silencing their voices, even
at the United Nations.
On the issue of Taiwan, I once again reaffirm that
Taiwan is an inseparable part of Chinese territory. The
United States representative mentioned Taiwan in his
statement. I hope that the United States delegation can
respect the One China principle.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 74.
Agenda item 117
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
Note by the Secretary-General (A/73/876)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the Assembly, in its decision 70/402 of 12 October
2015, approved the appointment of Ms. Heidi Mendoza
of the Philippines as Under-Secretary-General for
Internal Oversight Services for a fixed term of five
years, beginning on 15 November 2015 and ending on
14 November 2020.
On 2 June 2016, the Secretary-General informed
the Assembly that Ms. Mendoza had assumed her duties
on 11 December 2015 and that, accordingly, her term of
office would expire on 10 December 2020.
In document A/73/876 of 17 May 2019, the
Secretary-General informs the General Assembly that,
on 23 April 2019, the United Nations Staff Pension
Committee determined that Ms. Mendoza would
have to shorten her appointment, with effect from
25 October 2019.
Taking into account the decision of the Committee,
the Secretary-General, in accordance with paragraph
5 (b) of resolution 48/218 B, proposes to initiate the
recruitment process for the next Under-SecretaryGeneral for Internal Oversight Services. Eventually, the

19-152887/9

A/73/PV.85

28/05/2019

Secretary-General will propose a candidate to succeed
Ms. Mendoza. The Secretary-General recommends that
the General Assembly take note of his proposed action.

is reducing the destructive impact of the Aral Sea crisis
on the environment, health and very existence of the
millions of people living in the Aral Sea basin.

May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to take note of the Secretary-General’s
proposed action as contained in document A/73/876?

In 1993, the Heads of State of Central Asia
established the International Fund for Saving the Aral
Sea with the aim of dealing with the environmental
crisis and improving the social and economic situation
in the Aral Sea basin, which the world community has
recognized as one of the worst disasters of the twentieth
century. On 24 August 2018, under Turkmenistan’s
chairmanship, the Council of Heads of the founder
States of the International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea
held a meeting in the city of Turkmenbashi attended
by Heads of State of Central Asia and representatives
of specialized United Nations structures and regional
organizations. During the summit, the Heads of State
discussed a wide range of issues of cooperation for
the future improvement of the water-management,
environmental and socioeconomic situation in the Aral
Sea basin. They also noted the significant contribution
that the International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea has
made in this area in the 25 years of its existence. The
summit resulted in the adoption of a joint communiqué
by the Council of Heads of the founder States of
the Fund.

It was so decided.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 117.
Agenda item 128 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(z) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea
Draft resolution (A/73/L.87)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Turkmenistan to introduce draft
resolution A/73/L.87.
Mrs. Ataeva (Turkmenistan) (spoke in Russian): I
have the honour to introduce draft resolution A/73/L.87,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations
and the International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea”.
Throughout the entire negotiating process on the text of
the draft resolution, we made every effort to maintain a
constructive atmosphere and achieve consensus.
There is an environmental disaster in Central Asia
associated with the Aral Sea. Until it began to shrink,
the Aral Sea was the fourth largest lake in the world.
It had ports, fish factories and a fishing fleet. But
since the 1960s, the level and volume of water in the
Aral Sea have been rapidly declining due to a drop in
the flow from the main rivers feeding into it. In the
past 50 to 55 years, the volume of water in the Sea has
shrunk by more than fifteenfold and its level has fallen
by 29 metres, resulting in the formation of 5.5 million
hectares of salt and sand areas on its territory, with a
negative impact on the ecology of the region and the
health and lives of its people, flora and fauna.
The impact of the Aral Sea disaster is being felt all
over the world. Toxic salts from the Aral region have
been found on the coasts of Antarctica, in the glaciers
of Greenland, the forests of Norway and many other
parts of the globe. The most important task right now
8/9

With today’s draft resolution, the sponsoring
countries want to draw the attention of the States
Members of the United Nations to the fact that without
the support and assistance of international financial
institutions and developed countries, and a leading role
on the part of the United Nations, this problem cannot
be solved. The draft resolution takes into account the
fact that the negative humanitarian, environmental and
socioeconomic consequences of the Aral Sea basin
tragedy extend well beyond the region and represent a
global problem.
In that regard, the draft resolution affirms
that achieving international cooperation in solving
international problems of an environmental, economic,
social and humanitarian nature is one of the purposes
of the United Nations. We believe firmly that the
draft resolution will provide more opportunities for
strengthening cooperation between the United Nations
and the International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea.
In conclusion, I would like to express our hope
that this important draft resolution will be adopted by
consensus. We call on all countries to support it and
to join the list of sponsors, which will give our shared
19-15288

28/05/2019

A/73/PV.85

efforts additional momentum. I would also like to
thank the countries that have already joined the list of
its sponsors.

the Assembly about its position on resolution 73/297
on cooperation between the United Nations and the
International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea.

The Acting President: The General Assembly
will now take a decision on draft resolution A/73/L.87,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea”.

In 2016, the Kyrgyz Republic adopted a decision
on ending its participation in the activities of the
International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea and its
entities, owing to its ineffectiveness and the lack of
progress in reforming it. The talks held in 2010 and
2011 between experts from the States of the region
on the issue had no results, due to the unconstructive
positions of various States. The problems of reforming
the Fund requires the joint efforts of all of its member
States and must be discussed and promoted outside the
context of the Fund, including its board of directors, by
experts from the countries of the region. The Kyrgyz
Republic is ready for expert discussion of the issues
regarding reform of the Fund with the participation of
representatives of every Central Asian State. We hope
that the Central Asian countries will be able to achieve
the necessary reform of the Fund with the goal of
increasing the effectiveness of its activities and bodies,
in accordance with the interests and the urgent needs of
all the States of Central Asia.

I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I would like to
announce that since the submission of draft resolution
A/73/L.87, in addition to those delegations listed in the
document, the following countries have also become
sponsors: Austria, Azerbaijan, Estonia, Georgia,
Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Papua New Guinea, Poland,
the Republic of Moldova, the Russian Federation,
Singapore, Thailand and Turkey.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/73/L.87?
Draft resolution A/73/L.87 was adopted (resolution
73/297).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kyrgyzstan, who wishes to speak in
explanation of position on the resolution just adopted.
Mrs. Moldoisaeva (Kyrgyzstan) (spoke in
Russian): The Kyrgyz Republic would like to inform

The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (z) of agenda item 128?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 11.05 a.m.

19-152889/9
