S/2013/163

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 March 2013
Original: English

Letter dated 15 March 2013 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit a letter dated 7 March 2013 from Mr. Ramtane
Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African Union, forwarding
the revised harmonized concept of operations of the African-led International
Support Mission to Mali, adopted by the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union at its 358th meeting, held on 7 March 2013 (see annex). The communiqué of
the meeting is also attached.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

13-26131 (E) 220313

*1326131*

S/2013/163

Annex
Letter dated 7 March 2013 from the Commissioner for Peace and
Security of the African Union addressed to the Secretary-General
On behalf of the Chairperson of the Commission, I would like to forward
herewith the communiqué, as well as the revised harmonized concept of operations
of the African-led International Support Mission to Mali (AFISMA), adopted by the
African Union Peace and Security Council at its 358th meeting, held today, 7 March
2013.
As you are aware, the review exercise of the concept of operations was
necessitated in light of the developments in the situation in Mali following the push
of the armed and terrorist groups towards the south and the subsequent FrancoMalian operation, which helped put an end to it and initiate the process for the
liberation of the north, that led to the acceleration of the deployment of AFISMA.
Pursuant to the communiqué of the Peace and Security Council meeting held on
25 January 2013, at Heads of State and Government level, a planning conference
was held in Bamako from 15 to 21 February 2013, and prepared a revised joint
concept of operations, based on the latest developments on the ground. The
conference brought together military and civilian experts of the African Union and
ECOWAS Commissions, Mali and bilateral and multilateral partners.
The revised concept of operations provides for an increase in the strength of
AFISMA from 3,300 to 9,620 troops, including 171 elements of the civilian
component, 8,859 troops and 590 police personnel.
As consultations are under way within the Security Council on its future
actions and decisions on the situation in Mali, including the transformation of
AFISMA into a United Nations peacekeeping operation, I wish to convey, here, the
support of the African Union Peace and Security Council to such an operation, that
would advance peace, security and stability in Mali and in the Sahel region as a
whole. While supporting the envisaged operation, I also would like to draw your
kind attention on paragraph 13 of the communiqué, in which the Peace and Security
Council stresses the need for the Security Council to take into account some key
principles that should guide the possible transformation of AFISMA into a United
Nations operation, with a view to consolidating the gains and thus enhancing the
prospects for ending the crisis.
The African Union Peace and Security Council is of the view that a United
Nations operation should be given a peace enforcement mandate and its action
should be within the framework of action-oriented assistance to the Malian
Government, in particular by providing the required support for the full restoration
of the authority of the Government of Mali over its entire territory and the
preservation of its national unity and territorial integrity, as well as the protection of
civilians. In this regard, the proposed mission should actively sustain efforts aimed
at dismantling the terrorist and criminal networks operating in the north of the
country.
It is equally important that the United Nations operation comes to back the
critical political role of ECOWAS and the African Union, which, over the past
months, have demonstrated exemplary dynamism in the management of the crisis in
Mali. On that basis, the Peace and Security Council stressed the need for the United

2

13-26131

S/2013/163

Nations Security Council, in carrying out its primary responsibility for the success
of the mission, and, ultimately, for sustainable peace, security and stability in Mali,
to undertake appropriate consultations with the African Union and ECOWAS,
including on the leadership and the composition of the envisaged mission in a spirit
of continuity.
Last but not least, the Peace and Security Council reiterated the African
Union’s pressing call for appropriate steps to be urgently taken for the early
provision of a logistic support package to AFISMA funded through United Nations
assessed contributions, as well for transitional support arrangements, which should
be effective as from 1 April 2013, in order to help complete the deployment of
contingents according to the revised concept of operations and sustain operations on
the ground following the end of the self-sustained period.
I would like to reiterate the African Union’s deep appreciation of the Security
Council’s strong commitment and your own to the success of the African Union and
ECOWAS efforts aiming at the early resolution of the multidimensional crisis facing
Mali.
The African Union Commission would be most grateful for the steps you may
wish to take for the circulation of this letter and the attached communiqué and
revised harmonized concept of operations to the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Ramtane Lamamra
Commissioner for Peace and Security

13-26131

3

S/2013/163

Enclosure I
Revised joint strategic concept of operations for the African-led
International Support Mission in Mali and the Malian Defence and
Security Forces to restore the authority of the State of Mali over its
entire national territory
References
A. African Union Strategic Concept for the Resolution of the Crises in Mali
adopted by the African Union Peace and Security Council on 24 October 2012.
B. Joint Strategic Concept of Operations for the International Military Force and
the Malian Defence and Security Forces to Restore the Authority of the State of
Mali over its Entire National Territory endorsed by the African Union Peace and
Security Council on 14 November 2012.
C. United Nations Security Council resolution 2085 (2012) adopted on
20 December 2012.
D. Communiqué of ECOWAS Extraordinary Summit at the level of Heads of
State and Government (19 January 2013).
E. African Union Peace and Security Council communiqué following its 353rd
meeting (25 January 2013).
F.
Road map for the Transition adopted by the Malian Parliament on 29 January
2013.

4

13-26131

S/2013/163

I. Review
1.
The deployment of the African-led International Support Mission in Mali
(AFISMA) was authorised by United Nations Security Council resolution 2085
(2012) adopted on 20 December 2012. Subsequently, the African Union (AU) Peace
and Security Council at its 353rd meeting on 25 January 2013 requested the revision
of the AFISMA concept of operations by the African Union and ECOWAS
Commissions in collaboration with the United Nations, the European Union and
other partners in order to increase AFISMA’s strength, including through the
integration of the troops provided by Chad and other contingents that are being
prepared and, and in so doing to better respond to the needs on the ground.

II. Current situation
(a)

Political
2.
The Malian crisis is complex and multi-faceted in nature encompassing
security, political, ethnic and religious identity, and gender, humanitarian, socioeconomic and environmental factors. Therefore, there is a need for a comprehensive
solution, based on relevant Security Council resolutions (especially 2085 (2012)),
decisions of the AU Peace and Security Council, AU Strategic Concept and the Mali
road map for the Transition. In this regard, it is crucial that the Malian Government
continues to promote local reconciliation, an all-inclusive national dialogue and
organise credible legislative and presidential elections envisaged in its road map for
the Transition. The decision of the Malian authorities to establish a Dialogue and
Reconciliation Commission will facilitate negotiation and reconciliation amongst
Malian actors, including Malian armed groups that unconditionally renounce
terrorist activities and commit themselves to disarm and to respect the unity,
territorial integrity and Constitution of Mali. The joint action of AFISMA and the
MDSF as described in this joint strategic Concept of Operations is designed to
contribute to a comprehensive and sustainable solution of the Malian crisis. It must
also be noted that discussions are presently underway at the level of the Security
Council regarding support for helping the Malian authorities to restore peace and
security. Options for consideration include enhanced support for the political
process and a possible United Nations peacekeeping operation.

(b)

Environment
3.
The northern regions of Mali constitute an area of 937,742 km2 situated in the
Sahel-Sahara region, representing 75 per cent of the total Malian territory. It
contains the three regions of Gao, Timbuktu and Kidal, and a population of
1,293,449, representing 10 per cent of the national population. This area is
predominantly desert, with some mountainous terrain. It has minimal and irregular
rainfall (below 200 mm per year) creating extremely difficult living conditions. Mali
shares a 5,000 km border with Algeria, Mauritania, Niger and Burkina Faso.

(c)

Humanitarian
4.
The humanitarian situation in Mali has continued to improve since the
commencement of the French-led military Operation Serval on 11 January 2013 in
support of the MDSF and the deployment of AFISMA. There have been reported

13-26131

5

S/2013/163

improvements in humanitarian access in the town of Gao and in other areas of
northern Mali. While aid activities are resuming in the north, there are some
limitations due to the difficulties in establishing safe commercial and humanitarian
supply routes. As a result, reports of new internally displaced persons and the influx
of Malian refugees to neighbouring countries have emerged. According to an Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs report dated 6 February 2013, it is
estimated that there are 227,206 internally displaced persons in Mali and 144,439
refugees are registered in neighbouring countries particularly Algeria, Burkina Faso,
Mauritania and the Niger. Amongst these internally displaced persons and refugees,
the majority are women and children. There is also still a possibility of increased
displacement and refugee crisis due to concerns of drought, sporadic rains, poor
harvest, rising food prices and insecurity and an estimated 4.6 million Malians
remain at risk of a humanitarian crisis. Funding gaps have also continued to
undermine the effective delivery of humanitarian assistance because of the limited
implementation support programmes. Therefore, there is an urgent need for the
fulfilment of pledged contributions to the Consolidated Appeals Process to address
the humanitarian crisis in Mali.
(d)

Human Rights
5.
The conflict in Mali has taken an acute toll on civilians. The recruitment of
child soldiers, sexual violence and the extremely strict interpretation of Sharia law
including amputations and stoning are but some of the horrific crimes perpetrated
against civilians by terrorist groups, transnational criminal organisations and other
armed opposition groups that have occupied the northern regions of Mali.
Specifically, there has been widespread evidence of sexual and other violence
against women and girls including gang rapes, public beatings, forced marriage and
torture as reported by the Chair of the AU Commission on the situation in Mali
dated 14 July 2012. In addition, the United Nations Secretary-General’s report on
the situation in Mali of 29 November 2012 also documented various forms of human
rights violations perpetrated by armed groups in northern Mali. Furthermore, several
UNESCO world heritage sites have been destroyed particularly in Timbuktu.
6.
In addition to violations committed against civilians, there have been reports
of alleged ill treatment and summary executions of some captured combatants, in
violation of international humanitarian and human right laws. It is within this
context that the 353rd PSC communiqué of 25 January 2013 decided that civilian
human rights observers will be deployed as part of AFISMA to monitor the human
rights situation in the recovered areas and in this way will promote and support the
respect for fundamental human rights and freedoms.

(e)

Security
7.
Important progress has been registered in the defeat of religious extremist
groups in northern Mali following military operations that commenced in January
2013. The major movements consist of Islamist terrorist and transnational criminal
groups. They include Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM), Movement for
Oneness and Jihad in West Africa (MUJWA), Ansar Dine, Islamic Movement of
Azawad (IMA), and the Arab Movement for Azawad (AMA). The main secessionist
group is the National Movement for the Liberation of the Azawad (MNLA). The
strength of the core fighters of various nationalities and of all movements is
estimated to be between 1,500 and 2,000.

6

13-26131

S/2013/163

8.
Terrorism and transnational crimes constitute serious threats to the security
and stability of Mali, its sub-region, and the international community. These groups
engage in terrorism, narcotic and human trafficking, hostage taking (for ransoms),
smuggling of arms, drug route protection, currency exchanges and control of local
economies. These activities generate income used for arms procurement, insurgency
costs, recruitment of new members, spares and supplies and vehicles as well as
other ancillary needs. Weapons available to the groups include rifles, some heavy
weapons, surface-to-air missiles, anti-aircraft guns, rockets, mortars, light-armoured
vehicles, mines and improvised explosive devices.
9.
Following the French/Malian military operations and the deployment of
AFISMA, the combat capabilities of armed opposition groups have been severely
degraded. These groups are seeking havens further north or in neighbouring
countries. Others are dispersing and some are melting into the population. It is
anticipated that they will carry out asymmetric attacks and continue to intimidate
and try to influence the population.

III. Strategic framework
(a)

Strategic End-State
10. A stable democratic Malian state fully exercising its authority over its national
territory, responsive to the needs of all its citizens, addressing human rights
challenges and regional security particularly by reducing international terrorism and
transnational criminal activities.

(b)

Strategic Objectives
11.

AFISMA’s strategic objectives are as follows:

(a) Achieve full operational capability of AFISMA through coordinated
support by stakeholders for force generation, training, equipping, technical
assistance and funding.
(b) Facilitate mobilisation of resources to support the MDSF including
coordination of contributions to the Trust Fund for Peace and Security in Mali.
(c) Support the Malian authorities in the restoration of State authority and
preservation of Mali’s national unity and territorial integrity.
(d) Protect the population with respect to international human rights and
international humanitarian and refugee law, and with adherence to the United
Nations Human Rights Due Diligence Policy.
(e) Reduce threats posed by terrorist groups and transnational criminal
networks in Mali.
(f)

Establish a safe and secure environment in Mali.

(g) Support the Malian authorities in implementing the road map for the
Transition.
(h) Assist the Malian authorities in the reform of the defence and security
sectors as required and within capability.

13-26131

7

S/2013/163

(i) Facilitate establishment of conditions for the engagement of the wider
international community in Mali.
(c)

Strategic Assumptions
12.

The following assumptions have been made in planning:

(a) Operation Serval forces will adjust force levels/withdraw taking into
consideration the capabilities of AFISMA and the MDSF to conduct operations.
(b) AFISMA troop-contributing countries will meet pledged force levels,
though capability shortfalls may remain.
(c) AU Member States and international partners continue to provide
resources, funding, training and equipment in support of AFISMA and MDSF.
(d)

The MDSF will achieve its training objectives in due time.

(e)

The road map for the Transition will be fully implemented.

(f) Malian authorities and neighbouring/core countries will support AFISMA
operations.
(d)

Constraints and Limitations
13.

The main constraints and limitations are:
(a)

Full deployment of AFISMA within the envisaged timeline.

(b)

Identification and accessibility of financial and logistical support.

IV. Mission area
14. The Mission area is defined by the territory of the Republic of Mali, but may
also include parts of territories of willing neighbouring and core countries, subject
to their agreement and within appropriate legal frameworks.
(a)

MDSF Strength
15. It is planned that 10,500 MDSF personnel will be supported. This includes
8,000 military personnel and 2,500 security forces comprising the police,
gendarmerie, national guards and civil protection services that will be involved in
security tasks. All of the above will require training assistance such as counterterrorism, communications, police and special operations, basic and advanced
combat skills, mobility and counter-mobility skills, counter-improvised explosive
device, fire support, and human rights skills as appropriate. The European Union
Training Mission (EUTM) will provide some of this training to the military. Basic
and specialised equipment is required including for force protection, police
operations, counter-improvised explosive device and demining operations.

8

13-26131

S/2013/163

(b)

AFISMA strengths
16.

The total strength of AFISMA is 9,620 composed as follows:
– Civilian component. 173 comprising substantive and support staff at the
Mission HQ and Sector Offices, and 50 civilian human rights observers (see
Annex A).
– Military component. 8,859 comprising infantry battalions, engineers, fire
support, air assets, and logistics units (see Annex B for Troops to Tasks
Analysis). As of 20 February 2013, 7,670 pledged and 5,397 already deployed.
– Police component. 590 comprising four FPUs and 30 IPOs (see Annex C for
Police component organogram).

V. Mission
17. AFISMA, in support of MDSF, with international assistance will conduct
security operations to recover and stabilize the regions in Mali, in order to
contribute to the creation of the necessary conditions for a stable, democratic Malian
State exercising authority over its national territory and assuming its responsibilities
in the protection of the population, properties and livelihood means, and addressing
regional security challenges, particularly international terrorism and transnational
criminal activities (see Annex D for AFISMA Organizational Structure).

VI. AFISMA concept of operations
18. There will be a complete deployment, expansion and consolidation of
AFISMA in close coordination with the Mali Defence and Security Forces (MDSF)
and other allied forces operating in Mali. AFISMA will continue to deploy in the
Mission area and support the MDSF to complete the restoration of the territorial
integrity of Mali. AFISMA will also support the MDSF in carrying out stabilization
activities. Upon completion of its mandate AFISMA will be redeployed from the
Mission area.
19. Mali, the core countries 1 and other neighbouring countries, with the support of
the international community, will then continue their efforts to consolidate security
and stability within the region.
(a)

Civilian Concept of Operations
20. The AFISMA civilian component is composed of a substantive and a support
section (in addition to civilian personnel of the Senior Mission Leadership Team).
The relatively small size of the AFISMA civilian component necessitates that the
mission’s substantive civilian section be multifunctional and crosscutting in its
approach. The substantive section is primarily responsible for the implementation of
activities in support of the mission mandate and will on the basis of priorities as
articulated by the Malian authorities “provide support as requested (and within its
means) to the transition and post transition period whilst assisting in the
development of the necessary capacities for the extension and consolidation of state

__________________
1 Core countries are Mali, Algeria, Mauritania and the Niger.

13-26131

9

S/2013/163

authority; rapidly deploy human rights observers to monitor the human rights
situation and support the promotion and respect for fundamental human rights and
freedom across Mali; support the road map for the Transition; support the Malian
authorities in their primary responsibility to protect the population whilst providing
guidance to the Mission on the mainstreaming of protection considerations into
Mission operations; and support the government in creating an enabling
environment for the delivery of humanitarian assistance and for the voluntary return
of internally displaced persons and refugees”.
21. AFISMA employs an integrated support approach wherein military and police
second personnel to the civilian-led mission support team. The mission support
component is responsible for providing administrative and logistical support on a
mission-wide basis, and in this way supports the mission in executing its mandated
tasks in a manner that is effective, timely and coordinated. The mission support
component of AFISMA is divided into three sections namely Integrated Support
Services (ISS) which provides and oversees integrated mission logistical support
requirements including engineering, transportation and communication and
information technology amongst others; Administrative Services Section (ASS)
which plans, organizes, implements, manages and oversees the activities of all
administrative support services of the Mission; and the Finance, Accounting and
Budget (FAB) Section which will ensure the efficient management of AFISMA’s
financial resources.
(b)

Military concept of operations
22. The military component of AFISMA, in the role of a supporting force to the
MDSF, deploys in the area of operations in Mali to support the operations of the
MDSF. AFISMA will establish presence in key localities in close coordination with
the MDSF.
23. The AFISMA military force will support the MDSF in recovering occupied
territories and neutralising the terrorist threat throughout the area of operations.
AFISMA will also mount stability operations in support of the MDSF in the
recovered areas thereby contributing to the establishment of secure conditions in
addition to supporting the Malian responsibility for protection of civilians.
24. AFISMA military component will actively support the return and
reestablishment of legitimate government authorities, provision of essential services
and the conduct of elections. It will also actively assist the deployment of human
rights observers and will create enabling conditions for the delivery of humanitarian
assistance. Subsequently AFISMA will hand over its security tasks to an
operationally capable MDSF or follow on force based on the prevailing conditions.

(c)

Police concept of operations
25. The police component of the mission, with the support of the international
community, will coordinate with relevant stakeholders, including the Centre de
Coordination des Opérations de Sécurisation des Institutions de la Transition 2
(CCOSIT). It will also deploy its formed police units (FPUs) in the protection of

__________________
2 The CCOSIT is the Malian coordination centre responsible for the security activities of the

institutions of the Malian political transition.

10

13-26131

S/2013/163

AFISMA personnel, property and provide any other support as may be requested by
the Malian authorities.
26. As the MDSF stabilizes the recovered areas and prepares to deploy in areas of
the northern regions, the Police element, when requested, could support Malian
Security Forces (MSF) Police and security agencies to resume their responsibilities
for the establishment and maintenance of law and order and public safety.
Assistance may also consist of addressing gaps identified with regard to security
threats to the restoration of State authority and the protection of the population with
respect for international human rights and international humanitarian and refugee
law.
(d)

Mission Support Concept
27. AFISMA will have an integrated support organisation utilising a combination
of Mission owned, contingent owned and contracted assets and services to provide
support to the military, police and civilian components across all phases of AFISMA
operations. Specifically, immediate support will be provided to the civilian
component and staff officers. Support to military and police contingents will be
provided following the expiration of the 90-day self-sufficiency period. The
AFISMA integrated support organisation will cover supply, transport, medical,
logistics services, Communications and Information Technology Systems (CITS)
and operational support contracts capabilities. A support network will be deployed
in order to support both the geographical spread of troops and the extended lines of
communication (LoCs) including the main supply routes (MSRs).
28. The resources provided will be centrally managed and controlled by the
mission support component but delivered through a decentralised distribution
system. The physical distribution will be based on contracted logistics support
complemented by Mission controlled military logistics enabling units and Mission
logistics owned assets. The primary means of delivery of goods to the logistics hubs
will be through road convoys supplemented by air assets as may be feasible.
However, due to both the asymmetric and conventional threat to the supply network,
significant risk mitigation measures would be put in place. These measures include
the establishment of sufficient reserves in forward areas and the use of military
second line enabling units depending on the operational situation. The delivery and
distribution system and level of reserves held along the network could therefore
vary from one commodity (fuel, rations and water) to the other depending on the
prevailing situation.
29. Logistics support will be provided down to unit level in all phases and under
certain situations directly to troops in forward areas. A Main Logistics Base (MLB),
to hold strategic reserves as considered necessary, will be established at Bamako
and additional logistics bases including two Forward Logistics Bases (FLBs)
established in the forward areas. A logistics node could also be established in
Niamey when considered necessary. Units close to Bamako will be supported
directly from the MLB while the FLBs will support and provide services to
locations in the forward areas. As may be considered necessary, additional Logistics
bases will be established within the mission area to include mobile distribution
points (MDPs) along the axes of advance to support mobile operations. These will
then form the hubs from which logistics will be delivered to the front line positions
through the most economical means.

13-26131

11

S/2013/163

30. AFISMA battalions will deploy with a minimum of a level I medical
capability, containing at least two forward medical teams. Two Level II medical
facilities will be provided within the mission area and MEDEVAC to all level III
and IV facilities will be provided in the region. Mission air assets, supplemented if
necessary by contract, will conduct CASEVAC/MEDEVAC. Level 1 and 2 medical
support for the Mission HQ (Including the FHQ) will be contracted in Bamako and
the Level 2 medical facility contract extended to the QRF and other units supported
from Bamako. Level III and IV services will be provided outside the mission area
from Accra, Ghana and Dakar, Senegal as considered appropriate. The MDSF will
have an independent support system from the AFISMA integrated support network.
However, where considered feasible, MDSF logistics support will be co-located
with the AFISMA support locations.

VII. Implementation of the AFISMA mandate
31. AFISMA operations will be conducted in three phases, some of which may
overlap.
Phase 1: Complete Deployment, Expansion and Consolidation (M to M+180)
Civilian Component Tasks
(a) Establishment of Mission Headquarters in Bamako including deployment
of Senior Mission Leadership (SML).
(b) Operationalise the Integrated Support Services (ISS) concept in order to
provide sufficient support to all mission components.
(c)

Deployment of Human Rights Observer Group throughout the Mission

(d)

Develop and implement strategic communication strategy.

area.

(e) Key mandate-implementation sections (Political and Civil Affairs,
Humanitarian Liaison, Protection, Gender and Human Rights and Public
Information) established and facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance and
carry out human rights monitoring, support the protection of the population, support
to implementation of the Malian Government road map for the Transition.
Military Component Tasks
(a)

Complete planned deployment into the Mission area.

(b) Expand current AFISMA operations and establish presence further north
to include Timbuktu, Bourem, Aguelhoc, Menaka, Kidal and Tessalit.
(c)

MDSF to re-establish Malian territorial integrity.

(d) Establish logistic capabilities to include logistic battalion and operational
stocks throughout the Mission area.
(e)

Complete equipping and resourcing of AFISMA and MDSF.

(f) Conduct joint security operations with MDSF to degrade armed
opposition groups.

12

13-26131

S/2013/163

(g)

Support disarmament initiatives.

(h)

MDSF to commence training with EUTM.

(i)

Facilitate access to humanitarian assistance in the recovered areas.

(j)

Conduct Civil-Military Cooperation (CIMIC) activities.

(k)

Complete command and control structures and coordination mechanisms.

Police Component Tasks
(a)

Establish the police component headquarters.

(b) Support the MSF in expansion of the security and rule of law presence
throughout Malian territory.
(c) Deploy IPOs and 4 FPUs in Bamako (1), Sevare (1) and Gao (2) to
maintain law and order in support of MSF as may be required.
(d)

Provide protection to AFISMA personnel and property.

(e)

Deploy IPOs for liaison and coordination including with the CCOSIT.

Phase 2: Stabilisation (M+120 to M+360)
Civilian Component Tasks
(a) Establishment of civilian presence in sectors, based on need, security and
logistical considerations.
(b) Human Rights Observer Group transitions to providing capacity building
support to the Malian authorities for human rights.
(c)

Provision of support to the road map for the Transition.

(d)

Support to stabilisation efforts of the Malian authorities.

Military Component Tasks
(a)

Maintain a safe and secure environment.

(b) Perform security tasks related to the road map for the Transition as
requested.
(c)

Facilitate the access to humanitarian assistance.

(d)

Continue to support disarmament initiatives.

(e)

MDSF continue training with EUTM.

Police Component Tasks
(a) Assist the MSF to ensure security necessary in support of the road map
for the Transition as requested.
(b)

13-26131

Continue to support the MSF to maintain law and order and public safety.

13

S/2013/163

Phase 3: Transition (M+300 to M+365)
Civilian Component Tasks
(a)

Prepare Mission for future operations or liquidation.

Police Component Tasks
(a)
(b)
mission.

Set conditions conducive for a transition.
Transfer responsibility for residual tasks to the MSF or a follow-on

Military Component Tasks
(a)

AFISMA to hand over tasks to MDSF and/or a follow-on mission.

(b) MDSF will continue stabilisation activities to maintain security and
territorial integrity.

VIII. Command and control
32. The MDSF and AFISMA will have separate chains of command. The AU
operational authority of AFISMA is vested in the Chairperson of the AUC who has
delegated overall responsibility for all Peace Support Operations to the
Commissioner for Peace and Security. With the approval from the AU PSC, the
Chairperson of the AUC in consultation with ECOWAS has appointed a Special
Representative (SRCC) as Head of Mission who is responsible for implementing the
Mission’s mandate and exercises overall AUC authority over civilian, police and
military components of AFISMA in the Mission area. The SRCC reports to the
Chairperson of the AUC through the Commissioner for Peace and Security. The
Force Commander and Police Commissioner have operational control over the
assigned forces. The Deputy Special Representative (DSRCC) will have
responsibility for management of the civilian substantive units. See Annex E for
proposed AFISMA Command and Control structure.

IX. Coordinating mechanisms
33. At the strategic level, the Mali Integrated Task Force (MITF) comprising AU,
ECOWAS, United Nations and other partners has been established at the AUC. The
MITF will ensure coordinated strategic implementation of the relevant decisions of
AU, ECOWAS and the United Nations on the situation in Mali. At the operational
level, the Joint Coordination Mechanism (JCM) will be established under the
leadership of the Head of Mission to coordinate support to the mission. The JCM
will be composed of Malian authorities, United Nations, ECOWAS and other
partners/actors.
Annexes

14

A)

Civilian component personnel

B)

Military Troop to Task Analysis

13-26131

S/2013/163

13-26131

C)

Police component Organogram

D)

AFISMA Organisational Structure

E)

AFISMA proposed Command and Control and Mission Headquarters structure

15

S/2013/163

Annex A: Civilian component strength
Table A: Staffing for Mission Management Functions
Office of SRCC
1 x SRCC
1 x Political Advisor (P6)
1 x Spokesperson (P5)
1 x Legal Advisor (P5)
1 x Electoral Advisor (P5)
1 x Senior Political Officer, Sahel (P4)
1 x Environment and Development
Officer, Sahel (P3)
1 x Special Assistant (P3)
1 x Secretariat Staff (GSA 5)
TOTAL = 9
Office of Head of Mission Support

16

Office of Deputy SRCC
1 x D/SRCC
1 x Special Assistant (P3)
TOTAL = 2

Office of Chief of Staff

1 x HMS (D1)
1 x Special Assistant (P3)
TOTAL = 2

1 x CoS (P5)
1 x Office Coordinator (P3)
TOTAL = 2

Conduct and Discipline Unit
1 x Head (P5)
1 x Conduct and Discipline Officer (P3)
TOTAL = 2
Seconded personnel from Military and
Police to reinforce the staffing of the Unit
as required

Safety and Security Unit
1 x Chief Security Officer (P5)
1 x Deputy Chief Security Officer (P4)
1 x Security Officer (P3)
TOTAL = 3

MAC/MOC/MPEC
1 x Head of MAC (P4)
TOTAL = 1
Seconded personnel from Military and
Police to reinforce the staffing of the
Cells/Centre as appropriate

Integrated Mission Training Centre
1 x Head of Training (P5)
TOTAL = 1
Seconded personnel from Military and
Police to reinforce the staffing of the
Centre as required

Seconded personnel from Military and
Police to reinforce the staffing of the
Unit as required

13-26131

S/2013/163

Table B: Staffing for Substantive Sections
Political and Civil Affairs Section
1 x Senior Political and Civil Affairs Officer
(P5) (Head)
1 x Political Affairs Officer (P3)
1 x Civil Affairs Officer (P3)
1 x Elections Officer (P3)
TOTAL = 4

Humanitarian Liaison Section
1 x Senior Humanitarian Liaison Officer
(P4) (Head)
1 x Humanitarian Liaison Officer (P3)
TOTAL = 2

Public Information Section

Protection, Human Rights and Gender
Section
1 x Senior Public Information Officer / 1 x Human Rights Officer (P5) (Head)
1 x Protection Officer (P3)
Deputy Spokesperson (P4) (Head)
1 x Human Rights Officer (P3)
1 x Public Information Officer (P3)
1 x Gender Officer (P3)
1 x Photographer/Videographer (GSA 5)
2 x Technical Support Staff (P2)
TOTAL = 3
TOTAL = 6
The Section will serve as the Secretariat
and will provide technical support to the
Human Rights Observer Team
TOTAL = 37
Table C: Staffing for Mission Support Functions
Chief: Administrative Services (Reports HM)
1x Head (P5) + Assistant (GSA 5)
Human Resources Unit
Procurement/Contract Unit
1 x Senior Human Resources Officer (P4)
(Head)
1 x Database/Records Officer (P2)
1 x Payroll Officer (P2)
1 x Human Resources Assistant (GSA 5)
TOTAL = 4

13-26131

1 x Senior Procurement Officer (P4) (Head)
1 x Procurement Officers (P3)
TOTAL = 2

17

S/2013/163

General Services Unit

Travel and Protocol

1 x General Services Officer (P3) (Head)
1 x Contracts Management Officer (P2)
3 x Cleaners (GSB)
5 x Language Assistants (GSB)
TOTAL = 10

1 x Travel and Protocol Officer (P3) (Head)
1 x Travel Officer (GSA)
TOTAL = 2

Asset Control and Inventory Unit

Contingent-Owned Equipment Unit

1 x Asset Control and Inventory Officer (P3)
(Head)
1 x Asset Manager (GSA)
TOTAL = 2

1 x COE Officer (P3) (Head)
2 x Inspectors (P2)
TOTAL = 3

TOTAL = 25
Chief: Integrated Support Services (Reports to HMS)
1x Head (P5) + Assistant (GSA 5)
Transport Unit
1 x Transport Officer (P3) (Head)
1 x Transport Officer (P2)
10 x Drivers (GSB)
TOTAL = 12

Medical Unit
1 x Senior Medical Officer (P4) (Head)
1 x Medical Planning Officer (P3)
TOTAL = 2

18

Joint Support Operations Centre
1 x Chief JSOC (P4) (Head)
1 x Chief Logistics Planner (P3)
1 x Chief Logistics Operations Planner (P3)
1 x Civilian Logistics Planner (P2)
TOTAL = 4

Supply Unit
1 x Supply Officer (P3) (Head)
1 x Stores Officer (P2)
TOTAL = 2

13-26131

S/2013/163

Engineering Unit
1 x Senior Engineering Officer (P4)
TOTAL = 1

Joint Mission Air Operations Centre
1 x Senior Air Operations Officer (P4) (Head)
1 x Aviation Officer – Planning (P3)
1 x Aviation Officer – Tasking (P3)
TOTAL = 3

Movement Control

Communications and Information Technology

1 x Head of MOVCON (P3) (Head)
1 x MOVCON Planner (P2)
TOTAL = 2

1 x Senior CITS Officer (P4) (Head)
1 x CITS Officer (P3)
TOTAL = 2

TOTAL = 30
Chief: Finance and Budget (Reports to DBFA at AU Commission and Finance Department at
ECOWAS Commission via HMS and SRCC)
1x Head P5 + Assistant (GSA 5)
Budget and Reporting Unit

Financial Management Unit

1 x Finance Officer (P3) (Head)
2 x Finance Officer – Asset Management (P2)
TOTAL = 3

1 x Finance Officer (P3) (Head)
3 x Finance Officer – Payroll Management (P2)
1 x Cashier (GSA 5)
TOTAL = 5

Certification Unit
1 x Senior Certifying Officer (P3) (Head)
1 x Certifying Officer (P2)
TOTAL = 2
TOTAL = 12
TOTAL: 67

13-26131

19

S/2013/163

Table D: Summary of AFISMA Civilian Staff Component
MHQ CIVILIAN STAFFING REQUIREMENTS
Grade

Total

D1

3

P6

1

P5

12

P4

12

P3
P2
GSA
GSB

32
18
11
15
TOTAL: 104
INTERNATIONAL STAFF: 78
LOCAL STAFF: 26

HUMAN RIGHTS OBSERVER GROUP
Phase 1

50

Phase 2

20

TOTAL PHASE 1: 154 Civilian Personnel
TOTAL PHASE 2: 124 Civilian Personnel
At time of deployment to sectors, an additional 40% of MHQ civilian personnel strength will be required
to staff 2 sector offices. The total AFISMA civilian personnel strength for MHQ and three sectors
offices would thus amount to approximately 173 personnel.

20

13-26131

S/2013/163

Annex B: TROOP TO TASK MATRIX
ENTITY/UNIT

NUMBERS

BROAD TASKS

Force Headquarters

85

C²

Sector Headquarters

40 + 40

C²

5200 + 650

Stability Ops and 1

Infantry Battalions(650)

No

8+1

REMARKS

reserve
Engineer Units

5

620

Counter mobility &
mobility–
Construction River Crossing

Logistic Units

1

729

Support – Sustain – CSS / Transport /
Maintain

Supply / 2 Medical
level 2

Air assets:

30

800

06 Fighter ground Attk AC
08 Attk Helicopters
08 Tactical Transport
Helicopters
06 Tactical Transport AC
02 Liaison/Recce AC

Logistics – Combat

Generated :04

Air Spt – Air Coord

Alpha Jets
01 Mi 35 (Attk), 04
Mi 25 (Tpt), 01 DA
42, 03 UH and 01
utility Aircraft

Others (CIS / Special Forces / /

695

CIS / Special Forces

Info Ops and Intelligence

/ Info Ops /

Assets / Force Protection /

Intelligence Assets

Riverine Ops

/ Force Protection /
Riverine Ops

TOTAL

13-26131

8859

21

S/2013/163

ANNEX C: POLICE COMPONENT ORGANOGRAM

Overall AFISMA Police Organogram
Head of Mission
Police HQ

24

02

CCOSIT

01

J/MAC

01

JOC

FPU

FPU

FPU

FPU

01

J/LOC

140

140

140

140

01

JOCC

TOTAL STRENGTH: 590

22

13-26131

S/2013/163

ANNEX D: AFISMA ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE

SRCC

CoS

MAC

MPEC

MOC

Police
Commissioner

Force
Commander

Deputy Police
Commissioner

DFC

Chief:
Logistics
Chief:
Admin and
Personnel

D/SRCC
(Operations
and Support)

Conduct
and
Discipline
Unit

D/SRCC
(Substantive)

J1

J2

J3/
J5

J4

J6

J7

J8

J9

FMO

Force
Eng

Sahel
Cell

Political and
Civil Affairs
Humanitarian
Liaison
Public
Information

CAS

Military Rep

13-26131

Safety &
Security
Unit

HMS
CoS

Chief:
Operations

Advisors

Integrated Mission
Training Centre

CISS
Protection, Human
Rights and Gender

CFAB

Human Rights
Observer Team

Sector

Police
Rep

Sector

Civilian
Component
Reps

Sector
Administrative
Office

Sector Security
Team

23

S/2013/163

ANNEX E: COMMAND AND CONTROL STRUCTURE
MITF
Government of
Mali

AU

CEMGA

SRCC

COIA
Commander
MDSF

LO

Force
Commander

Police
Commissioner

JCM
Strategic
Partner
Coordination
Forum
Operational

D/SRCC

HMS

DFC
Joint Planning
and Coordination
Centre

Partner Liaison and
Coordination
Tactial

Command
Post
Units

Units
OPCON
COMD
MDSF
COORD

24

13-26131

S/2013/163

Enclosure II
[Original: English and French]

Communiqué
The Peace and Security Council of the African Union (AU), at its 358th
meeting, held on 7 March 2013, in Addis Ababa, adopted the following decision on
the situation in Mali:
Council,
1.
Takes note of the Report of the Chairperson of the Commission on the
evolution of the situation in Mali [PSC/AHG/3 (CCCLVIII)], as well as the
briefings made by the Commissioner for Peace and Security and the High
Representative of the AU for Mali and the Sahel, Head of African-led International
Support Mission in Mali (AFISMA). Council also takes note of the statements
made by the representatives of Mali, the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) and the United Nations, the European Union (EU), France, the
United Kingdom and the United States of America;
Recalls its previous Communiqués on the Situation in Mali and
2.
reaffirms its unwavering commitment to the national unity and territorial integrity
of Mali;
3.
Welcomes the progress made in the efforts to recapture the regions in the
North of Mali, occupied by armed terrorist and criminal groups, with the prompt and
effective assistance provided by France. Council also welcomes the acceleration in
the deployment of AFISMA and the ongoing security and stabilisation operations in
order to facilitate the consolidation of gains made on the ground. Council notes
with satisfaction the appointment of the High Representative for Mali and the
Sahel, former President Pierre Buyoya of Burundi, as the Special Representative of
the Chairperson of the Commission and Head of AFISMA, as well as the
appointment of Ambassador Cheaka Touré of Togo, as Deputy Special
Representative. Council also notes with satisfaction the establishment, in Addis
Ababa, of the Integrated Task Force on Mali and the Joint Coordination Mechanism
in Bamako, under the leadership of the Head of AFISMA. Council welcomes the
consultations undertaken by the Chairperson of the Commission and the
Commissioner for Peace and Security with various African and international actors,
including Presidents Alassane Ouattara of Côte d’Ivoire and Idriss Deby Itno of
Chad, as well as with the United Nations Secretary-General, and the interactions of
the Head of AFISMA with the Malian authorities and bilateral partners;
Expresses its deep appreciation to all the forces engaged in the security
4.
and stabilisation operations in the North of Mali, and expresses its deepest
condolences to Chad, France and Togo for the loss of troops in their respective
contingents. Council also expresses its gratitude to all Troop Contributing
Countries (TCCs) and Police Contributing Countries (PCCs) to AFISMA for their
sacrifice and contribution to the efforts for the liberation and restoration of the
authority of the State of Mali in the regions in the North of the country. Council
reiterates its appreciation to the core countries for their commitment to facilitate
the operations of the AFISMA and the French and Malian forces in the North of
Mali;

13-26131

25

S/2013/163

5.
Appeals to all countries and organisations that made pledges to support
AFISMA and the Malian Defence and Security Forces at the Donor Conference,
held in Addis Ababa, on 29 January 2013, to expeditiously honour their pledges, so
as to allow AFISMA to operate in the best possible conditions and to effectively
fulfill its mandate aimed particularly at assisting Mali in regaining the territories
still occupied, to ensure the security of the institutions and the people and stabilise
the security environment in the country;
Notes with satisfaction the adoption by the Government of Mali of the
6.
Roadmap for the Transition, and its subsequent approval by the National Assembly
and urges all Malian stakeholders to work towards the full implementation of the
road map. Council reaffirms its strong support to the authorities of the Transition
and takes note of the timetable envisaged for the organisation of the general
election;
7.
Decides to endorse the decision of the Ordinary Summit of ECOWAS,
held in Yamoussoukro, on 27 and 28 February 2013, that the general elections will
mark the end of the Transition. Council encourages the Government of Mali to
finalise all the arrangements provided for in the road map, and welcomes the
establishment of the Dialogue and Reconciliation Commission by the Council of
Ministers on 6 March 2013 and calls for its speedy operationalization, with the full
support of all Malian stakeholders. Council warns, once again, all individuals,
military or civilian, who interfere in the conduct of the Transition or the functioning
of the chain of the military command under the civilian control, and who would be
involved in violation of human rights;
Urges all stakeholders in Mali to respect Human Rights and International
8.
Humanitarian Law, and expresses its determination to take appropriate measures
against any violation of those rights;
9.
Commends the convening, in Brussels, on 5 February 2013, of the third
meeting of the Support and Follow-up Group and fully supports the implementation
of the conclusions of that meeting;
10. Welcomes the organisation, in Bamako, from 15 to 21 February 2013, of
the Planning Conference, which, with the participation of experts from Mali,
ECOWAS, the core countries, the AU, United Nations, EU and other bilateral
partners, helped to finalise the revised, harmonised AFISMA concept of operations,
pursuant to Paragraph 7 (a) of the Communiqué [PSC/AHG/COMM/2. (CCCLIII)]
of its 353rd meeting, held on 25 January 2013. Council notes with satisfaction that
the revised and harmonised concept of operations has been endorsed by ECOWAS at
its Ordinary Summit held in Yamoussoukro;
11. Decides to endorse the harmonized and revised AFISMA concept of
operations. In this regard, Council requests the TCCs and PCCs to accelerate the
pace of deployment in the theatre of operations;
12. Requests the Chairperson of the Commission to immediately transmit
the harmonized and revised concept of operations to the Secretary-General of the
United Nations, and requests the Security Council to consider the document
favorably. Council reiterates its request to the Security Council to authorise the
immediate establishment of a support package funded through United Nations
assessed contributions, as well as the transitional arrangements to allow the

26

13-26131

S/2013/163

completion of the deployment of AFISMA and the effective conduct of its
operations;
13. Supports the envisaged transformation of AFISMA into a United
Nations operation. In this regard, Council stresses that a United Nations operation
should, in order to positively contribute to the consolidation of the progress made in
Mali and the promotion of peace and security in the region, comply with the
following parameters:
(i) the need for such a Mission to be provided with a robust mandate based
on Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, defined in consultation
with Mali, the AU and ECOWAS. This mandate should aim to support the
Malian Government in strengthening the authority of the State throughout its
territory and to preserve the unity and territorial integrity of the country,
including the fight against criminal and terrorist networks operating in the
North of Mali;
(ii) the need for the United Nations to consult closely and adequately with
the AU and ECOWAS throughout the proposed transformation process of
AFISMA into a United Nations operation, as well as the appointment of the
future Special Representative of the Secretary-General who will lead the
planned Mission in a spirit of continuity, with regard to the leadership of the
Mission and the contingents;
(iii) the mobilisation, in favour of AFISMA, of financial and logistical
support that makes it possible to build the operational capacity of the Mission
and to facilitate its early transformation into a United Nations operation,
particularly through the establishment by the United Nations of an appropriate
logistical support mechanism to be operational by the end of the three-month
period during which the contingents are supported by their respective
countries;
(iv) the support for the central political role of the AU and ECOWAS, both in
supporting the transition through the implementation of the road map
developed in this regard, as well as in the formulation and implementation of
the governance and other reforms to be carried out to address the root causes
of the multidimensional crisis faced by Mali; and
(v) the support for regional cooperation in the field of security, considering
the transnational nature of the threat of terrorism and crime, and given the
potential to be realised within the African Peace and Security Architecture;
14. Requests the Chairperson of the Commission to transmit this
communiqué and the revised concept of operations to the United Nations SecretaryGeneral and, through him, to the Security Council, as well as to mobilise, in close
consultation with ECOWAS, the support of partners of Africa for the adequate
consideration of the concerns expressed above;
15. Requests the Chairperson of the Commission to initiate immediate
consultations with the President of the ECOWAS Commission for the establishment,
in the wake of the early transformation of AFISMA into a United Nations operation,
of a Joint AU-ECOWAS Support Mission in Mali, whose mandate will be
determined in close consultation with the Government of Mali;

13-26131

27

S/2013/163

16. Stresses the importance of formulating a comprehensive post-conflict
reconstruction strategy for Mali, and requests the Commission in coordination with
the Government of Mali, ECOWAS, the United Nations Envoy for Mali and the
Sahel, as well as bilateral and multilateral partners, to ensure the coherence of
regional, continental and international efforts. In this regard, Council welcomes the
offer by the Government of the Arab Republic of Egypt to host an expert-level
workshop on the issue;
17.

28

Decides to remain actively seized of the matter.

13-26131
