S/PV.8543

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8543rd meeting

Tuesday, 11 June 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Sheikh Al Sabah . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kuwait)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Adom
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Kuzmin
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Allen
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Missing persons in armed conflict
Letter dated 3 June 2019 from the Permanent Representative of Kuwait to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2019/458)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-17030 (E)
*1917030*

S/PV.8543

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2019/475, which contains the text of a draft resolution
that has been sponsored by the countries that appear on
the list that is also before Council members.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.

Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Missing persons in armed conflict
Letter dated 3 June 2019 from the Permanent
Representative of Kuwait to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2019/458)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of the following
countries to participate in this meeting: Albania,
Algeria, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Bulgaria, Canada, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, the
Czech Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Egypt, Estonia, Finland, Georgia,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iraq, Israel, Italy,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Montenegro, Morocco,
North Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Palau, Portugal,
Qatar, Romania, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, Spain, the Sudan, Sweden,
Switzerland, Tajikistan, Ukraine, the United Arab
Emirates and Uruguay. There being no objection, it is
so decided.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Reena
Ghelani, Director for Operations and Advocacy of
the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, and Mr. Peter Maurer, President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross.
Mr. Maurer is joining the meeting via videoteleconference from Geneva.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/458, which contains a letter
dated 3 June 2019 from the Permanent Representative
of Kuwait to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.
2/19

11/06/2019

A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Belgium, China, Côte d’Ivoire, Dominican
Republic, Equatorial Guinea, France, Germany,
Indonesia, Kuwait, Peru, Poland, Russian
Federation, South Africa, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America
The President (spoke in Arabic): The draft resolution
received 15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has
been adopted unanimously as resolution 2474 (2019).
I now give the floor to Ms. Ghelani.
Ms. Ghelani: I am pleased to deliver this statement
on behalf of the Emergency Relief Coordinator,
Mr. Mark Lowcock.
We very much welcome today’s discussion and
adoption of resolution 2474 (2019), on missing persons
in armed conflict. Importantly, the resolution affirms
the obligation of parties to conflict to prevent persons
from going missing and to clarify their fate if they do
go missing. It comes not a moment too soon. Alarming
numbers of persons go missing in armed conflicts.
They might be captured by warring parties and held
incommunicado in secret locations, where they may
ultimately die. They might be victims of extrajudicial
executions, their bodies hidden in unmarked graves.
Sometimes they are civilians merely fleeing violence
for their own safety, girls and boys who become
separated from their families, and elderly persons or
persons with disabilities who are unable to flee or are
left behind. They might be civilians or combatants,
killed during fighting, and their remains improperly
managed or disposed of.
Whatever the circumstances, the families of the
missing are left in a state of absolute despair, not
knowing the fate or whereabouts of their loved ones.
When the missing person is also the breadwinner, the
impact on families can be economically devastating.
In some situations, the relatives of missing persons
19-17030

11/06/2019

S/PV. 8543

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

find it hard to remarry, claim their inheritance, receive
benefits and rebuild their lives in the face of legal
and administrative obstacles. Moreover, the anguish
and uncertainty can jeopardize the prospects for
reconstructing the social fabric of conflict-affected
communities and societies.
There is no comprehensive figure for those missing
in conflict, but what we do know is that the situation
is dire. For example — as the Council will hear from
the President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC) — more than 10,000 cases of missing
persons have been opened by the ICRC in relation to
the Syrian conflict. The organization has also received
13,000 requests for support in finding missing relatives
from families in Nigeria. In Myanmar, South Sudan
and Yemen, United Nations bodies have reported cases
of enforced disappearance of persons deprived of their
liberty, along with many other persons reported to be
missing. Meanwhile, cases of missing persons that
occurred years and even decades ago in the Balkans,
Lebanon, Nepal and Sri Lanka, for example, are still
pending clarification.
What we need, as the Secretary-General noted
in his report last month on the protection of civilians
(S/2019/373), is for parties to conflict to respect and
ensure respect for international humanitarian law as it
relates to missing persons. The law prohibits enforced
disappearance. It requires that parties take all feasible
measures to account for those reported missing as a
result of armed conflict. It enshrines the right of the
families of the missing to receive information on their
fate and whereabouts. In turn, this entails putting in
place appropriate domestic laws and policies, including
mechanisms to search for the missing and respond to
the needs of their relatives. These mechanisms should
entail the collection, management and protection of
information on missing persons; the establishment of
necessary forensic and other processes for managing
human remains; and the provision of psychological,
legal and financial support needed by the families of
the missing.
The resolution adopted by the Council today is
rightly ambitious. It calls upon States and parties
to conflict to put in place these and other specific
measures. We would encourage parties to conflict and
States to avail themselves of the support of the ICRC
and other key actors in establishing the necessary legal
and policy frameworks related to missing persons and
the needs of their families.

As the resolution rightly stresses, strengthening the
role and capacity of relevant existing national, regional
and international mechanisms to provide advice and
support to Member States will be essential. We would
also encourage Member States to engage in networking,
exchange of experience, best practices and other means
of cooperation on the issue of missing persons as a
result of armed conflict.
In that regard, we welcome the launch this year of
the ICRC Missing Persons Project, which will build
a community of practice; bring together experts and
practitioners to work with families, Member States,
international organizations and other actors to help
stop people from going missing; find those who have
gone missing and support their families.
The scale of the problem can and must be addressed,
principally by respecting and ensuring respect for
international humanitarian law. For the sake of those
missing now and who may be in the future, and for the
families that suffer so much as they wait for news, it is
incumbent upon us all to take action.
The President (spoke
Ms. Ghelani for her briefing.

in

Arabic):

I

thank

I now give the floor to Mr. Maurer.
Mr. Maurer: Some of the most horrific
consequences of war are those that we cannot see. When
traumas are invisible, they are overlooked, ignored or
deprioritized. This is perhaps most starkly evident when
it comes to the critical issue of missing persons. Every
day, people go missing because of conflict, violence,
disaster or during migration.
Today, as we focus on the issue of missing persons
in armed conflict, I have to report that the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) has observed an
alarming increase in cases recent years. In 2018 alone,
over 45,000 new cases were registered by the ICRC
Central Tracing Agency — the neutral entity mandated
by the Geneva Conventions. We know that this figure
is the tip of the iceberg and does not convey the true
extent of the problem or do justice to the suffering of
each and every family.
I thank Kuwait for its stewardship in bringing
forward this debate. The ICRC welcomes the adoption
of resolution 2474 (2019) as the first Security Council
resolution fully dedicated to the issue missing persons
in conflict and commends the Council’s commitment
to the issue.

19-170303/19

S/PV.8543

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Every time someone goes missing, families wait for
answers. Ricocheting between hope and despair, they
mark anniversaries: one year, two years, ten years. The
trauma of ambiguous loss is one of the deepest wounds
of war. The pain infects whole communities, lasting
decades and preventing societies from reconciling. The
ICRC is a daily witness to this suffering. Our teams are
frequently approached with pleas for help — mothers
searching for sons, husbands searching for their wives.
And sometimes there are answers. Every minute,
the ICRC, together with national Red Cross and Red
Crescent societies, helps a family separated by conflict
to restore contact.
Yet so much more can be done. If parties to conflict
fulfil their obligations to search for missing persons
and if they manage the dead systematically and with
respect, missing persons can be found, remains can
be identified and answers can be given. We have the
legal framework. International humanitarian law sets
out obligations on preventing persons from going
missing in armed conflict and clarifying of the fate and
whereabouts of those who do. And we have practical
experience. Preventing family separation — for
instance, during evacuations — registering all persons
deprived of their liberty or issuing identity disks to
armed forces are all concrete steps that can be taken
today.
What is needed is stronger political will and
cooperation. This is crystal clear to the ICRC, as the
custodian of international humanitarian law and from
decades of experience working with parties to conflicts
to resolve cases of missing persons. The ICRC’s work
extends from chairing coordination mechanisms,
advising on national laws and policies, to registering
detainees, supporting with families and offering
technical forensic expertise.
We have seen what can be achieved through
political will and cooperation. The agreement on
identifying the remains of unidentified soldiers
involved in the Falkland/Malvinas Islands conflict is
a striking example. We also note, too, the joint efforts
of the Gulf War Tripartite Commission on the recovery
of remains in southern Iraq in just the past few weeks.
These breakthroughs offer enormous hope to families
that have waited decades for answers.
Today’s wars pose new challenges but also new
opportunities to search for missing persons. While the
issue remains complex, there is now a wealth of new
4/19

11/06/2019

sources of information that can facilitate the search.
As the ICRC Central Tracing Agency prepares to mark
150 years of service next year, we are modernizing our
approaches, including by investing in improved search
technologies, such as facial recognition.
Additionally, there is a growing body of expertise
and experience, including in forensic science, to
improve prevention and response tactics. The ICRC
is building a community of practice and, through the
Missing Persons Project, it is reaching out to experts
and practitioners, international and non-governmental
organizations, State institutions and families to identify
best practices, develop technical recommendations and
coordinate our efforts.
It is clear to us that the way in which the issue of
missing persons is addressed during and after conflict
can determine the scale of the problem, its repercussions
on communities and future relations between parties to
the conflict. Crucially, cases of missing persons need
to be handled without discrimination; missing persons
and their families are not bargaining chips.
I urge Member States, in implementing today’s
resolution and beyond, to adopt these four steps:
First, States and parties to armed conflicts must
respect and ensure that international humanitarian
law is respected in their operations. They must uphold
families’ right to know; ensure that civilians are
protected; ensure that no one disappears in armed
conflict as result of hostilities or after arrest; and ensure
the systematic and dignified management of the dead.
In particular, we call on parties to conflict to enable the
ICRC to access detention facilities and facilitate family
contact. This important step would go a long way in
preventing those detained from going missing.
Secondly, States must put in place preventative
measures. Without early action, the work to account
for missing people only redoubles, as do the suffering
of families and the future support required to address
their needs. Obligations do not start after hostilities
come to an end.
Thirdly, the issue of the missing must be first and
foremost humanitarian and not part of political agendas
and accountability processes. States must address cases
of missing persons without discrimination. Too often,
we see political manipulation of this issue or families of
former enemies stigmatized or blocked from services.
19-17030

11/06/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Fourthly, States must support professional,
neutral, impartial humanitarian action on the issue
of the missing. Through its technical experts and
institutions, the United Nations can join efforts with
the ICRC and local and international organizations to
support the creation of a global community of practice
and universally recognized technical standards and
recommendations.
We urgently need stronger political will and
commitment on the part of all actors to implement
their obligations on the missing. We ask States to
live up to their responsibilities and to take the steps
necessary to address this profound yet overlooked
humanitarian challenge.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Maurer
for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kuwait.
It is my pleasure to participate today in this
meeting on the important humanitarian issue of missing
persons in armed conflict. I welcome the adoption of
resolution 2474 (2019), drafted and submitted by the
State of Kuwait. The resolution has human and humane
significance because it addresses an issue that is close
to the hearts of the people of Kuwait. It is aimed at
promoting international efforts to address the issue
of missing persons in armed conflict. I also thank all
members for supporting us during the negotiations on
the resolution.
The resolution has important human and
humanitarian aspects. It seeks to promote the
institutional and normative framework for protecting
civilians, as well as international efforts to address the
issue of missing persons in armed conflict. This is in
line with the attention that the Council has focused on
the issue of protecting civilians over the past 20 years
and with the humanitarian resolutions it has adopted,
free of political considerations. The most recent of
these is the resolution we have adopted today with the
aim of preventing any persons from going missing as a
result of conflict.
I commend the briefings by the President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC),
Mr. Peter Maurer, and the Director for Operations
and Advocacy of the United Nations Office for the

S/PV. 8543

Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Reena
Ghelani, which have enriched today’s discussion.
We meet today as the international arena is
confronting increasing challenges that threaten
international peace and security. Those challenges
have become more complexed and intertwined over
the years. Countless civilians are impacted by conflict
and other forms of violence that affect civilians and
have dangerous humanitarian implications that require
comprehensive and sustainable solutions, the absence
of which may prolong conflict and represent an obstacle
to security and stability.
One of the humanitarian challenges addressed in
international norms and laws is the issue of missing
persons in armed conflict, which has a tragic effect on
the lives of affected civilians and their families. We are
totally convinced that its many important dimensions
require the attention of the international community
and should be dealt with at all stages of a conflict and
beyond through clear and tested practices.
International human rights law and international
humanitarian law have identified the tools that we need
to use in order to protect communities and civilians, as
well as to ensure all their rights and a life of freedom
and dignity, free of violations and humanitarian
suffering. These tools include the identification of
solutions pertaining to the issue of missing persons in
armed conflict.
Missing persons are the main victims of any war
or conflict. We must commit to using these tools and
practices in all negotiations in order to build trust in
the political process after a conflict, leading to peace
agreements, peacebuilding and lasting peace. Parties
to a conflict must therefore provide all necessary
information on the fate of missing persons in order to
ensure family reunification or to determine the location
of their remains, in line with agreed international
and humanitarian norms. Furthermore, impunity is
prohibited and those responsible for causing persons to
go missing, for hiding related evidence or for covering
for the perpetrators of crimes against humanity must be
held to account.
Committing
to
international
humanitarian
law will pave the way for peace. The resolution
adopted today by the Council will contribute to
raising international awareness and to bridging
the gaps in the issue of missing persons in armed
conflict. It encourages relevant national, regional and

19-170305/19

S/PV.8543

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

international humanitarian organizations to take the
necessary measures to facilitate search operations and
appropriately manage relevant information on missing
persons in order to determine their fate, while ensuring
the necessary political will and cooperation among all
parties to a conflict.
The State of Kuwait has tragic experience regarding
this humanitarian issue. We are pursuing our efforts to
determine the fate of our missing nationals since the
war that liberated Kuwait from the Iraqi invasion in
1991. The fate of 236 of 605 missing persons has been
determined. We commend the Council for following up
on this issue, in line with its relevant resolutions. We also
commend the Iraqi Government for its cooperation and
serious efforts to finalize this issue in the framework
of the meetings held by the Tripartite Commission
and its Technical Subcommittee, chaired by the ICRC.
We thank the ICRC for its efforts, determination and
assistance to all parties in order to ascertain the fate
of missing persons and alleviate the suffering of their
families and relatives.
We renew our commitment to doing our best to
strengthen the efforts of the international community to
maintain international peace and security and support
peacebuilding and comprehensive development in the
context of preventive diplomacy. We will contribute to
joint humanitarian action, in line with the established
and steadfast foreign policy of the State of Kuwait, as
a tool for conflict prevention and for helping to anchor
the foundations of stability, dialogue and mediation by
addressing all current and emerging crises and global
instability. We will be guided by international law and
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, as well as international resolutions.
Fulfilling our international obligations based on
responsibility, partnership and international solidarity
is the best way to tackle all the challenges that we face.
We commend all parties and organizations for the role
they play in mitigating conflict-related threats and
building peace among countries and parties to conflicts.
The State of Kuwait will use all of its capacities
and make every effort to support those endeavours in
order to promote international cooperation and build
the capacities of other countries to protect civilians
and alleviate humanitarian suffering. In that regard, I
once again express my thanks and appreciation to all
those who cooperated and helped us in adopting today’s
resolution, which ensures that Kuwait and the rest of
6/19

11/06/2019

the world will not forget the issue of missing persons in
armed conflict.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I now give the floor those other members of the
Council who wish to make statements
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I would like to
formally welcome you today, Mr. President, to the
Council. I congratulate you and your team on presiding
over it and thank you for the great work you have
already done this month.
Every year, thousands of people go missing amid
violence and armed conflict. Every one of those missing
persons is an individual — a mother, a father, a son, a
daughter, a sister, a brother. Their absence is directly
felt by their loved ones for a lifetime. Uncertainty
about the fate of family members, not knowing whether
they are dead or alive, can continue for many years
after the fighting ends. The trauma that causes can
undermine relationships among communities and
makes peacebuilding and reconciliation harder.
The circumstances in which disappearances occur
can vary greatly. As armed conflicts create significant
mass displacement, many migrants, refugees or
internally displaced people go missing because they are
afraid or unable to contact their families. Combatants
and civilians may go missing as a result of abductions,
mass atrocities, forced disappearances, arbitrary
detentions and, of course, extrajudicial killings.
Women and children may be particularly at risk of
being abducted for sexual exploitation or enslavement.
The actions of non-State armed groups pose a
particular challenge. In north-east Nigeria, Boko Haram
has abducted hundreds if not thousands of women and
children, including 274 girls kidnapped from their
secondary school in Chibok in 2014. Five years on,
more than 112 of those girls are still missing. In Iraq,
between 5,000 and 7,000 Yazidi women and girls were
abducted and subjected to sexual slavery by Da’esh
in 2014. Today, more than 3,000 Yazidi women and
children remain unaccounted for. Given the scale of the
global missing persons phenomenon, resolution 2474
(2019), adopted this morning, provides an important
opportunity to review and strengthen international
cooperation on this issue.
The United Kingdom welcomes Kuwait’s
leadership on this important and complex issue and
19-17030

11/06/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

we were pleased to vote in favour of the resolution
that Kuwait submitted. The resolution underlines the
existing international legal obligations in this area
and builds on the work of existing mechanisms. It also
underscores that States bear the primary responsibility
to protect their civilians and uphold the human rights of
all individuals within their territory.
But we need international cooperation in
addressing the issue of missing persons, both during
and after conflicts. After conflicts, international
support to resolve this issue is frequently an important
factor in promoting post-conflict peace, security
and reconciliation. In that connection, I would like
to commend the work of the International Red Cross
and Red Crescent Movement and the International
Commission on Missing Persons for providing longterm institutional capacity and technical expertise to
Governments with regard to the location, recovery and
identification of missing persons.
As we have heard today, the issue of missing
persons is a complex and prevalent problem in Iraq and
Kuwait, but also in many conflict situations around
the world.
In Kosovo we welcome the efforts of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
and the Government of Kosovo to address legacy
issues, including investigating cases of missing
persons. According to the International Committee
of the Red Cross, more than 17,000 people are still
registered as missing after the conflicts that broke out
in the former Yugoslavia in the 1990s. Justice for all
victims and their families is a crucial part of future
stability. The United Kingdom calls on both Pristina
and Belgrade to support all necessary action, which
must include assisting existing domestic war-crimes
courts in ensuring that outstanding cases of war crimes
are heard. We urge political leaders to focus on those
efforts rather than divisive political rhetoric, which
only perpetuates antagonism.
Resolution 2474 (2019), adopted today, highlights
the actions that Member States can take to prevent
people from going missing in armed conflict. But sadly
there are too many examples of States deliberately
targeting civilians in armed conflict, including through
arbitrary detention and enforced disappearance. The
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
reported in 2012 that enforced disappearance was used
by the ruling regime in Syria to eliminate opposition

S/PV. 8543

groups and create a climate of fear. The Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab
Republic estimates that at least 60,000 people have gone
missing in Syria since the beginning of the civil war.
Another 17,000 are believed to have gone missing as a
result of Government repression before the beginning
of the conflict. The United Kingdom underlines
the importance of the work that the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011 is undertaking on accountability and takes note
of its plans to develop a system to categorize and
classify material that might be relevant to locating
missing persons.
Long after a conflict ends, families and
communities are deeply affected by those who remain
missing. Since the beginning of my diplomatic career,
in Cyprus, I have met many families in this position,
from a range of conflicts. They suffer every day, and
those of us who have met them cannot fail to be moved
by their suffering. They relive conflicts as others are
able to move on. Whatever positions that Member
States around this table take on individual conflicts, let
us all agree collectively that resolving cases of missing
persons should be a humanitarian priority, and let us
try to remove this issue from the political arena.
Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, the delegation of the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea would like to thank the delegation
of Kuwait for organizing this important briefing on
missing persons in armed conflict, as well as for its
excellent leadership with respect to resolution 2474
(2019), which the Council has just adopted and which
we were proud to sponsor. I would also like to take
this opportunity to express our thanks to Mr. Peter
Maurer, President of the International Committee of
the Red Cross, and Ms. Reena Ghelani, Director of
the Operations and Advocacy Division of the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, for their insightful briefings.
As we in the Council can confirm, the growing
complexity of armed conflicts increases their
multidimensional impact on the civilian population
while making the work of States, humanitarian and
peacekeeping personnel to protect civilians in those
contexts more difficult. As we have seen in the
work of the Council, one aspect of armed conflict’s

19-170307/19

S/PV.8543

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

impact on people is the increased vulnerability of
the groups that most need social protection in these
circumstances, such as children, women, the elderly,
persons with disabilities, and minorities. Another is
the impact that people’s disappearance has on their
loved ones. It is one of the most harmful and lasting
humanitarian consequences of armed conflicts, not
only affecting people and families who face economic,
legal and mental health challenges, but also with
significant repercussions for the resolution of conflicts,
the sustainability and consolidation of peace and
sustainable development.
We know that although the available data on people
who have disappeared during conflict is not exhaustive,
the International Committee of the Red Cross estimates
that some 140,000 people have disappeared around the
world, 36,000 of them in Africa, and many of them as a
result of armed conflicts. Accordingly, the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea joins the Secretary-General’s call for
the parties to conflicts to ensure respect for international
humanitarian law in relation to disappeared civilians,
prevent enforced disappearances, take all possible
measures to account for persons reported missing and
defend their families’ right to receive information about
their fate and whereabouts.
The primary responsibility to protect the civilian
population belongs to individual States. However,
when that is not possible, and when States request it,
the international community, including humanitarian
organizations, can provide support, in accordance with
the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations, including full respect for the sovereignty of
States and based on a just and legitimate cause. There
are obligations under international humanitarian
law designed to prevent people’s disappearance,
hold accountable those who are responsible for such
disappearances, and ensure that those obligations are
met during an armed conflict, not just after hostilities
have ended. That includes being committed to finding
the disappeared through records and the appropriate
handling of human remains, among other measures.
In that regard, it is the responsibility of the
conflicting parties to establish effective mechanisms
and measures to determine the whereabouts of
disappeared civilians and refrain from using
disappearance as a military tactic, so that the families
and communities of the disappeared can move forward,
without underlying tensions and with trust between
communities and institutions. In that context, we would
8/19

11/06/2019

like to acknowledge the commendable commitment and
work of the International Committee of the Red Cross
to make visible at the global level the experiences of
associations of missing persons in the world and its
initiatives to find solutions to the problem of disappeared
people across the globe, particularly through its Central
Tracing Agency. We encourage States to continue to
collaborate and support it in that regard.
This meeting is a step forward in terms of
strengthening the Security Council’s work in the
area of the protection of civilians in armed conflicts.
We believe that focusing on disappeared persons in
armed conflicts is a key element in that area because
of its impact on international peace and security, for
which the Council is responsible. In that regard, we
appreciate the good work being done by governmental,
humanitarian and human rights organizations and
peacekeeping missions in searching for and identifying
missing civilians, and we encourage them to strengthen
those efforts. We also request that this be reflected
in the annual reports of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I thank you very much,
Mr. President, for personally attending the meeting
today. I think that underlines the importance that
Kuwait, based on its history and experience, attaches
to this issue. While I am praising you, I would also
like to extend my congratulations to your Permanent
Representative, Mr. Mansour Alotaibi, who worked
very hard to get this done today. It is also his
personal success.
What Kuwait did is very much in line with what
Germany and France did during their joint presidencies
when we placed humanitarian issues very high on the
Security Council’s agenda. I think it is very important
that this body deal with those issues.
I would like to thank both of the briefers for their
very impressive reports. I was dismayed by what Peter
Maurer told us at the beginning of the meeting that there
has actually been an alarming increase in the number
of missing persons, despite the fact that we have clear
international laws on that issue. That should really
concern us. I would also like to express on this occasion
my gratitude to the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC), which has 150 years of experience, for
what it does and what its work means and, when there
are successes, what that means for individual families.
19-17030

11/06/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Germany is participating, of course. The German
Red Cross is also working very hard on the issue. It has
a long history, but at the same time we are focusing right
now on current issues. We are working hard to locate
the relatives of refugees and migrants who have arrived
in Germany in the past years. Most of the requests that
we have been able to meet came from Afghanistan,
Syria, Somalia and Eritrea.
Syria is, for us, the toughest case. The SecretaryGeneral, in his report (S/2019/373), expresses particular
concern about Syria. There are more than 10,000 cases
of missing persons, but the total number of people
arbitrarily detained and missing persons is believed to
be more than tenfold that amount. I think our colleague
from the United Kingdom mentioned 60,000. I think,
if one takes into consideration everything, it would
be even more. The problem and challenge in Syria is
that this continues and there is no end to the missing
persons; their numbers continue to grow. We therefore
encourage the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Syria to work with the parties to secure the release
of detainees and the location of missing persons, and
we call for full cooperation.
It is clear that the Syrian regime has engaged
in a systematic and widespread pattern of forcibly
disappearing persons for political reasons, retaliation
and gathering-intelligence. That is unacceptable and
needs to be to be addressed.
Unfortunately, Syria is not the only case. Others
have been mentioned already, including that of Nigeria.
We all know the heartbreaking cases of the girls who
have been abducted by Boko Haram. There have been
other cases in South Sudan, Myanmar and, during
an earlier war, in the Balkans. My British colleague
mentioned the conflict between Serbia and Kosovo.
There are still missing persons from that conflict today.
We encourage all efforts to resolve those issues, which
is very important not only for the families, but also
for reconciliation.
With regard to resolution 2474 (2019), we
co-sponsored it and we are very happy with it, but we
would have liked the point with regard to accountability
to be stronger. There is no reference to international
criminal mechanisms because some members of the
Council were against that. The Rome Statute clearly
refers to enforced disappearance as a crime against
humanity. We would have liked to have that reference
in the resolution. We also want to take this occasion

S/PV. 8543

to underline our full support for the work of the
International Criminal Court.
I want to come back to the main issue, which is that
this is a humanitarian issue. That was underlined in the
remarks by the President of the ICRC. In the end, we
have to make sure that all parties uphold the right of
families to receive information on the fate of missing
relatives. Governments, armed forces and armed groups
have an obligation to provide information and to help
reunite families. We call on all parties to work with
the ICRC to ensure that appropriate mechanisms are in
place that deal with missing persons, and that has to be
done early on. The President of the Council mentioned
how important it is for this to be already done when a
conflict breaks out.
At the same time, in conflicts, as is the case in Syria
and other places, we need Governments and parties to
allow and facilitate the access of humanitarian personnel,
and we need to safeguard humanitarian space.
Ultimately, resolving the issue of missing persons
is very important for reconciliation and having a policy
of preventing disappearance in place is very important
for conflict prevention. That is why Germany has
ratified the International Convention for the Protection
of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance. We also
believe that the work of the International Commission
on Missing Persons is important.
Lastly, I would like to refer to what my colleague
from Equatorial Guinea said with regard to how
important is that the Security Council deal with
questions of international humanitarian law and that
international humanitarian law be respected because
that relates directly to the preservation of peace and
security and to the prevention of conflicts.
Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
thank the Kuwaiti presidency of the Security Council
for organizing this briefing on missing persons in
armed conflict. I also have the pleasure of welcoming
your presence among us, Mr. President, which
demonstrates that, as with many countries that have
witnessed the horrors of war, the question of missing
persons in armed conflict remains at the heart of your
country’s priorities. I join my voice to those who spoke
before me in thanking Ms. Reena Ghelani and Mr. Peter
Maurer for their informative briefings on how acute
this phenomenon is.

19-170309/19

S/PV.8543

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The stories of thousands of missing men, women
and children in armed conflict engages the entire
international community and more specifically the
entities that seek to defend human rights law and
humanitarian law. The International Committee of the
Red Cross is currently looking for more than a 100,000
missing persons around the world. In that regard, I
recall that the number of reported cases represents only
a minute portion of the people who are actually missing.
The respective reports of the Secretary-General on
the protection of civilians of May 2019 (S/2019/373),
the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary
Disappearances and the International Committee of the
Red Cross agree as to the scale and complexity of the
phenomenon of missing persons in armed conflict. That
requires us more than ever to take coordinated action to
understand the profound trends of this phenomenon and
identify collective effective solutions. That is why Côte
d’Ivoire supported resolution 2474 (2019), which was
adopted today by Council members. The resolution is
distinguished by the relevance of the measures that are
proposed for the prevention of disappearances, support
for families, ways to fight impunity and support for the
pursuit of truth.
Côte d’Ivoire is of the view that the appeal of the
international community for the respect of international
humanitarian law and the International Convention
for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced
Disappearance during hostilities must transcend
partisan positions to reflect our common commitment
to the principle of the protection of civilians.
Similarly,
the
international
community’s
firm stance against the proven challenges to the
international legal framework must be demonstrated
in the commitment of all States to cooperating fully
with accountability mechanisms provided for that
purpose for impartial investigations and prosecutions
against the perpetrators of crimes related to the
disappearance of persons. That is why my delegation
believes that capacity-building in States emerging from
conflict is absolutely vital. It should provide them with
the necessary legal and institutional mechanisms to
conduct national and international investigations that
allow for the prosecution of individuals or groups guilty
of enforced disappearances. In addition, the promotion
of and respect for normative frameworks for the
protection of civilians and to combat the phenomenon
of enforced disappearances during conflict could be
10/19

11/06/2019

more effective if our collective action were part of a
preventive approach. That is the view of my delegation.
In that respect, the upstream registration of
detainees and the sharing of information pertaining
to detention cases could allow for the mapping of
detention facilities and the identification of detainees,
thereby facilitating the work of agencies specialized in
protecting their rights and physical well-being. That
approach would also force parties to conflict to face
up to their responsibilities under international law and
allow for the proper prosecution to be conducted if
detainees were to go missing.
Similarly, the creation of databases, which foster
information-sharing among detainees and their
families, could prevent people from going missing
and assist in the processing of human remains,
according to established standards, so as to allow for
the identification of missing persons. To that end, we
are of the view that the establishment of a centralized
tracing agency as a reference point for the creation of
databases, which can serve as a neutral intermediary
tool between parties to a conflict, is equally relevant.
Preventing the disappearance of persons in conflict
would be in vain if political will and national, regional
and international ownership did not support it. Indeed,
although it is true that, under international humanitarian
law, the responsibility for preventing disappearances
and the search for missing persons lie first and foremost
with local authorities, it is also true that it must be built
upon as part of collective responsibility and sustained
cooperation at the regional level. It is by combining our
resources and sharing experiences and good practices
that we will be able to fill the capacity gaps that exist
in preventing the disappearance of persons during
armed conflicts.
That is why Côte d’Ivoire encourages cooperation
between the Iraqi and Kuwaiti authorities in order to
provide a definitive answer to the issue of missing
Kuwaiti nationals and facilitate the return of property,
including Kuwaiti national archives. It is also why we
intend to support the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant/Da’esh, which
is responsible for collecting, storing and preserving
evidence of crimes committed by the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant in Iraq.
The issue that brought use here today is inextricably
linked to the persistence of armed conflicts. Working
19-17030

11/06/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

S/PV. 8543

together to prevent conflict throughout the world by
combating their root causes is, as far as my delegation
is concerned, the first step towards a definitive solution
to the issue of missing persons. All of our energies
should be invested to that end.

non-confrontation and without the targeting of third
parties; and work to establish international relations of
a new kind, featuring mutual respect, fairness, justice
and win-win cooperation, in a joint effort to build a
community of shared future for humankind.

Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates Kuwait’s initiative to convene a public
meeting on the issue of missing persons in armed
conflict and welcomes the Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait to New York to
preside over the meeting.

According to the Geneva Conventions, all parties
to conflict, including the countries concerned, should
assume responsibility for the search for missing
persons in armed conflict and are obligated to inform
their families of their whereabouts and help separated
families to reunite. The Government of the country
concerned bears the primary responsibility and plays
an irreplaceable role. If conflict is unavoidable, parties
should take effective measures, as soon as possible
and when conditions allow, to prevent and reduce the
disappearance of persons.

I thank Mr. Peter Maurer, President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), and
Director Ghelani for their briefings.
Many decades ago, the Geneva Conventions and
their Protocols Additional established clear rules
regarding the issue of missing persons in armed
conflict. Regrettably, for quite some time that issue
has not received sufficient attention or been effectively
addressed. In recent years, the number of missing
persons, as a result of armed conflict, has continued
to increase. Behind the alarming statistics is one
family after another subjected to endless suffering.
They have the right to know the whereabouts of their
missing relatives.
Resolution 2474 (2019), which was unanimously
adopted today, is the first thematic resolution on the
issue of missing persons in armed conflict adopted
by the Council. It fully demonstrates that the Council
places a high priority on the issue and stands firm in
upholding international humanitarian law. It also has
great significance for effectively addressing the issue
of missing persons in armed conflict. China welcomes
the resolution and is among its sponsors. I would like to
commend the Government of Kuwait and its Permanent
Mission for their considerable efforts in that regard.
If we are to fully address the issue of missing persons
in armed conflict, we must eliminate the root causes of
armed conflict. The Security Council should earnestly
fulfil its primary responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security by vigorously
promoting the resolution of differences through
dialogue, consultations and political negotiations to
prevent conflict, peacefully resolve disputes and reduce
the number of armed conflicts. We must firmly reject
anachronistic ideas, such as the clash of civilizations,
the Cold War mentality and zero-sum games; forge a
constructive partnership featuring non-alliance and

It is essential to register information on prisoners
and other relevant persons, make every effort to search
for missing persons and establish information-sharing
and communication channels with their families. Cases
involving a large number of people who have gone
missing in armed conflict should be investigated in
order to hold those responsible accountable, in line
with domestic law and relevant international law. In
that process, the judicial sovereignty of the countries
concerned should be fully respected.
The international community should actively
provide constructive assistance to the countries
concerned on the basis of respect for national sovereignty.
It is imperative to strengthen information and
experience-sharing, help the countries concerned with
capacity-building in areas of science and technology,
such as forensic science, ground-penetrating radar
and satellite positioning, among others, and respond
to the issue of missing persons in armed conflict
in a tailored manner. In that regard, China highly
commends the ICRC for upholding the principles of
neutrality, impartiality and independence and for
playing a positive role in resolving relevant issues over
the years. It is our hope that all humanitarian agencies
can, in a humanitarian and professional spirit, play a
constructive role in reducing the humanitarian impact
of armed conflict and in searching for missing persons.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to welcome the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kuwait, and warmly congratulate him on his
country’s assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council and for taking the initiative to convene today’s

19-1703011/19

S/PV.8543

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

important meeting. Like my German colleague, I
congratulate the Permanent Representative of Kuwait
and his entire team. It is to that country’s credit, marked
as it has been by a conflict that left thousands of families
without news of their loved ones, that it has convened
the Council to address the issue of missing persons in
armed conflict for the first time. I would also like to
thank Mr. Peter Maurer, President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), and Ms. Reena
Ghelani, Director of Operations and Advocacy of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
for their briefings and commitment.
The issue of missing persons is inherent to all
armed conflicts, but it has been particularly acute in
recent years. That is why France welcomes resolution
2474 (2019), which the Council has just adopted and
which powerfully reaffirms the obligations that flow
from the international humanitarian law and human
rights law on the subject. In that regard, I want to
highlight two main points. The first is the need for
the parties to a conflict to prevent and respond to this
issue, which relates to the protection of those who have
not participated or are no longer participating in the
hostilities in an armed conflict, while the second is the
crucial importance of protecting people from enforced
disappearances, including in times of armed conflict.
The starting point for our efforts in the Council
is as much about the need to ensure respect for the
obligations under international humanitarian law on
the parties to an armed conflict as it is about a moral
imperative. The suffering of the relatives of missing
persons demands that of us. The pain of not knowing
what has happened to a loved one is unbearable and
inconsolable. Has that son or husband who was a
member of the Syrian opposition been detained in the
regime’s prisons or killed under torture, like thousands
of detainees? From Sri Lanka and Kosovo to Colombia,
on every continent, conflicts have left thousands of
missing persons in their wake. That is why it is essential
for the Security Council to call on the parties to prevent
disappearances, help the families of the disappeared
reunite and enable the exchange of information about
them and support for their families. They must also
guarantee people’s right to the truth.
In order to do that, it is crucial to cooperate with the
ICRC, whose excellent work I want to commend once
again, especially the Central Tracing Agency, which
runs the Family Links Network. State action has to be
deployed in complementarity with all the dedicated
12/19

11/06/2019

mechanisms and humanitarian organizations on the
ground. That is what France does in its areas of operation.
French forces inform the ICRC systematically and as
soon as possible about the people involved in hostilities
whom they have detained, after they have been given
a medical examination, and ensures the ICRC’s access
to them, in accordance with international humanitarian
law. They also report their transfer to host countries
and ensure that they have adequate guarantees from
the authorities of the States concerned so that those
who are being returned to them do not run the risk of
enforced disappearance. After fighting has occurred,
they report to the ICRC the location of the graves of
the deceased, who are buried with dignity and in
accordance with the rules of international humanitarian
law. France contributes to efforts to identify and search
for missing persons, whether civilians or combatants,
keeping in mind the concerns of relatives. Those are the
same obligations for parties involved in conflicts that
France itself respects with regard to soldiers of its own
who are missing in combat.
At the United Nations, France supports recognizing
disappeared-person status for Blue Helmets and
developing a policy that takes that status fully into
account. Respect for the families of the disappeared
and the principles of responsibility, prevention and
reparation are at stake.
My second point is about the issue of enforced
disappearances. No war or exceptional circumstances
can justify them. The disappearance of a person is
an extremely serious crime when it is the result of
deliberate action by a State that is followed by a denial
of that disappearance or by concealing the truth about
the person’s fate and whereabouts. Widespread or
systematic enforced disappearance is a crime against
humanity, and in that connection I want to emphasize
the role of the International Criminal Court and the
investigative mechanisms whose job it is to collect the
evidence of such crimes. Those crimes are certainly
not a thing of the past or of a particular region. In
that regard, I would like to remind the Council of the
November 2018 report of the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic,
Death Notifications in the Syrian Arab Republic, which
describes the fact that tens of thousands of people
are missing in Syria after being in the hands of proGovernment forces.
Death certificates, when they exist, are a charade.
They do not provide the credible response that is
19-17030

11/06/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

expected by families, who are left, sometimes for
years, in uncertainty about the real circumstances of
the disappearance and the fate of their relatives, or who
cannot give them a burial once they have learned of their
death. Those certificates issued by the regime cannot
absolve it of crimes for which it still has to answer. In
that context, France, which was a sponsor of resolution
2474 (2019), regrets that the text does not explicitly
mention the International Convention for the Protection
of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, which is
a crucial instrument for combating disappearances in
times of peace as well as of war, and to guarantee the
right to the truth. That is why France calls on all States
to ratify it and cooperate with the Working Group
on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances and the
Committee on Enforced Disappearances.
In conclusion, my country solemnly reaffirms
the importance of upholding respect for international
humanitarian law as we celebrate the seventieth
anniversary of the Geneva Conventions. It is important
that States take concrete steps to strengthen their
implementation, which is why, together with Germany,
France will launch a humanitarian call to action to which
our Foreign Minister, Jean-Yves Le Drian, committed on
1 April, alongside his German counterpart, Heiko Maas.
The universal ratification of the relevant conventions,
such as the International Convention for the Protection
of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance and the
Rome Statute, are part of that.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank you, Mr. President,
and your Kuwaiti colleagues for the invitation to
address the issue of missing persons in armed conflict.
We are grateful to the President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), as well as to the
Director of Operations and Advocacy of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for their
contributions to the discussion.
Over the past 20 years, the topic of the protection
of civilians has occupied a special place in the work of
the Council, as is evidenced by resolution 2474 (2019),
which we adopted today. The Russian delegation voted
in favour of the resolution, motivated by reasons of
humanity and in the hope that the resolution will help
families that have been separated by war to learn the
fate of their loved ones and perhaps even save some of
their lives.

S/PV. 8543

We greatly appreciate the role of the ICRC in this
issue. We also believe that the International Commission
on Missing Persons is doing necessary and useful work,
especially with regard to providing assistance to States
concerned in identifying missing persons. However,
we take the generally accepted approach to the term
“missing persons in armed conflict” as applying not
only to civilians, but also to military personnel whose
fate remains unknown when a conflict ends. Sadly, the
objective reality is that people go missing as a result of
any war, and the reasons for that are many. War is an
evil in and of itself, and it would be an unacceptable
simplification to reduce the issue of missing persons in
armed conflict exclusively to a problem of international
criminal responsibility.
At Security Council meetings held under the agenda
item “Protection of civilians in armed conflict” we
often hear a very important point. States already have
at their disposal all the international legal instruments
essential to alleviating the plight of civilians in times
of war. I am referring to the Geneva Conventions of
1949 and their Additional Protocols of 1977. The issue
is having the political will to properly implement those
documents, and that is fully applicable to the situation
of missing persons in armed conflict.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Like other speakers, I would
like to welcome Your Excellency as President of the
Security Council and to thank Kuwait for convening
this very important meeting. I look forward to the
discussion. I would also like to thank Mr. Maurer,
President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC), and Ms. Ghelani, Director for Operations
and Advocacy of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, for their valuable briefings.
Again like others, Indonesia commends Kuwait on
taking up the difficult but essential issue of missing
persons in armed conflict. We also congratulate you,
Mr. President, on the adoption of resolution 2474 (2019)
on the issue of missing persons in armed conflict,
initiated by Kuwait. Indonesia supports the resolution,
and we believe that its implementation will strengthen
efforts towards preventing persons from going missing
as a result of armed conflict and serve to meaningfully
address the situation of such persons. The issue is
indeed an integral part of advancing our efforts to
protect civilians in armed conflict.
Last month, during Indonesia’s presidency of the
Security Council, our Minister for Foreign Affairs

19-1703013/19

S/PV.8543

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

11/06/2019

presided over the open debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict (see S/PV.8534). The
protection of civilians in armed conflict has been an
important part of Indonesia’s constitutional mandate
and will continue to be a significant element of our
foreign policy.

in armed conflicts. Sharing information and expertise
in the areas of science and modern technology is a
useful way to reduce the number of missing persons.
However, it should be ensured that such support and
cooperation are tailored to respond to the needs of the
country in conflict and are provided at its request.

The number of missing persons in armed conflict
presented in the report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2019/373)
is alarming. More than 23,000 requests have been
received by the ICRC in relation to only two armed
conflicts. This morning, as Mr. Maurer also mentioned,
there are a large number of missing persons and in 2018
alone, more than 45,000 new cases were registered.
Once again, that is an alarming number, especially
since, as Mr. Maurer said, that figure is only the tip of
the iceberg. Something must be done in that regard.

Last but not least, we fully concur that the issue
of missing persons should feature prominently in
dialogues and peace processes to resolve conflicts from
the outset. We should focus on the humanitarian aspect
in addressing the issue.

While historically conflicts have taken a toll
on civilians, that must not be an accepted fact. In
that context, Indonesia would like to emphasize the
following three pertinent points.

Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the convening of this meeting and your
presence, Mr. Minister, here among us at this Security
Council briefing. We thank Mr. Peter Maurer, President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC),
and Ms. Reena Ghelani, Director for Operations
and Advocacy of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, for their briefings, which have
provided us with a comprehensive and detailed picture
of the situation of missing persons in armed conflict. At
the same time, we wish to acknowledge their particular
contribution in this area, which the ICRC itself has
called a hidden tragedy.

My first point is on the importance of preventing
persons from going missing as a result of armed
conflict. The establishment of information centres for
coordination and the pooling of information are necessary
upon the outbreak of a conflict in order to minimize the
number of missing persons. Concurrently, providing
appropriate training to armed forces, ensuring detainee
registration, producing proper means of identification
and establishing well-functioning processing systems
that involve all the authorities concerned are among the
necessary measures. Prevention should be the priority.
Secondly, the development and upholding of national
laws, along with complying with responsibilities under
the relevant international humanitarian instruments,
are vital. The Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their
Additional Protocols of 1977 are a key part of the legal
framework to safeguard civilians in armed conflict.
Even those countries that are not yet a party to those
instruments should undertake efforts to align with them.
There should not be any doubt. Parties to armed conflict
bear the primary responsibility for taking all necessary
steps to ensure the protection of civilians, including
reducing the number of cases of missing persons.
Thirdly, increased international cooperation and
support are an important way forward to address the
issue. The developments in forensics can lead to the
bolstering of efforts to find and identify missing persons
14/19

Reaffirming Indonesia’s support for today’s
topic, we hope that our deliberations will contribute
meaningfully to advancing the issue of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict, focusing in particular on
the humanitarian aspect.

It is clearly an ongoing and significant problem,
where, despite the difficulty in having exact figures
for the number of missing persons in armed conflict,
the data available reflect a situation described by the
Secretary-General as alarming, amounting to several
tens of thousands of cases.
Although such efforts are compounded by extreme
situations on the ground, which make it difficult to
search for missing civilians and other protected persons,
it is possible to take preventive measures in this context,
such as proper registration, exchange of information and
avoiding actions that violate international obligations
under the Geneva Conventions.
We understand that the situation of a person
missing in armed conflict has two dimensions: on the
one hand, that of the victim and, on the other hand,
the concern and distress of their close relatives. The
latter is enshrined in international humanitarian law,
19-17030

11/06/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

which establishes the right of family members to know
the fate of a missing person and provides for the return
of their remains. That can also be seen as a matter of
human rights.
The positive aspects of that are the value of healing
open wounds and easing tensions, not only of the family
but of society as a whole, with a view to subsequently
allowing for accountability and reconciliation. We
recognize that this situation is particularly sensitive
in the case of missing children given their extreme
vulnerability and helplessness. We believe that
there must be specific State and international action
to deal with such cases, including their protection
and identification.
We are convinced that focusing on and considering
this situation will help to establish appropriate
mechanisms to promote good practices, the exchange
of experiences and modern technology, and voluntary
funding with a view to providing an immediate and
collaborative response capacity so as to find and
identify missing persons.
In that regard, in addition to acknowledging the
efforts of the International Committee of the Red Cross
and other international and regional organizations and
mechanisms, we recognize the work of the International
Commission on Missing Persons, based in The Hague.
However, on this occasion, we would like to welcome
and commend the initiative and leadership of Kuwait
on this topic and the excellent work of your delegation,
Mr. President, which has enabled us to adopt the
important resolution 2474 (2019) on the issue this
morning and which we were pleased to co-sponsor.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): I would like to thank
Ms. Reena Ghelani, Director of the Operations and
Advocacy Division of the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, and Mr. Peter
Maurer, President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, for their insightful briefings.
South Africa co-sponsored and supported the
adoption of resolution 2474 (2019) on missing persons
in armed conflict, but it is also heartening to know that
some of the countries experiencing conflict as we speak
also co-sponsored the resolution.
Let me commence by welcoming the convening of
this meeting on this matter as a stand-alone item for
the first time, giving it the attention it deserves. We
would like to thank you, Mr. President, and the Kuwait

S/PV. 8543

presidency, especially our friend Ambassador Alotaibi,
for their efforts to focus attention on this crucial
matter. Kuwait has had the misfortune of experiencing
the devastating impact and trauma of missing persons
in armed conflict situations first-hand, as have many
other countries. We hope that the ongoing efforts and
cooperation between Kuwait and Iraq will bring closure
to the matter of missing men, women and children as
soon as possible.
While South Africa acknowledges the important
role the Council can play in addressing this phenomenon,
especially by addressing the root causes of conflict
situations, which give rise to missing persons, we
would like to emphasise that the primary responsibility
resides with States themselves. States must ensure that
the people within their respective borders are accounted
for and protected; that records of prisoners of war are
well kept; and that the graves of those who have died
are preserved and properly marked. Modern technology
can assist us in accurately identifying mortal remains,
especially those in the unmarked graves that dominate
the landscape of conflict areas.
We take this opportunity to welcome the positive
role played by the International Committee of the Red
Cross in assisting national actors, where needed, to
locate missing persons and to provide support on related
matters in addressing this disturbing phenomenon,
including by communicating with families of missing
persons, where possible.
We are deeply concerned by the rise of incidences
of missing persons in armed conflict. The impact of this
problem extends beyond the victims themselves and has a
lasting and prolonged impact on the affected families and
communities. We must also take note that, in situations
of armed conflict and in the context of missing persons,
those who are most vulnerable — particularly women,
children, the elderly and displaced persons — are
most affected. The uncertainty surrounding missing
persons is deeply traumatic and requires the due
attention of national authorities, regional mechanisms
and the broader international community. South Africa
believes that international cooperation on this matter
is indispensable, especially in terms of technical
development and cooperation, which may assist in
locating missing persons.
Drawing from our own experience, South Africa
would like to underscore the important role of
truth, justice, reconciliation and accountability in

19-1703015/19

S/PV.8543

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

consolidating peace gains and achieving sustainable
peace. In this connection, we wish to highlight the
importance of addressing the repatriation of mortal
remains to their own countries of origin. This would
assist in the healing process and in finding closure for
the affected families and communities. We believe that,
as a matter related to the protection of civilians, the
issue of missing persons suffers from the same problems
relating to the lack of implementation of international
humanitarian law.
At this juncture, we wish to highlight the
prominence of the respective provisions of the Geneva
Convention of 1949, the seventieth anniversary of
which we are celebrating this year, in guiding the
responsibilities of States and parties during armed
conflict. In this regard, we would like to emphasise the
importance of accountability mechanisms that focus on
building national and regional capacities. The sooner
we account fully for all missing persons in all armed
conflicts, the sooner we will be able to find closure and
heal the wounds inflicted by conflict, and the sooner
lasting peace will prevail.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): Allow me at the outset to welcome you,
Mr. President, to preside over the Security Council
today. I would also like to thank you for convening this
meeting on the important issue of missing persons in
armed conflict.
I wish to thank Ms. Reena Ghelani and Mr. Peter
Maurer for their briefings. As they highlighted earlier,
this issue has a legitimate place on the Council’s
agenda. Indeed, the impact of disappearances on
individuals, families and communities is one of the
most devastating and persistent consequences of armed
conflict. Uncertainty and the search for answers can
span several generations, marking the history of entire
communities and even running the risk of generating
new conflicts.
Providing an adequate response to these challenges
has a profound impact on our ability to create lasting
stability and peace in post-conflict contexts. In
Belgium’s view, this response is based on three
elements: first, prevention and the early management
of cases of disappearance; secondly, the fight against
impunity; and thirdly, international cooperation.
First, the prevention and early management of cases
of disappearance is, of course, in the interest not only
of individuals and their families, but also of States.
16/19

11/06/2019

Without timely action, the work required to search
for missing persons is doubled, as is the suffering of
the families waiting for answers. It is important to
understand what prevention means in practice, and we
are pleased that resolution 2474 (2019), adopted today,
outlines several concrete measures. These include the
registration of detainees, the facilitation of information
exchange among separated family members,
information-gathering on missing or deceased persons,
the mapping of burial sites and graves and the appropriate
handling of human remains for identification. These
are often measures that are fairly simple but can have
an enormous impact if implemented early in a conflict
situation. Taking steps such as these means limiting
human suffering, preserving the fabric of society and
helping reduce feelings of resentment that could give
rise to new tensions.
This brings me to my second point. Many of these
examples fall within the provisions of humanitarian law
and human rights aimed at preventing the disappearance
of persons and addressing the consequences of their
disappearance. Failure to comply with these obligations
cannot be ignored.
Enforced disappearances, be it in a situation of armed
conflict or not, are unacceptable and may constitute
crimes against humanity. In this context, Belgium
welcomes the work of the United Nations Working
Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances
and calls on States to accede to the International
Convention for the Protection of All Persons from
Enforced Disappearance and to implement it in their
national legislation. This international legal framework
regulates States’ obligations, including prosecuting
and punishing perpetrators of forced disappearances
and compensating the victims and their families. We
believe that no effort to bring about reconciliation or
peace can succeed when entire families are abandoned
and given no information about the fate of their missing
loved ones and with no prospect of reparation, leaving
impunity to reign undeterred.
Thirdly and finally, I would like to stress the
importance of international cooperation in preventing
disappearances and addressing their consequences.
We must not only coordinate and exchange specific
information on missing persons but also share
experiences among the existing mechanisms. In that
context, we naturally commend the tireless work of
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
and the Central Tracing Agency. Belgium especially
19-17030

11/06/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

encourages the ICRC’s Missing Persons Project
initiative, because it is specifically aimed at ensuring
that information, advice and experience are more
effectively shared and at developing technical standards
that can benefit all States and actors concerned.
In conclusion, Mr. President, I would like to
congratulate you on convening this meeting and
submitting the resolution that we had the honour
to sponsor. Its adoption by consensus reflects the
international consensus on the humanitarian issue of
missing persons, which remains a global challenge and
requires a coherent response.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
and presiding over today’s briefing. We also thank
Mr. Maurer, President of the International Committee
of the Red Cross (ICRC), and Ms. Ghelani, Director for
Operations and Advocacy of the United Nations Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, for
participating today, and we commend their teams for
their critical work in addressing the global challenge of
missing persons. The ICRC has brought a much-needed
international spotlight to the issue in recent years.
All too often, we hear stories of people going
missing in times of armed conflict, including notably
in the Balkans and Kuwait, and most recently in Iraq
and Syria. As we have heard from other speakers,
after eight years of conflict many thousands of Syrian
civilians are still missing, the vast majority of them, we
believe, forcibly disappeared by the Al-Assad regime.
Those who are still unjustly detained in Syria must be
released. Their families deserve information from the
regime about the fate of their loved ones. Taking such
basic humane steps would be helpful in building the
foundation necessary for a successful political process
in Syria, in line with resolution 2254 (2015).
Since 2005, the United States has consistently
funded efforts to support the identification, security
and excavation of mass graves in Iraq, as our colleague
from the United Kingdom noted. More than 6,000
Yazidis were kidnapped by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham (ISIS) in 2014, of whom approximately
3,000 remain unaccounted for, along with hundreds
of Christians and Shia Muslims. We strongly support
the International Commission on Missing Persons in
providing training to Iraqi ministries in the scientific
investigation of mass graves and providing support
to victims’ families. The United States also supports

S/PV. 8543

the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in collecting,
storing, and preserving evidence of atrocities carried
out by ISIS. We recently committed $2 million in
support of its first exhumations, in Sinjar.
More than 20 years after the war in the Balkans,
approximately 10,000 people there are still missing, a
figure that should give us all pause. We welcome the
partnership between the ICRC and the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals to support
the humanitarian search for missing persons in the
former Yugoslavia.
Kuwait’s own experience regarding the whereabouts
and fate of its own missing persons is one that none of
us should forget. Nearly 28 years have passed since the
end of the first Gulf War, but it remains important to
address the issue and bring some measure of closure to
the families of those still missing. The United States is
working diligently to provide satellite imagery to assist
in the identification of remains from the conflict.
Families separated by conflict may face the
anguish of not knowing what happened to their loved
ones, and that pain can prevent surviving relatives
from grieving, reconciling, and recovering. The
uncertainty also negatively affects a society’s ability
to seek justice and reconciliation. Joint efforts to
address the outstanding issue of missing persons by
Kuwait and Iraq together exemplify how countries can
emerge from conflict to work in a spirit of cooperation
and friendship. It is an example that the international
community should applaud as a positive step towards
justice and reconciliation.
As today’s unanimous adoption of resolution 2474
(2019), with its 62 co-sponsors, makes clear, all the
parties to an armed conflict should enable families
to clarify the fate and whereabouts of the missing,
including prisoners of war. In an illustration of our
own national commitment to addressing this critical
issue, the United States Department of Defense has
established the Defense Prisoner of War/Missing in
Action Accounting Agency. Its purpose is to fulfil
a national promise to provide the fullest possible
accounting for our missing United States personnel to
their families and our fellow citizens.
While it is clear that much work remains to be done
to bring closure to the families of missing persons around
the world, we remain committed to participating in that

19-1703017/19

S/PV.8543

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

and partnering with the ICRC and others to do what we
can to support humanitarian efforts to recover remains.
It is essential to account for the missing so that
families can have some certainty about the fate of
their loved ones. Today’s adoption marks the Council’s
first collective call to address this global humanitarian
priority. Let us now turn our words into actions together.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We welcome the convening of
this important meeting and Kuwait’s commitment,
Mr. President, exemplified by your presence here today,
to promoting the critical issue of missing persons in
armed conflict. I would also like to thank Ms. Ghelani
and Mr. Maurer for their briefings. We particularly
applaud the Council’s adoption of resolution 2474
(2019), submitted by your country, Mr. President,
through which we are taking a definite step forward
in comprehensively addressing the humanitarian
consequences of armed conflict, in this case that of
missing persons and the impact that the problem has on
their families and communities.
We welcome the resolution’s operational focus as
a concrete step towards prevention and early action
in dealing with the issue of missing persons as a path
to lasting stability, reconciliation, security and peace.
However, we still believe that there is room for the
Council to continue to fine-tune its approach to the
issue, and we regret that nowhere does the resolution
explicitly state that families have the right to know
the whereabouts of their missing loved ones, whether
civilians or combatants, in situations resulting from
armed conflict. Not knowing whether they are alive or
dead creates wounds for the families of the missing that
are difficult to heal. It leads to unrest and can end up
jeopardizing the reconciliation that must follow after
peace has been achieved. For the Dominican Republic,
the right of families to know the whereabouts of their
missing relatives must therefore be fully respected by
all parties to the conflict. That requires preventive
work and early actions such as registering detainees,
facilitating the exchange of news within separated
families and ensuring the appropriate and dignified
treatment of human remains. That right is particularly
important for women, children and the elderly, who are
more vulnerable in the face of this kind of uncertainty,
and for whom ignoring their specific needs can
perpetuate feelings of resentment and exclusion for
decades and in turn lead to new violence.
18/19

11/06/2019

We applaud the efforts of the International
Committee of the Red Cross and its Central Tracing
Agency to address the hundreds of thousands of cases
of missing persons. We encourage States to collaborate
closely with them in order to honour their commitments
under international humanitarian law and international
human rights law, with a view to offering families
long-awaited information about loved ones who
have disappeared.
There are considerable gaps in States’
implementation of their obligations concerning
disappeared persons, from the perspective of the
protection of civilians and within the framework of
international humanitarian law and human rights.
Above all, all parties must take every measure
necessary to avoid attacks on densely populated areas
and civilian infrastructure, which helps to prevent
people’s death or disappearance, and we must continue
to emphasize that. Tragically, however, civilians lead
the death statistics in conflicts today, as we continue
to see in Syria, Libya and Afghanistan, to mention just
a few places. In view of that unfortunate situation, the
parties to conflict must take every possible measure to
clarify the fate of disappeared persons and provide their
families with all the information available on the fate
of their relatives, respect the remains of the deceased
and where possible return remains to their relatives.
Procedures for the exhumation, identification and
repatriation of remains, and for the tracing of unmarked
graves, must be systematized.
In that regard, we believe that national and regional
measures that promote cooperation, training, the
exchange of good practices and relevant information on
missing persons are still areas where there is much to
be done and where more progress is needed to address
the issue of the hundreds of thousands of disappeared
people all over the world. We are of the view that
the families of disappeared persons, as well as civilsociety organizations and academia, can and should
play a constructive and significant role in establishing
mechanisms and national legal frameworks to respond
to their needs. Confidence-building is essential. It is
therefore necessary to support families by creating
spaces where they can be provided with credible and
concrete information about the fate of their relatives,
including the circumstances and causes of their
disappearance or death and possible arrangements
for their return. Psychological, legal, economic and
protective support for family members who remain in
19-17030

11/06/2019

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

the dark about the whereabouts of their loved ones is
particularly essential to the healing and reconciliation
process. For the Dominican Republic, access to justice,
accountability and the fight against impunity are as
important or even more so in that context.
In conclusion, we want to emphasize how essential
it is to ensure that the step forward we have made today
is followed by the determined exercise of political
will at the local, national and regional levels in order
to respond effectively to the issue of missing persons
and be able to put into practice the provisions of
international humanitarian law and resolution 2474
(2019), which we have just adopted. Collectively and
at all levels of the affected societies, we can offer a
little hope and a sense of closure to the families that the
disappeared leave behind.
Mr. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to welcome
you to the Chamber today, Mr. President, and to thank
you for your very valuable initiative. I also want to
thank our briefers.
Poland welcomes the adoption of resolution 2474
(2019), an important and timely resolution on missing
persons in armed conflict. We thank Kuwait for all its
efforts to see the text adopted today. We are pleased
to be among its sponsors, especially as it focuses on
an issue that has long been a global problem, with
hundreds of thousands of people missing as a result of
armed conflict or violence, whether in Syria, Iraq, South
Sudan, Colombia, Ukraine or dozens of other countries.
While the exact numbers are difficult to estimate,
what we know for certain is that in too many cases
of missing persons, families are kept waiting to find
out the whereabouts of their relatives, sometimes even
for years. Furthermore, as people missing in armed
conflicts are also members of various ethnic, religious
or other communities, those communities are also kept
in uncertainty and left anxious, which often hampers
peace and reconciliation efforts, and all of this despite
the fact that the international law on the subject is
very clear.

S/PV. 8543

First of all, the necessary preventive measures
must be put in place well ahead of the outbreak of any
conflict, as they are essential for any response to be
effective and comprehensive. They must include, among
other things, systematic efforts to register persons who
are imprisoned, notify their families and collect and
centralize information. They must also include the
dignified and adequate treatment of the dead by the
authorities, as States have the primary responsibility
to respect and ensure respect for the human rights of
all individuals within their territory and subject to
their jurisdiction.
At the same time, in situations where preventive
measures have failed, States must do their utmost to
trace, locate, identify and return the missing. They
can do it individually or collectively with other States
and parties to a conflict or other non-State actors, if
necessary. In that context I would once again like to
thank Mr. Peter Maurer, President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, and Ms. Reena Ghelani,
Director of the Operations and Advocacy Division
of the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, not only for their briefings today
but for their tireless efforts to offer States and parties
to conflicts every kind of support, including on the
legal and technical fronts, and to build international
recognition of the problem of missing persons and their
families, thereby promoting respect for international
humanitarian law on the eve of the seventieth
anniversary of the Geneva Conventions.
The right to justice, followed by effective remedies
and accountability measures, is essential to securing
long-lasting peace and reconciliation. For that reason,
we fully support the resolution adopted today and want
to continue to underscore the obligation of all parties
to conflicts to respect the principles and norms of
international humanitarian law, including by taking
all feasible measures to account for persons reported
missing as a result of armed conflict and providing
their family members with any information they have
on their fate.
The meeting rose at noon.

19-1703019/19
