A /67/PV.74

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Offi cial Records

Sixty-seventh session

74th plenary meeting
Friday, 26 April 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jeremić . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Serbia)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Kanda (Ghana),
Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.35 a.m.
Agenda item 134 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/67/693/Add.10)
The Acting President: I should like, in keeping
with established practice, to draw the attention of the
General Assembly to document A/67/693/Add.10, in
which the Secretary-General informs the President of
the General Assembly that, since the issuance of his
communication contained in document A/67/693/Add.9,
the Dominican Republic and the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela have made the payments necessary to reduce
their arrears below the amount specified in Article 19
of the United Nations Charter. May I take it that the
General Assembly takes due note of the information
contained in this document?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 111 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(f) Appointment of members of the Committee
on Conferences
Note by the Secretary-General (A/67/107)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
at its 62nd plenary meeting, on 21 December 2012,

the Assembly took note of the appointment of Côte
d’Ivoire and Senegal as members of the Committee on
Conferences for a period of three years, beginning on
1 January 2013 and ending on 31 December 2015.
Members will also recall that at its 65th plenary
meeting, on 21 February 2013, the Assembly took note
of the appointment of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Iraq and
Israel as members of the Committee on Conferences,
for a term of office beginning on 21 February 2013
and ending on 31 December 2015, and Sri Lanka as a
member of the Committee on Conferences, for a term
of office beginning on 21 February 2013 and ending on
31 December 2014.
Members will further recall that two seats from
among the Latin American and Caribbean States, for a
term of office beginning on the date of appointment and
ending on 31 December 2015, remain vacant.
I should also like to remind members that one seat,
also from among the Latin American and Caribbean
States, for a term of office beginning on the date of
appointment and ending on 31 December 2014 has been
vacant since the sixty-sixth session.
On the recommendation of the Chair of the Group
of the Latin American and Caribbean States, Peru
has been appointed a member of the Committee on
Conferences, for a term of office beginning on 26 April
2013 and ending on 31 December 2015.
May I take it that the Assembly takes note of this
appointment?
It was so decided.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

13-31525 (E)

*1331525*

A/67/PV.74

The Acting President: Regarding the remaining
vacant seats from among the Latin American and
Caribbean States, consultations will continue with that
regional group.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of sub-item (f) of agenda item 111.
Agenda item 33
Prevention of armed conflict
Draft resolution (A/67/L.61)
The Acting President: Before proceeding further,
I would like to inform members that the debate on
agenda item 33 will take place at a later date to be
announced.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to introduce draft
resolution A/67/L.61.
Mr. Gata Mavita wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic
of the Congo) (spoke in French): I have the distinct
honour to introduce, on behalf of the Group of African
States, the draft political declaration on the peaceful
resolution of conflicts in Africa.
First of all, I take this opportunity to express the
African Group’s profound gratitude to the President
of the General Assembly for this important initiative
to commemorate the fiftieth anniversary of the
establishment of the former Organization of African
Unity, now the African Union. I would also like to
pay special tribute to Mr. Teodoro Obiang Nguema
Mbasogo, President of the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea; Mr. Pierre Buyoya, former President of
Burundi, African Union High Representative for Mali
and representative of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission to this meeting; and the Ministers
for Foreign Affairs and other eminent personalities
who have granted us the honour of participating in
this meeting. I would also like to thank all the Member
States for their interest in this event and for their
participation in the general debate.
I should like to introduce to the Assembly, on
behalf of the African Group, draft resolution A/67/L.61,
which contains the draft political declaration on the
peaceful settlement of conflicts in Africa. The draft
resolution commemorates the fiftieth anniversary
of the establishment of the Organization of African
Unity/African Union. It also highlights the fact that

2

decolonization was the primary goal behind the
establishment of our continental organization. Today
as we celebrate this historic opportunity, we welcome
the achievements that our continent has made: the
transformation of the Organization of African Unity
into the African Union; the continent’s economic
evolution; and the establishment of the Peace and
Security Council, as enshrined in the Constitutive Act
of the African Union.
We therefore call on all Member States to adopt
this draft resolution by consensus, in a show of
genuine solidarity with the political and economic
transformation of Africa.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
action on draft resolution A/67/L.61, entitled “Political
declaration on the peaceful resolution of conflicts in
Africa”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department of General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that, since the submission of the
draft resolution, in addition to the delegations listed
in document A/67/L.61, the following countries have
become sponsors: the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Malaysia, the Russian Federation and TimorLeste.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/67/L.61 ?
Draft resolution A/67/L.61 was adopted (resolution
67/259).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of position, allow me to remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
We welcome the adoption of the political declaration
(resolution 67/259) commemorating the fiftieth
anniversary of the establishment of the Organization
of African Unity and commending African Union and
international efforts to peacefully resolve African
conflicts. We further welcome the positive contributions
of the African Union and subregional organizations to
the peaceful settlement of disputes in Africa and the
continued cooperation and mutual support between the
United Nations and the African Union.

13-31525

A/67/PV.74

We strongly agree with the language celebrating
Africa’s economic growth throughout the global
economic crisis, reaffirming the international
community’s support for the consolidation of democracy
and good governance in Africa, and recognizing that
the implementation of peacebuilding and State-building
goals will contribute to durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa.
We nonetheless have concerns about the process
under which the declaration was negotiated and about
the language of the declaration in a few areas. We
would have welcomed further consultations on the
text, beyond the one session that was held, as there
remained substantive differences on it. Specifically,
the declaration lacks robust provisions on the role of
accountability in preventing and deterring conflicts and
providing justice for victims. As we have consistently
noted, the rule of law and transitional justice are critical
in preventing conflict and atrocities and rebuilding
societies torn apart by systemic violence. Accountability
for the worst atrocities has been and remains an
important priority for the United States and is a crucial
ingredient to peacefully resolving conflicts in Africa
and elsewhere. Additionally, the United States believes
that pronouncements on Security Council reform are
best left to the intergovernmental negotiations that are
working to forge a consensus among members.
We are glad to join the nations assembled here in
supporting the ongoing initiatives at the United Nations
and the African Union to address the peace and security
challenges facing the African continent.
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
observer of the European Union.
Mr. Vrailas (European Union): I speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States.
Let me start by emphasizing the importance that
the European Union and its member States attach to
marking the fiftieth anniversary of the establishment
of the Organization of African Unity. We should indeed
pay tribute to the founders of the African Union and
mark the key role of the African Union and subregional
organizations in settling disputes and conflicts
peacefully. We also welcome the initiative of the
President of the General Assembly to organize a debate
on the matter.
The resolve of Africa to take responsibility for its
own peace and security has been strongly supported

13-31525

by the European Union and its member States from the
outset. We have provided consistent and substantial
political backing and predictable funding to African
peace support operations and the relevant capacitybuilding activities.
The declaration adopted today (resolution 67/259)
contains many important elements, which we warmly
embrace in view of the strong Africa/EU partnership.
We are convinced that we would have been able to give
our unqualified support to this text if we had been
given an opportunity and sufficient time to engage on
its content. The lack of time and consultations does not
do justice to the importance of the subject matter, and
it does not reflect normal General Assembly working
practice.
As it stands, the political declaration does not
include agreed language on several important issues
we submitted comments on, such as the role of women
in conflict resolution, development, human rights, the
responsibility to protect, the fight against impunity and
the role of the International Criminal Court, and fails to
acknowledge that the Security Council has the primary
responsibility for international peace and security.
Their absence from the political declaration cannot be
taken as setting a precedent for future consideration of
the same topics.
Regarding the paragraph on Security Council
reform, the States members of the European Union
wholeheartedly support increased representation for
African States within a reformed Security Council.
However, we wish to underline that the framework of
intergovernmental negotiations was established by the
General Assembly as the forum to ensure that the issue
is given the full and considered attention it deserves.
The States members of the European Union
acknowledge that this declaration represents the
views of the members of the Group of African States
on this issue. The positions of EU member States on
Security Council reform are unchanged and remain as
articulated in the framework of the intergovernmental
negotiations.
We will continue to stay actively engaged in debates
on Africa and with Africa, and to further develop our
vibrant Africa-EU partnership on the many issues the
General Assembly covers. In that regard, we would like
to take this opportunity to appeal to the flexibility of
the African Group to allow for the broad participation
of non-governmental organizations in the context of

3

A/67/PV.74

other upcoming high-level meetings, including that on
human trafficking.
To conclude, the European Union and its member
States remain strong supporters of the positive
contribution of the African Union and African
subregional organizations to peace on their continent.
We will continue to strengthen the global partnership
in support of Africa’s own efforts and leadership
to resolve conflicts and promote durable peace and
sustainable development.
Mr. Barriga (Liechtenstein): Liechtenstein and
Switzerland join others in congratulating African
Member States on the fiftieth anniversary of the
establishment of the Organization of African Unity,
the predecessor of today’s African Union. Much of
Africa’s progress today is due to the foresight of the
founding fathers of the African Union, and we welcome
the continuing and indispensable role of the Union in
resolving conflict and promoting peace and security
on the African continent. We therefore find it entirely
appropriate for the General Assembly to adopt a political
declaration on the peaceful resolution of conflicts in
Africa (resolution 67/259).
We would also have thought it appropriate, however,
for a document of such a nature to be prepared in true
consultation with all members of the General Assembly
to ensure a balanced outcome that is supported by
all. We would have preferred in particular a stronger
emphasis on justice, human rights and gender equality as

4

essential pillars of conflict resolution and development.
Nevertheless, we are satisfied that the declaration just
adopted duly celebrates the achievements made by the
African people and encourages all of us to work even
harder for a prosperous future for Africa.
Mr. Langeland (Norway): Norway welcomes the
adoption of the political declaration on the peaceful
resolution of conflicts in Africa (resolution 67/259).
It is timely to mark the important role played by the
Organization of African Unity/African Union over
the past 50 years and, not least, the need to further
strengthen the cooperation between the African Union
and the United Nations.
While supporting the declaration, Norway would
have preferred a more inclusive and consultative
process in its elaboration. It would have benefited by
including language on the important role of women
in resolving conflicts and in peacebuilding. Norway
would also have preferred including formulations on
justice, the rule of law and fighting impunity.
Let me assure the Assembly that Norway supports
the declaration.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position. The General
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 33.
The meeting rose at 10.55 a.m.

13-31525
