THIRTY-SECOND

YEAR

MEETING:

NEW

9 SEPTEMBER

1977

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2030/Rev.

Adoption

of the agenda

1)

. . , . . . . . . . . . . , . . . , , . . , . . .

1

. . : . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 26 August 1977 from the Permanent
Representative
of Cyprus to
the United
Nations
addressed to the President
of the Security
Council
(S/12387)
, . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . .

1

SjPV.2030

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. , .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

t

Held in New York

2030TH

MEETING

on Friday,

9 September

President: Mr. Riidiger van WECHMAR
(Federal Republic of Germany).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela.
Provisional agenda (?$/Agenda/2030/Rev,l)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 26 August 1977 from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council

(S/12387)
The meeting was called to order at 5.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 26 August 1977 from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12387)
1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2026th meeting, 1 invite the representatives of
Cyprus, Greece and Turkey to participate, without the right
to vote, jn the Copncil’s dis&sion
under the terms of
Article 31 of the Charter aqd rule 37 of the provisiooal
rules of procedure.
At [he invitatioq of the President, Mr* Christophides
(Greece)
and Mr. Rirkmen
(Clvprqs),
Mr. Pap&i@
(Turkey) took places pt the Coxncil table.
2. The PRESIDENT: The first speaker is the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Cyprus, upon whom I now call.
3. Mr. CHRISTOPHIDES (Cyprus): Mr. President, may I say
how grateful my delegation and I are to you and the other
members of the Council for holding this meeting and for
giving me this opportunity to make a statement.

1977, at 4 p.m.

4. The Council, nearly two weeks after it was convened as
a matter of urgency at the request of my Government, has
not yet heard-for some good reason, I would presumestatements from a number of representatives of Member
States and seems to be encountering difficulties in the
formulation of a draft resolution that would give appropriate expression to its position both on the broader aspects
of the Cyprus problem and on the immediate issue raised
by the situation in the new Famagusta area.
5. During the past several days, intensive private consultations have been held and a number of endeavours made
by you, Mr. President, by the previous President and by
members of the Council, acting individually or in groups, in
a.n effort to overcome the difficulties confronting the
Council as a result of the position taken on a resolution,
primarily by some members of a group within the Council.
6. In the meantime, the Cyprus crisis remains unabated,
and Ankara and the Turkish Cypriot leader Mr, De&as, by
inflammatory and provocative statements, cause alarm and
despondency among the unfortunate refugees, and particularly those from Famagusta. I shall now quote some of
those statements.
7. On 4 September, Mr. Denktas stated:
“A resolution of the Security Council on the Varosha
quarter of the Famagusta town would be a direct
intervention in the, internal affairs of the Federated State
and would adversely affect the intercommunal talks.”
8, Two days earlier, that is, on 2 September, the following
was published in the Turkish newspaper I’err:c’imun:
“Until now the policy of the ‘doves’ was being
implemented. In other words, a solution was being sought
through the intercommunal talks, and when it became
necessary territorial concessions were going to be made.
The voice of the ‘hawks’ is now being heard more and
more in Ankara. The ‘hawks’ advocate the implemention
of the Israeli policy. In other words, they want to occupy
more territory in the island and thus sit at the negotiating
table from a position of strength.”
9. On 6 September, Mr. Denktag declared: “There is no
such thing as the closing or opening to settlement of the
Famagusta region, Famagusta is within the Turkish Federated State.” One day later, in an interview with the
Turkish newspaper Cumhuriyet, he stated:
“There are Turks who want to settle in Famagusta and
whom we will settle . . . The settlement of Famagusta is

-

the safeguarding of the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and non-alignment of Cyprus, as provided
for in all the United Nations resolutions on Cyprus.

becoming a necessity as time passes . . The reality is that
Fmagusta is a region within the territory of the Turkish
Federated State. The reality is that our State alone is
responsible for the way Famagusta is governed or used.”

15. Apart from the provisions for the intercommunal
negotiations on the internal aspect of the Cyprus problem,
there are also the cardinal provisions of the relevant United
Nations resolutions. These demand the withdrawal of all
foreign troops from Cyprus, the cessation of all foreign
interference in the Republic of Cyprus and the return of
the refugees to their homes in safety. These provisions are
directed at and can be implemented only by Turkey and by
Turkey alone. It is of course an indisputable fact that
Ankara has not only ignored these provisions but has also
been persistently violating them.

And on 8 September, Mr. Denkta$ made the following
statement: “The time has come to take a decision on the
proclamation of independence.”
10. I am certain that the statements to which I have
referred do not paint a happy future for Cyprus.
Il. My Government and the people of Cyprus therefore
find It difficult to comprehend why, two weeks after it was
convened urgently, the Council is still unable t0 reach a
decision on such critical issues as the persistent Violations of
its resolutions by Turkey and Turkey’s illegal moves to
colonize even the new Famagusta area. Of course, these
actions have special implications for international peace and
security. The reaching of a decision should not, I would
submit to the Council, present any major difficulty since it
seems clear that on the basic points there exists unanimity
or near unanimity and a common position.

16. There is also no doubt that the Council remains firmly
committed to its own resolutions, that it regard them as the
appropriate basis for a just solution of the Cyprus problem
and that it is concerned over the fact that they have not
been implemented. This view of the Council is clearly
manifested in paragraph 2 of resolution 410 (1977), unanimously adopted as recently as 15 June, and in which the
Council

12. On the basis of the statements made before the
Council and in the course of our many contacts with its
members, we have arrived at what we believe to be a fairly
accurate conclusion: that the overwhelming majority of
Council members are not in doubt as to the real facts with
regard to the recent developments in the new Famagusta
area. These facts were set out in my statement of 3 1 August
/202&h meeting] and were corroborated by the SecretaryGeneral [202&h meeting/. It would also be objectively
true to say that there is unanimity or near unanimity in the
Council that such developments constitute unilateral
actions in violation of the council’s own resolutions, and
particularly of its resolution 367 (1975). Some members of
the Council also share our view that the said unilateral
actions are only the beginning of the step-by-step colonization by Turkey of the new Famagusta area.

“Reaffirms once again its resolution 365 (1974) of 13
December 1974, by which it endorsed General Assembly
resolution
3212 (XXIX)
adopted unanimously
on
1 November 1974, and calls once again for the urgent and
effective implementation of those resolutions and of its
resolution 367 (1975) of 12 March 1975”.
17. It is in view of the absolute disregard shown by
Turkey towards the United Nations resolutions on Cyprus
and in the light of resolution 31/12 of 1976, in which the
General Assembly expressed the hope that the Security
Council would consider appropriate steps for the implementation of its resolution 365 (1974), that, in my statement
Of 31 August, I appealed to the Council to adopt effective
measures which would ensure the immediate and effective
Implementation of the resolutions on Cyprus.

13. It would also be safe to assess that there is grave
concern among all Council members regarding the disastrous repercussions which these new unilateral actions will
have both on the intercommunal talks and on the prospects
for a peaceful solution of the Cyprus problem, It is
therefore logical to assume that the Council would wish to
call upon Turkey to desist from any unilateral action in the
new Famagusta area and, indeed, elsewhere.

18. We firmly hold the view that a just solution of the
Cyprus problem can come about only through the full and
effective implementation of all the provisions of the
relevant resolutions and had hoped, therefore, that the
Council would have been prepared at least to entrust a
committee of the Council with the task of studying, in
consultation with the Secretary-General, the means by
which its resolutions could be implemented. It seems,
liowever, that a number of members are not prepared,
perhaps as yet, to support such a course.

14. We are also fully aware of the importance a great
number of members attach to the intercommunal talks
provided for in the Council resolutions, considering that if
they were carried out meaningfully and constructively they
could enable progress to be made towards solution of one
Of the aspects of the Cyprus problem, the internal aspect,
But it is also known-and I am certain that most members
agree with this view-that no meaningful and constructive
negotiations can be carried out unless there is a common
purpose in the negotiations and unless the representatives
Of both the Greek Cypriot and the Turkish Cypriot
communities come to the talks with comprehensive and
concrete ProPods on all subjects under negotiation. The
common Purpose of the negotiations shouId of course be

IP. In our opinion, the brief analysis I have made
demonstrates that there is indeed a consensus on a number
of points on which the Council could adequately respond
by the adoption of an appropriate resolution. We find it,
therefore, difficult to comprehend why the proceedings are
so protracted and what the Council’s difficulty is in arriving
at a conclusion, when the main elements to be incorporated
in an adequate resolution arc in substance agreed upon by
all or nearly all.
20. To us it seems strange that some members are
unwilling to spell out in a resolution, even in moderate
2

language, views which they firmly hold and on which
virtually all members of the Council seem to agree. It is not
for me to go into the reasons or expediencies motivating
such attitudes, but I believe I am entitled to say in all
candour that to a small country such as Cyprus, in its hour
of need, this attitude does not seem to be compatible with
the great responsibilities entrusted to this body of the
United Nations.
21. The PRESIDENT:
I have been informed that
Mr. celik, to whom the Council has extended an invitation
under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure [2026th
meeting], wishes to make a further statement to the
Council. If no member of the Council raises any objection,
therefore, I shall invite Mr. Celik to take a place at the
Council table and make an additional statement. There
being no objection, I so invite Mr. Celik and give him the
floor.
22. Mr. CELIK: I thank you, Mr. President, for giving mc
the floor. It is not my intention to take up every point
raised by my Greek Cypriot colleague, as it is not my
intention to inflate the Council’s deliberations.
23. The Council has now been seized of the Cyprus
problem for almost a fortnight and it has not yet been
possible to reach a conclusion to its deliberations. This in
itself shows and confirms our contention that there was no
urgency in the present Greek Cypriot recourse to the
Council in any case. There is no crisis and there has been no
crisis, unless it is the one precipitated by the Greek Cypriot
side for internal political reasons. The quotations that have
just been cited by the Greek Cypriot representative do not

point to any change of policy regarding new Famagusta.
Our position is on record, and there has been no change
indicated by the recent statements which have been quoted
here out of context,
24. It appears that the Greek Cypriot representative insists
on a one-sided resolution. Unfortunately,
it has not been
possible to reach a consensus. A resolution will not mean a
solution. We have enough resolutions, and we are of the
opinion-and we hope we are right-that we are agreed on a
framework within which, through negotiations, the Cyprus
problem could be solved. We still honour the framework
agreement reached and especially confirmed by the fourpoint agreement reached early this year between President
Denkta$ and the late Archbishop Makarios, and within this
framework we are prepared to go back with our colleague
and make a new effort for a political settlement.
25. As I have said, any resolution which might be
prejudicial to one side or the other would only hinder the
negotiations and would make an already difficult situation
even more difficult. With that in mind, I hope it will be
possible to avoid any conclusions which would not be
conducive to negotiations or would not help us to resume
negotiations which we hope this time wilI be more fruitful.
26. The PRESIDENT: There are no further speakers. The
date for the next meeting of the Council to continue
consideration of the agenda item will be fixed in consultation with members of the Council.
The meeting rose at 5.30 p.m.

United
Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section,
New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

may
be obtained
your bookstore

LES

PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
and distributors
or write
to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

1~s publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
depositaires
du mondc entier.
Informez-vow
aupres de votre libraire
B : Nations
Unies. Section des ventes, New York ou Gen&ve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE

LAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
estin
buidoras
en todas partes
de1 mundo.
Consulte
Unidas, Section de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Lftho

in United

Nations,

New

York

Price:

$U.S.

1.00 (or equivalent

NACIONES

et les agences
ou adressez-vous

UNIDAS

en vcnta en librerias
y casas distria su librero
o dirfjase
a: Naciones

in other

currencies)

77-70001-October

1978-2,200
