United Nations

S/PV.6370

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6370th meeting
Friday, 6 August 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Churkin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Ebner
Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Dunlop
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet
Mr. Sumi
Ms. Ziade
Mr. Heller
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Mugoya
Mr. Parham
Ms. DiCarlo

Agenda
United Nations peacekeeping operations

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-47717 (E)

*1047717*

S/PV.6370

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
United Nations peacekeeping operations
The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Bangladesh, Canada, India,
Pakistan, the Philippines and the Republic of Korea, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend invitations under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Alain Le Roy,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations;
Lieutenant-General Sikander Afzal, Force Commander
of the United Nations Mission in Liberia; LieutenantGeneral Babacar Gaye, Force Commander of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo; Major General
Moses Bisong Obi, Force Commander of the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan; Major General Robert
Mood, Head of Mission and Chief of Staff of the
United Nations Truce Supervision Organization; and
Major-General Luiz Guilherme Paul Cruz, Force
Commander of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I would also like to welcome the other Force
Commanders present with us today.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is

2

meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Peacekeeping is one of the key activities of the
United Nations, an effective instrument for maintaining
international peace and security. This year the number
of peacekeepers has reached a historic high. Two-thirds
of these are uniformed personnel who play a lead role
in addressing such challenging tasks as supporting the
efforts of national Governments to restore stability and
strengthen peace, ensuring the protection of civilians,
and monitoring ceasefires.
We hope that today’s meeting will give us an
opportunity once again to better understand the current
problems faced by peacekeepers, and their military
contingents above all, as they carry out the duties
entrusted to them by the Security Council. We hope
that it will help to enhance the Security Council’s level
of military expertise.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Le Roy, Lieutenant General Sikander
Afzal, Lieutenant General Babacar Gaye, Major
General Moses Bisong Obi, Major General Robert
Mood and Major General Luiz Guilherme Paul Cruz.
I give the floor to Mr. Le Roy.
Mr. Le Roy (spoke in French): I thank you very
much, Sir, for this opportunity once again to debate the
issue of peacekeeping operations. This discussion
demonstrates the ongoing and tireless support of the
Security Council for these operations, in particular
today in the presence of our Force Commanders and
heads of the military components of our operations. I
believe that those who work on the front lines of those
operations are very pleased and proud to be able to
address the Council themselves.
My statement will be brief because the Council
has had regular opportunities to hear me speak in the
past months. Today’s meeting will, instead, offer the
opportunity
for
interaction
with
the
Force
Commanders.
I simply wish to note that there are currently
deployed 15 peacekeeping operations, in the strict
sense of the word. The Council has opted to hear
representatives from five of these, whom you named a
moment ago, Sir. All the others are seated behind us
and are prepared to answer any question that the
members of the Council should care to address to them.
Unfortunately, as Council members are aware, two of
10-47717

S/PV.6370

them had to leave New York recently, at my request,
due to heightened tensions concerning their operations.
They are Major General Asarta Cuevas, Force
Commander of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNMIL), whom I asked to return to preside
over the important tripartite meeting held on
Wednesday evening, and Lieutenant General
Nyamvumba, Force Commander of the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, who was
compelled to return to his core tasks in the field to
address the current tensions in certain camps in Darfur.

To conclude, since I said that I would be very
brief, I should like to point out to the Council that
Lieutenant General Obiakor will complete his tour of
duty in early September. On behalf of the Secretariat, I
should like to thank him for his outstanding
commitment to the United Nations, first as the Force
Commander of UNMIL in Liberia, under very difficult
conditions, and for the past two years as Military
Adviser. We have greatly benefited from his experience
and wise advice. We are extremely thankful and
grateful to him, and wish him the best for the future.

Among those who will speak, we have chosen a
panel that is very representative of the broad diversity
of our peacekeeping operations, from the oldest — the
United Nations Truce Supervision Organization,
created in 1948 — to such multidimensional operations
as the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), the United Nations Mission in Liberia,
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti and
the United Nations Mission in the Sudan.

The President (spoke in Russian): I thank Mr. Le
Roy for his briefing.

(spoke in English)
I should just like to remind the Council of the
current figures. As of 31 July, we had almost 120,000
peacekeepers deployed, among them 84,000 military,
13,000 police officers, and 22,000 civilians. Thus, we
have almost 100,000 people in uniform, plus 22,000
civilians. There has been, of course, a drawdown of the
United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad and MONUSCO, but we are still at
a very significant level. We cannot speak of a really
important drawdown; we consider that we have come
from a period of surge to a period of consolidation. We
are now at a plateau in consolidation, because we do
not see any new peacekeeping operation on the way.
We do not complain about that.
I just want to mention that this consolidation
phase will be used by us to consolidate and improve
our efficiency in so many fields: planning, oversight,
drafting protection of civilians strategies and robust
peacekeeping — in brief, our reform agenda. I also
want to mention that, of course, we are maintaining our
commitment to our reform agenda. Our New Horizon
process is going well. In September, the Council will
receive our first progress report. I must also note that
Susana Malcorra is working quite well and progressing
on the global field support strategy, on which the
Council will also receive a report very soon.

10-47717

I now give the floor to Lieutenant General
Sikander Afzal.
Lieutenant General Afzal: My name is Sikander
Afzal and I am the Force Commander of the United
Nation Mission in Liberia (UNMIL). It is an honour for
me to be allowed to say a few words about the Mission
in Liberia.
Liberia is emerging from the devastation caused
by 14 years of civil war. Its Government is taking the
right steps to improve infrastructure, governance and
the well-being of its people with the help of the world
community, donor nations and the United Nations.
However, it still has a long way to go.
From a regional perspective, there is no direct
threat to Liberia from any of its neighbours, but the
volatility of the region, coupled with the tribal, ethnic
and demographic links among regional countries means
that a serious event in any one country is likely to spill
over into another. Although Liberia is generally calm
and peaceful, unemployment, poverty and weak
infrastructure are hampering development. Let me
highlight some of the most serious security challenges
to Liberia.
The greatest challenge facing the Government of
Liberia is that of law and order and dealing with
criminality. Linked to this is the problem of maintaining
internal security. The root of the problem is the
population’s lack of confidence in the police and
judicial systems. The police lack the ability to respond
to crime effectively, although the situation is improving.
At the same time, the judicial system does not have the
capacity to deal with the increasing caseload. The lack
of confidence often results in vigilante mob justice
requiring the intervention of UNMIL.

3

S/PV.6370

Land disputes are a common occurrence in
Liberia as a legacy of the war. Many displaced people
have settled in areas belonging to other people, and the
laws relating to property rights, boundaries and natural
resources are not clear. When tribal and ethnic factors
are added in, disagreements can quickly turn violent.
UNMIL military has successfully completed
stage three of its drawdown. Its military strength is
now 8,102, down from 14,000 personnel, representing
43 different troop-contributing countries, as mandated
by the Security Council in its resolution 1885 (2009) of
September 2009. UNMIL remains headquartered in
Monrovia. The operating forces are deployed in two
sectors, with three infantry battalions each, a force
reserve of a battalion, six engineer companies and three
field hospitals.
The drawdown has meant that remaining units
have had to extend their areas of responsibility with no
additional resources. As a consequence, it has become
difficult to maintain a presence in all districts, and
UNMIL has increased the number of extended longdistance patrols by air and by road. In addition, our
reaction time in dealing with unforeseen situations has
increased. Therefore, the battalion-sized quick reaction
force is now based in Monrovia and at two forward
operating bases adjacent to main communication routes
to the Guinea and Côte d’Ivoire borders. In the absence
of engineering capacity within the country, it is the
force engineers who keep the roads open all year round
and thus ensure that logistics reach not only the United
Nations camps, but also the local populace.
Some of the lessons learned in the past year have
led to making the crisis management mechanisms
within UNMIL more effective. Joint exercises of
UNMIL military and UNMIL police personnel have
increased. There is a need to train and equip the United
Nations military force to respond to civil disorder by
establishing within the military contingents companysized units capable of conducting riot control. Steps
have been taken to improve joint military-police
cooperation, in the shape of table-top exercises and
rehearsals on the ground. On the crisis-management
side, a formal crisis-management team and a crisismanagement working group have been established —
chaired by the special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral — and the effectiveness of the Joint
Operations Centre has been improved.

4

Let me conclude by highlighting three major
challenges for UNMIL and its force in the near future.
First, the upcoming national elections at the end
of 2011 will be a prominent marker in measuring the
success of the UNMIL mission and in shaping the
Mission’s withdrawal from Liberia. Support for the
elections is expected to place a huge burden on the
UNMIL force to deal with any volatile situations, as
well as on logistics capabilities, particularly in the light
of UNMIL’s reduced numbers.
The second challenge is the budgetary constraints
as a consequence of drawdown and the funding
available for peacekeeping. While the force has been
reduced in numbers, its tasks remain the same. In order
to fulfil its mandate, it has to undertake more aerial and
ground patrolling, which implies more flying hours and
more consumption of fuel and wear and tear on
equipment. Thus, the tasks cannot be completed when
a reduced budget is allocated to the Mission.
The third challenge is the transition in security
tasks from UNMIL to the Government of Liberia. The
Mission’s exit strategy envisages a final withdrawal
when Liberia has a self-sustainable security sector able
to perform independent of the UNMIL mission.
Transition planning has commenced for UNMIL’s
handover of its currently mandated security sector
responsibilities to the appropriate national agencies,
following a very fruitful and productive workshop in
June.
Significant progress has been achieved. However,
slow progress in security sector reform, the absence of
police infrastructure, a limited national security
presence in outlying counties and weak capacity of the
criminal justice sector pose huge challenges to the
transition process. Considerable assistance from the
United Nations and bilateral partners is required to
ensure a smooth and seamless transition process.
In conclusion, I would like to submit that while at
present the situation is calm and stable, this is
primarily as a result of the deterrence of the UNMIL
force and the United Nations police. However, in case
a rapid withdrawal of the force is undertaken after the
elections without building the capacity of the country’s
security sector, the potential for the country slipping
into internal strife cannot be ruled out. From a situation
of success we may have another Timor-Leste,
Democratic Republic of the Congo or Haiti on our
hands.

10-47717

S/PV.6370

I humbly request the members of the Security
Council, donor countries and other players to invest
and focus all their resources on strengthening the
Liberian police and military and improving the
communication infrastructure in the country over the
next few years, so that UNMIL can leave as a success.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Lieutenant General Azfal for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Lieutenant General
Babacar Gaye.
Lieutenant General Gaye (spoke in French): As
the outgoing Force Commander of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), I would like to
say a few words on the challenges faced by the Mission
and the progress it has made in the area of protecting
civilians.
As the Council is aware, it was in 2000 that the
task of protecting civilians first figured in the mandate
of what was then the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC). Of course, that undertaking was entirely in
line with the Secretary-General’s statement during the
sixty-third session of the General Assembly in which
he recalled that the United Nations was the champion
of the most vulnerable (see A/63/PV.5). Quite clearly,
that statement in no way detracted from the primary
role of States in protecting their people, as was
reiterated at the 2005 World Summit. For the United
Nations, this is about helping countries to help
themselves by providing tailored support to meet
individual circumstances.
(spoke in English)
In MONUC, now MONUSCO, the protection of
civilians is the Mission’s priority task. Although the
military was nearly at 20,000 in strength and possessed
some useful capabilities, including eight attack
helicopters, we had an operational area equivalent to
the size of Western Europe before expansion to the
east, as well as a population nearing 65 million people
and limited intelligence assets. In the eastern provinces
of the Kivus alone, the entire force could be spread out
to just one peacekeeper per 20 square kilometres.
Adding to those problems was the lack of roads and
infrastructure, which made it extremely slow and
difficult to get from one place to another. It is
undoubtedly a beautiful part of the world, but the

10-47717

climate and terrain can be arduous, rendering many
places remote and inaccessible.
The threats to the population have also been
numerous and varied. They have faced the physical
threat posed by countless armed groups, as well as the
broader human security threats stemming from years of
poverty and underdevelopment. At the same time, our
partner on the ground — the Forces armées de la
République démocratique du Congo (FARDC) — is
struggling to integrate and exercise command and
control over tens of thousands of former militia
combatants. We must recognize that, without proper
military training, equipment and communications, and
operating in a highly volatile political environment,
many of the members of the FARDC themselves
constitute a threat to the population. Our work with the
country’s senior military command to help with
planning, military justice and logistical support must
be seen in the context of our protection mandate.
Our approach to this problem has been very much
an integrated one with our civilian colleagues in the
Mission. Together, we have identified the areas of
greatest risk, and have then set about deploying
peacekeepers to the most vulnerable sites. Our
approach is based on the premise that presence equals
protection. And in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, presence equals mobility. Each battalion has
been required to deploy to around six to eight separate
sites and to maintain a high profile and a robust
presence both day and night.
We cannot pretend to provide blanket protection.
We have attempted to overcome gaps by conducting
regular long-range patrols and temporary two-to-threeday standing deployments. In parallel, there have been
deployments by the Congolese army. Admittedly,
however, not all units have a positive benefit, for the
reasons I have mentioned. In essence, that has been the
framework around which our approach has been built,
and, over time, improvements and enhancements have
been made.
I have mentioned presence and mobility; but
there is a third essential ingredient of our protection
effort: communication. The Mission’s military and
civilian components have increasingly concentrated on
improving our communication with the population and
with key actors, both to understand the situation better
and to make ourselves better understood.

5

S/PV.6370

For instance, community liaison interpreters are
now deployed to many of the troop sites to improve
liaison and interaction with locals. A network of highfrequency radios and mobile phones is being rolled out
to bolster the already established unit surveillance
centres. And multidisciplinary Joint Protection Teams
are now quickly dispatched to areas where there are
reports of problems, to advise on the best course of
action.
The Mission’s Joint Military Analysis Centre has
also been a great help in pointing the Force towards
emerging areas of concern. In the very remote areas of
Bas-Uele, in northern Orientale province, where the
Lord’s Resistance Army continues to prey on small
village communities, MONUSCO is also conducting
farming patrols, allowing villagers to work in safety in
their fields. And in parts of the volatile Kivus, we are
providing security escorts so that groups of up to 1,000
civilians can go to their weekly markets. Thus, we have
certainly made some advances and have become more
adept at tackling this task.
Managing expectations has been a major
challenge. Congolese see a relatively well-equipped
and well-organized team of Blue Helmets and cannot
understand why we cannot protect everyone,
everywhere. Well-motivated and concerned actors in
the international community often have high and, I
dare say, unrealistic expectations of the force. We have
not shied away from the challenge and have sought out
humanitarian and civil society actors, both Congolese
and international, to help us do a better job.
Ultimately, the protection of the population in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo will depend upon
expansion of State authority and the rule of law across
the country. This is still a work in progress, and the
force has lent its support to this effort through the work
of engineering units and other specialists.
The protection of civilians is new ground for
many of the troops, and there is a need for in-depth
United Nations military doctrine and more
comprehensive individual and collective training on
the protection of civilians. The greater use of
interpreters is also vital to overcoming some of the
language and cultural issues, and operational reach and
responsiveness hinge on the United Nations ability to
muster sufficient and capable transport — particularly
aviation — assets.

6

Even then, try as we might, we will never be able
to offer a complete guarantee of security. There will
always be risks, and the Mission will always be
vulnerable to some form of criticism. But by adopting
this proactive, high-profile and — where necessary —
robust stance, the United Nations is able to show a
strong and effective commitment to the very important
task of championing the most vulnerable. I am
enormously proud of what our young soldiers, their
officers and civilian colleagues in the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and MONUSCO have managed to achieve
in this regard, and I have every confidence they will
continue to do so in the future.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Lieutenant General Gaye for his briefing and now give
the floor to Major General Moses Bisong Obi.
Major General Obi: I thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity. I bring you warm greetings from
my Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
In my briefing this morning, I will attempt to
acquaint the Security Council with an overview of the
military activities of the United Nations Mission in the
Sudan (UNMIS). I am the Force Commander of
UNMIS. I will briefly discuss the current situation, our
achievements, the challenges facing us and the outlook
for the future.
UNMIS is in a critical period of its mandate
implementation in the Sudan as the country approaches
the 9 January referendum. The Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA) requires that two referendums be
held by 9 January 2011 — one in which the people of
Southern Sudan will vote for unity or secession, and
the other through which the people or the region of
Abyei will remain in Northern Sudan or become part of
Southern Sudan. Although the referendums are to be a
nationally managed process, both parties have called
on UNMIS to play a strong role in support of the
referendums.
The referendums are arguably the most
momentous events to happen in the country since its
independence and, with five months to go until
9 January, time is swiftly running out for the parties to
come to political agreement on a number of issues.
While the Southern Sudan Referendum Commission
has been established, it has yet to become fully
operational and only has until September to supervise

10-47717

S/PV.6370

the registration of voters. Worryingly, the Abyei
referendum commission has yet to be formed.

the population. We are therefore taking this threat very
seriously.

UNMIS planning and preparation are in full flow
to provide support to the referendums. Technical
reconnaissance of the 79 country referendum bases is
complete, and logistical and engineering planning is at
full tilt in an effort to set up the bases ready for
occupation. It is from these bases that United Nations
election teams will operate to support the referendums.
Lessons learned from elections earlier this year are
being applied, but the task is complex because of the
increase of the number of polling sites at the county
level, as opposed to the state level in the previous
election.

One of the key CPA milestones is the
redeployment of forces across the border line between
the North and the South. The Sudanese Armed Forces
(SAF) have redeployed north of the current boundary
line, which is known colloquially as the 1-1-5-6 line,
as mandated by the CPA, and this has been verified.
Generally speaking, the SAF is compliant with the
terms of the CPA. However, to date, we have a verified
figure of 34.85 per cent of the stated strength of SPLA
that has redeployed south of the current boundary line,
as opposed to 100 per cent of the SAF. It is, however,
possible that the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement
(SPLM) may have overstated the numbers of its actual
armed forces to begin with, and thus the percentage of
redeployment may be much higher, as not much SPLA
presence or activity has been visible within the current
boundary line.

In terms of the current situation, most of the dayto-day violence in the Mission area is primarily in
Southern Sudan and is tribal in nature. Cattle rustling
and abductions are routinely taking place in many parts
of Southern Sudan. Although these are practices that
have gone on for generations among and, at times,
within tribes and in a wider area than Southern Sudan
alone, currently they are often inextricably linked to
minor political players and local renegade actors
posturing for their own benefit.
The emergence of rebel groups in a number of
areas, linked very closely to tribal affiliations and
dissatisfied losers of the last elections, has been the
trend recently. This has manifested itself in clashes
with the Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA) in
three areas of our sector 3, resulting in the
displacement of the civilian population and human
rights abuses by SPLA elements.
On our flanks, we watch the events in Darfur
unfold and keep a close eye on the analysis that is
available. Of specific interest is where the southern
border of Darfur meets with western Bahr el Ghazal in
Southern Sudan. This is a large expanse of ground that
is not easily covered by UNMIS patrols. We are thus
largely unsighted on activities in this area, and we have
evolved plans to deliberately insert long-range patrols
into this area in order to enhance informationgathering. This effort has, however, often faced
obstructions from the SPLA.
Regarding the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA),
we receive unconfirmed reports of violent crimes in the
border areas between Western Equatoria and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Our concern is that
the LRA activities have an impact on the security of

10-47717

I would like to focus now on the achievements of
UNMIS and in particular the UNMIS military force.
Despite the wide gap between the political stance of
both parties, the ceasefire has continued to hold to a
great extent. All the violence in the UNMIS area of
responsibility is triggered at lower levels, either over
resources or because of local political and tribal
grievances.
The Sudanese elections took place between
11 and 15 April without major security-related
incidents. The canvassing and polling periods were
characterized by noticeable restraint in the incidence of
violence across the country, although independent
SPLM candidates were openly intimidated. Northern
Sudan is outside of our area of responsibility, and we
cannot say what may have happened there. The postelections period was tense and not helped by the
delayed announcement of results at the end of April.
Posturing by losing candidates demanding political
accommodation and a significant increase in SPLA
obstruction of UNMIS operations were noticed.
Our primary focus is the protection of civilians,
and we do this in partnership with our civilian pillars,
as well as with the host nation. The provision of safe
and secure areas around the team sites has already been
planned. Currently, the situation across the Sudan, with
the exception of Darfur, has improved on the whole.
However, in particular areas in the South —
specifically Jonglei and Upper Nile states, some areas

7

S/PV.6370

along the North-South border and specific districts
along the border between the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Sudan — cases of intimidation and
violence towards civilians continue.
We cannot be complacent and are in the process
of planning operations specifically designed to combat
the targeting of civilians. Operation Safe Refuge is one
such operation, and requires that every team site to preselect and plan a refuge for internally displaced
persons (IDPs). The challenge is significant as it
involves coordinating not only military, but also
civilian pillars, and encouraging United Nations
country teams to come on board to provide through
non-governmental organizations the key requirements
of water, shelter and sanitation for a predetermined
number of IDPs.
Permit me to now discuss the key challenges we
face in UNMIS, in addition to the referendums I have
already touched on. Throughout most of this year, we
have seen our ability to operate both North and South
of the 1-1-5-6 line deteriorate because of the
belligerence of both parties. Freedom of movement is a
constant challenge to the force and all elements of the
Mission; incidents range from the deliberate
obstruction of logistical convoys to the feeding of false
information on current situations in the area.
Forceful abuses have happened as well. Two
recent examples are the hijacking of an UNMIS
helicopter and the manhandling of an UNMIS patrol,
including a helicopter crew, in Kodok, Southern Sudan,
in July. This latter case has triggered high-level
political démarches and engagements with the
Government of Southern Sudan, and mechanisms to
prevent such future abuses have been agreed upon. The
issue of freedom of movement and harassment of
United Nations personnel is thus being treated very
seriously, as it could impact on UNMIS mandate
implementation and the credibility of the referendum.
We are constrained by inadequate assets available
to the force to undertake operations. This creates
inevitable drag in our planning and tasking flexibility.
Resources are limited and, given that across Southern
Sudan the rains make movement almost impossible, the
only manner of projecting the force is by air. We
continue to work with the Mission Support Unit to try
to acquire the support necessary for agility and
flexibility in our intended manoeuvres and force
projection.

8

Looking to the future, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General has developed an
UNMIS/United Nations country team integrated action
plan for the Sudan. The plan has five strategic
objectives, which include the holding of credible
referendums in Southern Sudan and Abyei; fruitful
consultations in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile
states; the successful negotiation of post-referendum
engagement arrangements; overall Mission area
stability and protection of civilians; and finally,
improved governance capacity and rule of law in
Southern Sudan.
The military will lead in Mission area stability
and protection of civilians. My plan is to deliver a
more agile and mobile force to achieve Mission area
stability. To this end, emphasis is being placed on
patrolling and use of mobile reserves. In view of the
extensive area of responsibility and the absence of
roads, the demand for air assets is huge. We have also
identified one sanctuary per team site for the protection
of civilians. All pillars of UNMIS and the United
Nations country team are working together in this
regard. In addition to the physical protecting of
civilians, mitigation and deterrent troop patrolling are
also being employed to discourage violence against
civilians.
Finally, I would like to state that the referendums
to be organized in Southern Sudan in January 2011 are
of historic significance. The outcome could have vast
consequences, not only for the Sudan but for the region
and for Africa as a whole. The experience of the last
elections revealed challenges related to the lack of
capacity of local institutions. The challenge for
UNMIS and the international community to ensure
credible referendums is huge. UNMIS is conscious of
this responsibility and all hands are on deck to ensure
successful mandate implementation.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank Major
General Obi for his briefing. I now give the floor to
Major General Robert Mood.
Major General Mood: It is a privilege to serve
as a United Nations peacekeeper and it is an honour to
address the Security Council today. It is also an honour
to lead the first United Nations peacekeeping
operation, created by the Council in August 1949 —
the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization
(UNTSO). Our mission area straddles complex
cultural, religious, historic and perceptional fault lines

10-47717

S/PV.6370

in Egypt, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon and Syria. The work
of UNTSO is twofold. On the one hand we continue to
observe, on the Council’s behalf, withdrawals and
military disengagements between Israel, Lebanon and
Syria. On the other hand, through regional dialogue we
continue to assist the efforts of all five countries
towards a regional peace.
One might ask: Does UNTSO still deliver on the
commitment made by the Council in 1949? Let me
answer with four thoughts. First, UNTSO continues to
provide the international community with a regional
presence and perspectives on the Middle East that are
not limited to local withdrawal and disengagement
areas. Secondly, we continue to enjoy consent and
appreciation wherever we operate, from our
headquarters in Jerusalem, to Amman to Beirut,
Damascus and Cairo. Thirdly, once the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF)
have accomplished their mandates, UNTSO provides
an available mechanism for transition, while also
supporting
the
parties
in
their
subsequent
implementation of a comprehensive regional peace in
the Middle East.
Finally, impartial observation, de-escalation of
incidents and an objective regional perspective are
delivered at a fraction of the cost of larger operations.
As borders are discussed among Israel, its neighbours
and a future Palestinian State, UNTSO continues to be
as current today as when the Green Line was drawn.
Allow me to highlight some achievements. First,
the Force Commanders of UNIFIL and UNDOF
recognize the complementary value of unarmed UNTSO
observers under their operational control. The 153
unarmed female and male observers from 23 nations are
well-trained and experienced officers, contributing
significantly to UNIFIL and UNDOF operations.
Secondly, UNTSO, UNIFIL and UNDOF Force
Commanders have achieved unity of effort on mandate
implementation, enabled by their combined role as
heads of mission, thus aligning military and civilian
components in the same direction.
Thirdly, our unarmed male and female observers
enjoy unique access and trust among the local
authorities and population in South Lebanon and on the
Golan.

10-47717

Fourthly, we are welcomed and actively engaged
in bilateral and multilateral dialogues that serve to
de-escalate incidents and eliminate violence.
Fifthly, we enjoy an open and constructive host
nation dialogue with all five countries on a range of
issues related to support and cooperation.
Lastly, UNIFIL, UNTSO and UNDOF are
harmonizing and cooperating effectively on logistical
aspects of the missions, achieving cost-effectiveness
and enhancing operational output.
Allow me also to point out a few concerns and
challenges. First, improved coordination among the
civilian and military components of the United Nations
family in order to achieve integrated effects that imply
sustainable results carry considerable potential.
Secondly, much of the complexity we face is born
in and fuelled from countries beyond the five in the
Mission area. There is a need to relate to those who can
influence the military landscape, including States that
are not within the Mission area and non-States that are.
Thirdly, the credibility of the United Nations rests
on impartiality — actual and as perceived by the host
nations.
Lastly, seeds of conflict born of the fundamental
long-term risks to our planet, such as the lack of fresh
water, are becoming more apparent, including in the
Middle East.
The
United
Nations
Truce
Supervision
Organization is the most enduring evidence of the
Security Council’s commitment to supporting the
achievement of a comprehensive regional peace in the
Middle East. As the United Nations calls upon the
parties to show maximum restraint, refrain from
violations of Security Council resolutions and engage
in active dialogue, the United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization remains ready and available
to support their positive engagement.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank Major
General Mood for his briefing. I now give the floor to
Major General Luiz Guilherme Paul Cruz.
Major General Paul Cruz: I am General Paul
Cruz, Force Commander of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for this
precious opportunity to present the Security Council

9

S/PV.6370

with a view of MINUSTAH and its military
component, with a focus on humanitarian assistance,
which is an important part of the Mission’s daily
operations.
Since its inception on 1 June 2004, the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti has reached a
number of milestones. In the midst of ongoing violence
in the country, legislative and executive elections were
planned that, after having been postponed several
times, were held in February 2006. MINUSTAH played
a significant role in ensuring that the presidential
elections were organized, monitored and carried out in
a free and fair manner.
In 2006 and 2007, the military component of
MINUSTAH assisted in the restoration and
maintenance of the rule of law and public safety and
order in Haiti, including in the central areas of Port-auPrince. The years of 2008 and 2009 were rife with riots
and the destruction that the hurricanes wrought upon
the nation.
On 12 January 2010, an earthquake levelled
entire neighbourhoods in the capital city, delivered a
severe blow to a still-weak Haitian economy and
infrastructure, and impeded nation-building efforts in
the country. The catastrophe also led to a climate of
political uncertainty, interrupting a period of relatively
smooth progress towards elections that previously been
scheduled for February 2010.
In his semi-annual report on the situation in Haiti
dated 22 February 2010 (S/2010/200), the SecretaryGeneral provided recommendations on the future role
of the United Nations Mission in Haiti. After entering a
period of consolidation, MINUSTAH needed a surge
effort in order to help the Government preserve the
gains of stabilization to date and enable a transition to
long-term reconstruction.
Since the earthquake, humanitarian assistance, in
conjunction with relief and recovery operations, has
represented the primary focus of MINUSTAH and the
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes,
alongside international organizations and nongovernmental organizations, with, of course, the full
cooperation of all countries represented in this Council
and many others.
The Mission as a whole is actively engaged in
carrying out stage 2 of this concept of humanitarian
relief operations. It must be said that food, water, some

10

form of shelter and emergency medical assistance have
been delivered in a stable environment. There have
been no major epidemic outbreaks. A strategic plan
detailing stage 3, the normalization phase, is currently
being developed by MINUSTAH.
Notwithstanding the new mandate bestowed upon
the military component of MINUSTAH following the
earthquake, humanitarian assistance has always been a
key area of focus, along with programmes of violence
reduction. Better communication and approaches to
dealing with the Haitian people became necessary after
incidents that occurred at the beginning of the Mission.
Accordingly, coordination of action between civilians
and military personnel, and thus of humanitarian
assistance, became a priority for the success of the
military component’s mission in MINUSTAH.
Our activities are not intended to be a vehicle for
the Government’s development efforts or to replace
civilian organizations that have a greater capacity for
undertaking development projects. Rather, the
humanitarian activities carried out are to support the
Mission’s goals.
The military component has been providing quick
response assistance in the aftermath of such events as
hurricanes, floods, building collapses, accidents and
security breaches. Besides providing security, the
military component’s distribution of the necessities of
life, such as water, food, shelter and medical
assistance, comprises its ongoing activities in support
of United Nations agencies and programmes and nonUnited Nations organizations.
Naturally, since the earthquake, our focus on
these activities has increased exponentially. Through
its joint operations and tasking centre, it has been
possible for MINUSTAH to coordinate assistance
provided by diverse actors. A long list of countries
provided immediate assistance that was delivered as
fast as possible.
United Nations military had control of security,
which allowed the United States Joint Task Force Haiti
and troops from Canada, Spain, France and Italy,
among others, to carry out their main humanitarian
assistance tasks. The military component now has the
added responsibility of participating in the security of
the camps for internally displaced persons (IDPs). We
focus on the safety and security of those women and
children who are most at risk.

10-47717

S/PV.6370

Our engineers are working diligently every day to
improve the quality of life for communities across
Haiti on projects such as removing rubble, clearing
roads, rebuilding bridges, cleaning canals, preparing
sites for IDP camps, clearing areas to rebuild schools
and orphanages, digging wells, and so on.

As a police- and troop-contributing country — a
country moreover with significant experience of United
Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts —
Bosnia and Herzegovina is particularly aware of the
importance of the topic we are considering at this
meeting.

Since the inception of the Mission, the military
component of MINUSTAH has been involved in
humanitarian assistance. It has acquired great deal of
expertise in these areas, especially following the
hurricanes of 2004 and 2008. After the earthquake, it
used this expertise to work with the civilian branches
of MINUSTAH, the United Nations country team and
non-United Nations organizations in completing their
tasks. The military force will continue to pursue these
activities in order to contribute to the fulfilment of
MINUSTAH’s mandate to create a secure and stable
environment in Haiti.

Achieving sustainable peace from an initial peace
agreement requires clear and adequate mandates
adapted to country-specific situations, strategic
planning and coherent implementation, as well as the
consent and commitment of the host country. Bosnia
and Herzegovina is convinced that, in order to
successfully implement Security Council mandates, the
issue of major gaps in capabilities, resources and
training has to be addressed through enhanced
coordination among the Security Council, the
Secretariat and police- and troop-contributing
countries. We particularly underscore the role of the
Peacebuilding Commission in bringing together all the
relevant actors and call for further strengthening and
consolidation of its contribution to peacekeeping
efforts. We also believe that the Security Council could
rely more on its advice.

The President (spoke in Russian): I thank Major
General Paul Cruz for his briefing.
Before I give the floor to Security Council
members, I would like to welcome the Military Adviser
for peacekeeping operations, Lieutenant General
Chikadibia Obiakor, who, in accordance with the
understanding reached by the Security Council in its
prior consultations, is attending today’s meeting in
accordance with rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure. As the General’s term of office expires in
September 2010, I would like to thank him on behalf of
the Council for the job he has done and to wish him
every success in his future endeavours.
At this time, I now give the floor to members of
the Security Council.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Bosnia
and Herzegovina would like to thank the Russian
Federation for convening this debate on United Nations
peacekeeping operations. We thank the UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Alain Le Roy, and Force Commanders Lieutenant
General Sikander Afzal, Lieutenant General Babacar
Gaye, Major General Moses Bisong Obi, Major
General Robert Mood and Major General Luiz
Guilherme Paul Cruz for their valuable and
comprehensive briefings. We commend their tireless
efforts and outstanding work in maintaining
international peace and security.

10-47717

The United Nations has notably improved the
effectiveness of its peacekeeping. However, the
challenges posed by the global deployment of United
Nations missions will require additional and further
improvements in mandate design, strategic planning,
cognitive capacity and coherence. We urge the
Secretariat to continue to increase its planning capacity
expertise, as more data would be helpful in drafting
mandates.
Bosnia and Herzegovina stresses the importance
of including strategic integrated planning and
benchmarks, developed in close consultation with host
countries and the relevant regional organizations and
stakeholders, wherever possible and appropriate. Clear
and carefully calibrated benchmarks can help improve
the Security Council’s strategic oversight of a
mission’s progress and facilitate appropriate and timely
preparations for further action.
With regard to the increasing need for expertise
in areas such as the rule of law, security sector reform
and the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process, we believe it is important to improve
recruitment and training and to upgrade humanresource rules, especially when a mission’s mandate
includes a number of peacebuilding aspects. The

11

S/PV.6370

United Nations roster system covering experts in the
various areas of mission activities should be improved,
including with respect to interoperability with similar
databases of experts from regional and subregional
organizations. The experience and knowledge of
civilian, police and military experts from past and
current peacekeeping and peacebuilding host countries
should also be utilized.
The development of a strategic framework on the
protection of civilians, containing elements and
parameters for mission-specific strategies, will assist
the mission leadership in elaborating a comprehensive
protection strategy aligned with a mission’s concept of
operations. The process of putting such concepts into
practice has to be clearly defined and discussed with
the troop- and police-contributing countries. In that
regard, training modules for pre-deployment and inmission training for peacekeeping personnel are
important.
Peacekeeping operations must complement
activities that address the immediate needs of the local
population. Implementing quick-impact projects
contributes to building confidence in the peacekeepers
and gaining support for a peacekeeping mission and its
mandate, as well as creating an environment conducive
to the peace process.
Bosnia and Herzegovina believes that transfer of
ownership and strengthening of national capacities are
of key importance, as a peacekeeping operation cannot
be a substitute for the political process. We therefore
emphasize the importance of activities aimed at that
goal, such as the training of national police and
military personnel in international humanitarian law,
international refugee law and the protection of
civilians, as well as the establishment of joint
operational teams.
Finally, we would like to stress once more the
importance of sincere and devoted effort on the part of
the international community in assisting local and
regional stakeholders to reach a genuine and
constructive political dialogue aimed at solving key
political issues. Such an approach would significantly
contribute to the creation of an environment conducive
to sustainable peace, stability and development.
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French): I
would like to join with Ambassador Barbalić in
congratulating you, Mr. President, on convening this
constructive discussion of peacekeeping operations. I

12

also welcome the presence among us of Mr. Alain Le
Roy, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Lieutenant General Sikander Afzal,
Lieutenant General Babacar Gaye, Major General
Moses Bisong Obi, Major General Robert Mood and
Major General Luiz Guilherme Paul Cruz, whom I
thank for their very informative briefings.
My delegation would also like to praise the
efforts of the United Nations aimed at promoting
peace, knowing that, as Mr. Le Roy reminded us, more
than 120,000 people are involved in 16 peacekeeping
operations on four continents. We pay a well-deserved
tribute to the Blue Helmets serving throughout the
world. Gabon also wishes to express its great sadness
at the loss of many peacekeepers in recent years. The
road accident that cost the lives of four Sierra Leone
peacekeepers in the province of Southern Darfur on
1 August have added to the list of the deceased.
Having listened to the various speakers, and
focusing primarily on the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), I would like to discuss the following
two points: the consolidation of progress achieved in
defining and implementing mandates; and the
challenges encountered in implementing those
mandates.
Turning to our first point — progress achieved in
defining and implementing mandates — with regard to
Darfur, my delegation welcomes the fact that
UNAMID is reaching full deployment for its military,
police and civilian components, with 88 per cent, 70
per cent and 75 per cent of the authorized numbers,
respectively. We are also pleased with the increasing
number of UNAMID patrols and their further
expansion into the territory, which has considerably
reduced attacks on civilians and helped improve their
living conditions.
With regard to MONUSCO, Gabon welcomes the
new mandate for the United Nations Mission, which
provides, among other things, for the completion of the
ongoing military operations in North and South Kivu
and in Orientale province, as well as for an
improvement in the means available to the Government
to protect its people effectively and to strengthen State
authority throughout the territory. MONUSCO is also
giving support to the victims of the explosion that took

10-47717

S/PV.6370

place in the village of Sange in South Kivu on 2 July,
proof that the new civilian protection mandate is being
implemented. The success of this operation is partly
due to the coordinated action that on this occasion
prevailed between the Congolese authorities and the
United Nations teams on the ground.
In Gabon’s view, the mandate has the merit of
providing for a future reconfiguration of the Mission
based on developments on the ground, thus making the
mandate more realistic. We also welcome the fact that
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon visited Kinshasa to
preside over the ceremony marking the succession
from MONUC to MONUSCO on 1 July. We take this
opportunity to salute Mr. Alan Doss, head of MONUC,
and to Lieutenant General Babacar Gaye, outgoing
commander of MONUC and MONUSCO, for their
excellent work in recent years in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We would also like to welcome
the appointment of Mr. Roger Meece as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and head of
MONUSCO and of General Chander Prakash as the
new Force Commander of MONUSCO. We have noted
the start of the first phase of the drawdown of
MONUSCO, as provided for in Security Council
resolution 1925 (2010).
Finally, my delegation is pleased to note that,
increasingly, new, multidisciplinary approaches are
being integrated into peacekeeping mandates, in line
with the Secretary-General’s 2008 report, such as
strengthening the rule of law, protection of civilians,
applying mechanisms for preventing the resurgence of
conflicts
and
implementing
reconstruction
programmes.
I shall now turn to the second point of my
statement — the challenges encountered in carrying
out the mandates of United Nations missions. The
complexity of current crises is leading to difficulty in
the implementation peacekeeping mandates, and these
crises are often the result, of course, of shortfalls in
financial and material resources.
With regard to the Sudan, UNAMID reports a
significant deficit in terms of airborne military
capacity, including utility helicopters needed for air
reconnaissance missions. We deplore the fact that
UNAMID also faces restrictions on its freedom of
movement, which have increased from 21 per cent in
May to 77 per cent in June.

10-47717

With regard to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, my delegation remains concerned by the scale
of the humanitarian tragedy caused by the fighting
between the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Ugandan rebels of the Allied
Democratic Forces/National Army for the Liberation of
Uganda. In this context, we welcome the decision
taken by the Mission on 19 July to establish an
advanced outpost in Mutwanga and to set up a
temporary base there in order to increase security in
the area and allow for the deployment of personnel and
the distribution of humanitarian aid in secure
conditions.
My delegation encourages the international
community to provide the various missions with
financial and material resources commensurate with
the situation and developments on the ground and to
work for constructive dialogue with host countries.
Furthermore, my country advocates for the language
factor to be taken into account when choosing force
commanders, for greater collaboration with regional
and subregional organizations, and for greater attention
to be paid to aspects relating to prevention.
I should like to pay tribute to General Obiakor for
his excellent work with the United Nations over these
past years, and I wish him every success in his future
endeavours.
Mr. Ebner (Austria): Austria strongly welcomes
your initiative, Sir, to organize the present debate,
which allows the Council to interact directly with
United Nations force commanders.
I should like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Le Roy for his introduction. I should also like to take
this opportunity to welcome the Force Commanders
present here today and to thank them for their very
interesting presentations. Austria would like to thank
all force commanders of the United Nations for their
commitment and important work in the field. We also
appreciate the presence of Lieutenant General Obiakor.
In recent discussions in the Security Council on
United Nations peacekeeping, one of the key recurring
issues has been the need for the Council to provide
peacekeeping missions with clear, credible and
achievable mandates oriented to a desired outcome and
matched with adequate resources for the fulfilment of
all mandated tasks. Benchmarks and a clear
prioritization of tasks have proved useful for the

13

S/PV.6370

Council to better track progress made
implementation of peacekeeping mandates.

in

the

In order to be able to respond in a timely and
appropriate manner to developments on the ground, the
Council needs to have all relevant information at its
disposal. Briefings by force commanders and military
experts provide accurate information on the real-life
challenges peacekeeping missions are facing, and thus
are indispensable to the decision-making of the Council.
We also welcome the fact that troop- and policecontributors are participating in today’s discussion.
The success and credibility of United Nations
peacekeeping will also depend on how far missions can
effectively discharge their mandates and thus live up to
the expectations raised within the population. With the
growing complexity of tasks entrusted to peacekeeping
missions and the scarcity of resources, we are
confronted with serious capability gaps, including in
terms of civilian support capacities. These gaps may
jeopardize the success and reputation of United
Nations peacekeeping.
More consistent information on mission-specific
capability gaps and the impact of those gaps on the
implementation of the mandated tasks can help to
effectively utilize the gap lists of each peacekeeping
operation and to mobilize Member States’ support to
address them. We therefore appreciate the efforts of
Japan as Chair of the Security Council Working Group
on Peacekeeping Operations in this regard. Equally, we
support the capability-driven approach outlined in the
New Horizon non-paper, which concentrates on skills,
capacity and equipment, with a special focus on
potential resource gaps. This is not only in the interests
of the effectiveness of missions, but is also essential to
the safety and security of peacekeepers.
Strengthening early warning and crisis prevention
capacity is another aspect that deserves more attention
in our work in the Council. Both mission leadership
and the Council need to receive all relevant
information and assessments on early warning, which
would allow for a response to emerging crisis
situations in a preventive manner. Missions have come
up with several inventive approaches, including the
joint protection teams in the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), designed not
only to provide information-gathering and analytical
support, but also to facilitate context-specific civil and

14

military measures to protect civilians and liaise with
local authorities. Such outreach activities foster
interaction with the local population and yield valuable
information for an accurate assessment of the
circumstances on the ground. We would be interested
in hearing more from the field about the potential to
strengthen missions’ capacities in this regard.
We welcome the fact that protection mandates
increasingly include all activities aimed at ensuring the
safety and physical integrity of civilian populations,
securing humanitarian access and ensuring full respect
for the rights of individuals by all parties to conflict, in
accordance with international humanitarian and human
rights law.
The ultimate goal of any peacekeeping mission
with a protection mandate must be to help restore an
environment in which the host State is able to fully
exercise its primary responsibility to protect its own
population.
Creating
a
favourable
protection
environment goes beyond the protection of civilians
from physical violence and must be complemented by
activities in the fields of security sector reform;
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration; the
rule of law; transitional justice; human rights; and the
empowerment of local societies. This would also
facilitate the transition to sustainable peacebuilding
and State-building.
Early coordination of these activities and a
common strategy among all actors involved, including
civil society, will be crucial for success. The untimely
drawdown or premature downscaling of peacekeeping
missions can seriously endanger a country’s stability
and the safety of the civilian population. Mandateadjustment or the drawdown of missions also needs to
be conditioned upon on the fulfilment of benchmarks
relating to the protection of civilians, and we
encourage the further development of such
benchmarks.
Armed groups attacking the civilian population,
in particular women and children, do not respect
international borders, which have become porous over
years of conflict and due to the lack of control. The
cross-border
cooperation
of
United
Nations
peacekeeping missions in adjoining of responsibility is
required in order to effectively tackle these threats. For
instance, we believe that the problem of the Lord’s
Resistance Army (LRA) needs to be addressed further
by drawing up a comprehensive strategy that includes

10-47717

S/PV.6370

Governments in the region and all relevant United
Nations missions, including MONUSCO, which is
mandated to ensure the protection of the civilian
population in the LRA-affected areas of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We would appreciate hearing more about
synergies and potential further cooperation in this
regard. Equally, we would be grateful for suggestions
as to how missions can contribute to the fight against
the impunity for perpetrators of such violence.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I want to thank you, Sir,
for having convened this important debate on
peacekeeping. I should also like to thank Mr. Alain Le
Roy, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations; Military Adviser Lieutenant General
Chikadibia Obiakor; and the five Force Commanders
drawn from different operational fields who have
briefed us today. This is a most welcome development
in the interaction of the Secretariat with the Security
Council. Let me especially commend the field
commanders for their inestimable sacrifices in leading
the various peace missions.
Peacekeeping continues to evolve, and it has
grown in terms of both scope and complexity. I will,
however, limit my comments to six key points in my
contribution to this debate.
First, we welcome the meetings of the Council
with troop- and police-contributing countries. Since the
commencement of these meetings, value has been
added in terms of mandate-setting, planning and
operations in the field by peacekeeping missions. The
next step is for the Council to interact more closely
with Force Commanders in order to better understand
the operational challenges. Feedback from the field, we
believe, will enhance the Council’s appreciation of the
results achieved and, indeed, will improve the
precision of peacekeeping mandates. In saying this, we
reiterate the need for all mandates to be clear, credible
and achievable. There should be an exit strategy, linked
to the core objective of each mission. Exit for its own
sake, without achievement of the set objective, would
be counterproductive.
Secondly, considering the gaps between
capabilities, capacities and mandates, there is a need to
strike the right balance between supply and demand.
Twenty-first-century peacekeepers face the challenges
of balancing the long-term outlook of a strategy with
the need to implement an effective exit strategy, as

10-47717

well as to maintain goodwill among civilians in
incredibly demanding and complex crisis scenarios. To
balance this equation, the quality of personnel,
equipment and finance must be commensurate with
operational mandates and objectives. Moreover, the
cultural context of deployment should always be borne
in mind, to avoid unnecessary conflict with host
countries and communities.
There is also a need to provide pre-deployment
training to prepare peacekeeping personnel for their
missions. Pre-deployment training has been integrated
into the preparation of Nigeria’s peacekeeping
personnel. In addition, we maintain a forward
operations base in Abuja to ensure the adequate
preparation of our peacekeepers. In fact, only last
month, the Nigerian Army Peacekeeping Centre in Jaji,
Kaduna, was certified by the United Nations for
peacekeeping training purposes. It is our intention to
make it a centre of excellence and the training hub for
peacekeeping personnel from Nigeria, States members
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and other African countries.
Thirdly, forging partnerships within and outside
the United Nations system is imperative for effective
peacekeeping. It is not possible for the United Nations,
acting along, to meet the needs of all its peacekeeping
missions. Therefore, seeking bilateral and other forms
of assistance would complement the efforts to address
critical gaps in peacekeeping. The need to involve
regional and subregional organizations in this regard
cannot be overstated. Concerted efforts should be made
to enhance, diversify and update the roster of
peacekeeping personnel, giving consideration as a
matter of policy to geographical balance in the
appointment of senior peacekeeping personnel in
relevant fields.
Fourthly, achieving coherence and coordination
between the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the Department of Field Support will have a positive
impact in the field. But coordination and coherence
should not be limited to Headquarters; it should,
ideally, also permeate United Nations country teams,
the donor community and other actors in peacekeeping.
Such coherence would result in better safety and
effectiveness and in the rapid deployment of
peacekeepers. A situation where peacekeepers continue
to live in substandard settlement conditions long after
their arrival at their duty posts does not augur well for
productivity or morale.

15

S/PV.6370

Fifthly, during its debate on 16 July, on
preventive
diplomacy
(see
S/PV.6360
and
S/PRST/2010/14), the Security Council recognized the
increased material, human and financial resources
required by peacekeeping operations over the past
decade. The Council accordingly acknowledged
potential benefits and efficiencies that could be
achieved through an integrated approach to preventive
diplomacy efforts similar to the approach to
peacekeeping and peacebuilding methods. The nexus
between peacekeeping and peacebuilding was
embedded in the Council’s acknowledgement of the
interrelationship
between
political,
security,
development, human rights and rule of law activities.
At the heart of most conflicts are matters of
deprivation, injustice, inequitable distribution of
resources, bad governance and other forms of abuse.
Effective peacekeeping must therefore integrate
peacebuilding
strategies.
The
Peacebuilding
Commission has an important role to play in that
regard.
Sixthly, there is no gainsaying that prompt and
adequate
compensation
for
contingent-owned
equipment, apart from catalysing the participation of
other
potential
troop-contributing
countries,
demonstrates recognition and appreciation of the
sacrifices which troop-contributing countries are
continuously called upon to make.
Finally, it is important to strengthen both the
mandates and the rules of engagement of peacekeepers,
with a view to increasing their safety. Situations where
peacekeepers are killed or obstructed by spoilers of a
peace process should be examined closely. Adequate
measures, including deterrence and severe targeted
sanctions, are needed to ensure the safety of all
peacekeeping personnel. The Council should declare
zero tolerance for impunity for acts committed against
peacekeepers.
Nigeria remains committed to the ideals of the
United Nations, and in particular to its peacekeeping
role. We will continue to make sacrifices to contribute
meaningfully to the maintenance of international peace
and security. While it is unlikely that the need for
peacekeepers will be extinguished in the very near
future, that hope remains. In the final analysis, durable
peace can be achieved only through inclusive dialogue,
reconciliation and integration. The United Nations
must play a central role in defining and promoting a

16

comprehensive strategy comprising operational and
structural measures for preventing or addressing the
root causes of armed conflict, in order to ensure
sustainable global peace. That is the ideal for which the
United Nations was created.
Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank you, Mr. President, for having organized this
meeting. We thank Mr. Alain Le Roy, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Peacekeeping Operations, and the
commanders of the peacekeeping operations in Haiti,
Liberia, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Sudan and of the United Nations Truce Supervision
Organization for their briefings. We also welcome the
presence of the Military Adviser of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations. The participation of the
commanders of all these operations is, to a great
extent, a reflection of the way in which the mandates of
peacekeeping operations have developed over the
history of the Organization.
We welcome the convening of today’s meeting in
the hope that such meetings will become a regular
practice in the activities of the Security Council, taking
advantage of the annual meeting of commanders of
peacekeeping operations and fostering greater
coherence between what takes place on the ground and
what takes place within the Security Council. Clearly,
my delegation is most grateful to all the personnel of
peacekeeping operations for their invaluable work on
behalf of the international community to protect
international peace and security.
As a result of lessons learned in recent years, it
has been acknowledged that peacekeeping operations
must take account of certain fundamental elements if
they are to meet their primary objective of achieving
sustainable peace. Among these, we underscore the
following: the preparation of clear, credible and
achievable mandates with sufficient material, military,
police and civilian resources to carry out their
functions; the unequivocal commitment of the parties
involved to achieve a peaceful solution to the conflict;
the existence of a comprehensive peace agreement that
addresses the structural causes of the conflict; and the
understanding by the parties and the general population
of the benefits of achieving the mission’s objectives,
which they must assume as their own.
There is consensus on the need to establish timebound objectives at all stages, including transition and
exit strategies; a comprehensive approach to

10-47717

S/PV.6370

peacekeeping
missions
with
priorities
for
peacebuilding established at an early stage; and an
efficient planning and coordination mechanism which
includes the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and those entrusted with coordinating and
leading the military, civilian, financial and
humanitarian components of a mission. The conceptual
correlations are clear, and at times we end up repeating
the obvious. However, the difficulties faced on the
ground and the resulting need to adapt mandates which
can be multidimensional and extremely complex
require that the Security Council and the Organization
as a whole adopt pragmatic actions and strategies that
have impact in the short term.
My delegation is aware of the difficulties faced
by peacekeeping operations in complying fully with
their mandates, which include such diverse tasks as
supporting political dialogue between the parties,
strengthening human rights and the rule of law,
security sector reform and protection of civilians, in
addition to facing natural emergencies, organized crime
and, in some cases, attacks against their personnel.
The briefings we heard today indicate the
challenges in such diverse situations. In that sense, it is
essential to ensure a country’s cooperation with the
peacekeeping operation throughout its stay, since a
successful transition to a peacebuilding phase depends
upon it. The cases of the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) and
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) have provided us with lessons, but also
important questions for the future.
We also need to guarantee firm political support
by the United Nations, its representatives and the
Security Council for operations on the ground. The
legitimacy of the Organization is the main asset of a
peacekeeping operation. And often the actors on the
ground try to disregard this and involve the
Organization in the dynamics of the conflict as if it
were another participant in that conflict, often
hampering its freedom of movement, politicizing its
actions or placing it in risky situations, sometimes with
fatal consequences. Here, we underscore our rejection
of any attack against United Nations personnel and we
reiterate the importance of full respect for resolution
1502 (2003), on the protection of United Nations
personnel, associated personnel and humanitarian
personnel in conflict zones.

10-47717

On the situation in Haiti in particular, we reaffirm
our support for the work of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), which
has without question been essential for the survival of
institutions and the people of the country in tragic
circumstances. This case has put the Organization and
its response capacity on the ground to the test. We
consider strengthening the police contingent of the
Mission, following the adoption of resolution 1927
(2010), to be an important step so that it can continue
supporting the Haitian authorities in strengthening their
own police force and providing them with the
necessary assistance, within the Mission mandate, to
ensure the maintenance of stability, as well as
continuing to provide assistance in strengthening
national
institutions,
electoral
processes,
reconstruction, stability and social development.
In the case of the Sudan, as has been noted, it is
clear that the international community’s attention must
be focused on preparations for the referendum.
Logistical and security support, which the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) can provide, is
essential for ensuring complete and peaceful
participation. Notwithstanding that and aware of the
resources available to UNMIS, we must not forget that
all efforts must include the protection of civilians and
the facilitation of the provision of humanitarian
assistance, since these are both complementary to the
success of the voting and the peace process.
The escalation of tensions following the holding
of elections represents a new challenge to the Southern
Sudan Administration and UNMIS as they head
towards the holding of a referendum. The role of
UNMIS military personnel will be key in coming
months, and that is why we reaffirm our full support
for the preparatory work now under way, in particular
the contingency and strategy plans outlined by Special
Representative Menkerios based on the priority
objectives.
In the Middle East, the United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization plays an important role, and
it could be even more significant in the future given the
nature of the conflict in the region.
The Security Council must closely follow the
situations faced by a peacekeeping operation so that
timely changes may be made to the mandate, such as
on logistical and operational capacities, seeking always
to respond to events on the ground and, thus, to

17

S/PV.6370

provide tools and clear objectives for the work of
mission personnel. A peacekeeping operation is part of
the political solution to a conflict, but it does not
replace such a solution. Hence, it is also important to
bolster activities on the ground with parallel efforts to
strengthen preventive diplomacy, early warning,
conflict solution and mediation efforts, focusing
always on national priorities and national actors, thus
contributing to a country’s development in order to
guarantee lasting peace and the well-being of its
people. Paying attention to these aspects must be one
of our priorities if we wish to stabilize conflicts and
guarantee international security.
Mr. Sumi (Japan): At the outset, I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting today. I
would also like to thank Mr. Le Roy and the force
commanders for their useful briefings. Our thanks go
to Lieutenant General Sikander Afzal, Lieutenant
General Babacar Gaye, Major General Moses Bisong
Obi, Major General Robert Mood and Major General
Luiz Guilherme Paul Cruz. I also welcome the
presence of Lieutenant General Chikadibia Isaac
Obiakor, Military Adviser in the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations.
Japan takes this opportunity to extend its
wholehearted appreciation to and respect for the Force
Commanders and all the peacekeepers in each mission
who are tirelessly doing the invaluable work of United
Nations peacekeeping operations.
One of the most important issues facing United
Nations peacekeeping is to fill the gaps between
mission mandates and implementation. In this regard,
today’s exercise, in which the Council is listening
directly to the voices of the field commanders, is quite
beneficial, since it reduces the distance between the
Security Council and the field and facilitates the
sharing of best practices among missions. Japan
welcomes this practice and hopes that it will be
continued in the future.
From a practical perspective, Japan has
comments and questions on three points: strengthening
cooperation between the Council and the field,
implementing peacekeeping operation mandates, and
strengthening the integration of missions.
I should like to begin by pointing out that each
United Nations peacekeeping mission faces different
circumstances and that each mandate is the result of the
discussions formed by the different positions of

18

Council members. Thus, each Security Council
resolution tends to contain different language for the
same mandate, although these may sometimes be
merely nuanced differences. Japan emphasizes the
importance for the intentions of each resolution to be
clear, understandable and reflected in the concept of
operations and other means of communication during
implementation. At the same time, it should be noted
that the Council needs to listen to the voices from
United Nations peacekeeping operations, including
those of field commanders, and reflect these views in
the establishment of clear and achievable mandates.
However, the current situation is not always
satisfactory in this regard. Although the Council
undertakes such endeavours as briefings by the
Secretariat before and after technical assessment
missions and holds private meetings with troop- and
police-contributing countries before its consultations,
this is not enough to achieve mutual understanding
between the Council and the peacekeeping operations
in the field. Therefore, in order to further enhance such
understanding, I should like to propose that the
Security Council conduct future dialogues similar to
today’s initiative.
Secondly, I should like to touch upon issues
regarding the implementation of mandates, such as
information-gathering and capability gaps. In order to
effectively implement complex mandates, especially
with respect to the protection of civilians, timely and
accurate local information and its analysis are crucial.
However, many peacekeeping missions lack this
ability. There is no silver bullet for resolving this
problem, but sufficient discussions should be held
among the Council’s members, as well as through
meetings with force commanders and in the General
Assembly.
Japan would like to see further discussion of the
United Nations information collection and analysis
capabilities, in accordance with basic principles of
United Nations peacekeeping operations, such as
impartiality and respect for the ownership of the host
country. Japan should also like to see this expertise
developed in the mid- to long terms. In the short term,
comprehensive endeavours should be made to make
full use of existing capabilities and resources —
similar to what has been done in the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), which
strengthened its communications with the local

10-47717

S/PV.6370

populace regarding the protection of civilians and joint
mission analysis centres — in each mission. In this
context, I should like to ask about what kind of
discussion took place in yesterday’s meeting of the
Force Commander to that end.
The Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations,
which Japan has chaired since last year, has been
discussing the broader issue of the capability gap over
the past half-year. Its interim report, which summarizes
these discussions, lays out the Working Group’s
intention to hold meetings later this year in order to
consider ways to use the gap list more effectively,
including with respect to the shortage of utility
helicopters. The gap list has already been circulated to
all Member States. I should like to hear from the
Commanders about what part of their mandates they
find most difficult and challenging to implement with
regard to the gap list.
Last but not least, with regard to the protection of
civilians and humanitarian support, Japan would like to
point out the importance of civilian-military
cooperation, such as that of MONUSCO’s joint
protection team, and of strengthening coordination
between military and civilian components while
preserving
the
impartiality
of
humanitarian
organizations. At the same time, it is important to
enhance coordination between military and police,
especially formed police units, such as for the
internally displaced persons camps and their
surroundings in Darfur. Japan would like to ask about
what kind of discussion took place in this regard in
yesterday’s meeting and what the Secretariat thinks are
the challenges to strengthening the integration of the
missions.
The President (spoke in Russian): I would urge
members of the Council to use the presence of the
Force Commanders at this meeting as an opportunity to
ask any specific questions they may have with respect
to the challenges they are currently facing.
Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): I thank your delegation,
Mr. President, for organizing this debate and UnderSecretary-General Alain Le Roy for his briefing. We
welcome the presence of Lieutenant General Obiakor
among us today. I would also like to thank Major
General Paul Cruz, Lieutenant General Babacar Gaye,
Lieutenant General Sikander Afzal, Major General
Moses Bisong Obi and Major General Robert Mood for
their remarks. Taken together, they reflect many of the

10-47717

achievements of and evolving challenges to United
Nations peacekeeping today. Our guests, along with all
the other Force Commanders and mission leaders,
deserve our deep and heartfelt gratitude for the
extraordinary job they do in the most difficult
circumstances.
The presence of Force Commanders in the
Council today brings to the fore the obvious but
fundamental truth that peacekeeping happens on the
ground. We must trust our mission leaders and not
micromanage them, but we can and should give
missions the strategic guidance and multifaceted
support they need. In this regard, today I will focus on
where we stand and how we see the way forward in
three critical areas: the protection of civilians,
interaction between peacekeeping and peacebuilding,
and field support.
The past year has seen a wealth of conceptual
development and political support for the protection of
civilians in such documents as the joint independent
study of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, resolution 1894 (2009), and
the report of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations. The focus now should be on producing
concrete results on the ground. This is normally a
daunting task, as evidenced by the cases of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, but
one the Organization must perform to the best of its
ability.
In that context, priority should be given to the
preparation of a strategic framework to guide mission
leaders in setting up comprehensive protection
strategies, which are needed to ensure that the
protection of civilians is seen not as a solely military
task, but rather as a mission-wide endeavour. Some of
the most successful peacekeeping missions have been
those where peacebuilding concerns have been most
closely integrated into the mission’s work.
Nevertheless, we still need to develop greater clarity
on how peacekeepers can best contribute to
peacebuilding.
Over the next 12 months, important documents
will be released, including the strategy of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) for
the early delivery of peacebuilding tasks by

19

S/PV.6370

peacekeepers; the World Bank’s report on conflict,
security and development; and the review of
international civilian capacities. We must use those
opportunities to hold a detailed discussion on
peacebuilding and peacekeeping, just as we did on the
protection of civilians. That discussion should be
action-oriented and aim at achieving three main goals
by August 2011: first, a better understanding of the
relationship between security and development;
secondly, a clearer picture of how peacekeeping and
peacebuilding have interacted on the ground, both in
current and in older missions; and, thirdly, a practical
agenda for the way forward that identifies the main
challenges in the areas of field guidance, interactive
coordination and capacity development.
The global field support strategy received careful
consideration and approval from both the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and the Fifth
Committee. My delegation applauds the efforts of
Under-Secretary-General Susana Malcorra and her
team to guarantee that Member States are fully
engaged in this process through retreats, briefings and
workshops. That level of interaction must be
maintained in the coming months, both with
delegations in New York and with contingents and
mission leaders. That is key to ensuring that all
stakeholders fully understand the impact of the
proposed changes.
In taking forward the global field support
strategy, the Secretariat should continue to bear in
mind that logistical aspects of peacekeeping missions
can directly impact their ability to fulfil their mandates.
That, in turn, relates directly to the Council’s
effectiveness in addressing threats to international
peace and security. For instance, modelization can
allow civilian personnel to be safely deployed at an
early stage, with potentially important benefits to our
efforts to bring stability to a given region or country. In
that connection, efficiency gains mean a safer world.
That is where the strategy’s ultimate significance lies.
Before I conclude, I would like to refer to the
seminar entitled “A new horizon for United Nations
peacekeeping: perspectives from the South”, which
was held in Rio de Janeiro in June. The seminar made a
practical contribution to our collective thinking on how
best to face the dilemmas of twenty-first century
peacekeeping. Issues such as the linkage between
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, the use of force and
relations between missions and local populations were

20

thoroughly discussed. One of the key conclusions
reached at Rio — the summary of which will soon be
circulated to Member States — was that exit strategies
must be based on effective staying strategies, in the
sense not of over-staying but of ensuring that a
mission’s achievements are preserved and built upon.
We believe that the current efforts in the Organization
being led by DPKO to improve peacekeeping go
precisely in that direction. Brazil will continue to
contribute to that endeavour.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
your initiative to organize this meeting. I should also
like to thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations and the Force Commanders
of the peacekeeping missions represented here for
providing a clear perspective of their efforts on the
ground.
As the Security Council is aware, France wants
very much to participate in improving the functioning
of peacekeeping operations. Since they were first
established, such operations have been a valuable tool
in helping the United Nations to respond to the major
task assigned us by the Charter — maintaining
international peace and security. We are also keen to
improve their effectiveness and, as a result, their
strategic importance.
To that end, during our presidency of the Security
Council in January 2009, we launched an initiative
with the British Mission whose goal was to improve
the Council’s political and military follow-up to
peacekeeping operations, ensure more effective
management of administrative, logistical and financial
aspects of missions, and further develop doctrines on
complex peacekeeping issues such as protecting
civilians and peacebuilding.
We have made progress on that whole host of
issues thanks to the consideration everyone has given
to the questions concerned, far beyond the confines of
the Security Council, thanks to the Secretariat’s New
Horizon non-paper and the August 2009 and February
2010 presidential statements (S/PRST/2009/24 and
S/PRST/2010/2), as well as the work done by the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations. We
would also like to welcome the green light given to the
global support strategy, which France will monitor
closely to ensure that it results in the necessary
improvements in mission support.

10-47717

S/PV.6370

We shall in particular pursue our efforts to
strengthen the operational chain of command, improve
cooperation with troop and police personnel
contributors and provide more rigorous financial
follow-up of peacekeeping operations. Operational
budgets have indeed grown exponentially in recent
years. We need to consider how to manage those
budgets responsibly. The results achieved with regard
to financing peacekeeping operations at the most recent
session of the Fifth Committee demonstrate that such
concerns are increasingly being taken into account. We
have no doubt that the Secretariat will step up its
efforts in that regard.
The perspective developed on the ground by
mission heads is essential. I should therefore like them
to share with us their thoughts on how their working
methods and their relationship with Headquarters have
evolved in the past two years. What do they think
could be done to improve the functioning of
peacekeeping operations? In particular, I should like to
know their views on the following issues.
An exercise was launched to consider the
protection of civilians following the issuance of the
joint study requested by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Assistance and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, in June 2010.
To that end, operational documents were developed to
allow peacekeeping operations to translate into deed
the mandates we give to them to protect civilians. The
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur and the United Nations Mission in the Sudan
have now developed protection strategies, which the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) is currently implementing. What main
conclusions have been drawn? What are the primary
difficulties facing operations in discharging their
civilian protection mandate?
With regard to MINUSTAH, the January
earthquake forced it to take on tasks that are not
usually part of a peacekeeping operation’s tasks. In
particular, that has included improving its engineering
capacities to clear rubble, restore basic infrastructure
and so on. What conclusions have the Force
Commanders drawn from the involvement of those
engineering capacities?

10-47717

Working alongside Congolese armed forces,
MONUSCO is undertaking several military operations
in the eastern part of the country. The Security Council
has asked the Mission to develop a specific and limited
system for providing conditional support. How do the
Commanders believe that this support, which
henceforth will be more limited and focused only on
certain battalions, will contribute both to improving
civilian protection and to facilitating or hindering their
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration
mandate?
Lastly, with regard to the United Nations Mission
in Liberia, how is the Force Commander preparing for
its inevitable drawdown and what are the lessons
learned from the transition from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding? Where does the mission of the
peacekeeping forces end?
Before I conclude, I would like to commend
General Obiakor, as others have, thank him for his
work at the head of the Office of Military Affairs, and
wish him every success as he continues his career.
Mr. Mugoya (Uganda): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this important debate on peacekeeping
operations. I thank Under-Secretary-General Mr. Le
Roy for his briefing and the respective Force
Commanders of the United Nations Mission in Liberia,
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), the United Nations Mission in the
Sudan, the United Nations Truce Supervision
Organization and the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti for their very insightful briefings.
From the outset, I would like to commend the
Force Commanders, their officers and staff for the
selfless and gallant service they render in the
maintenance of peace and security in their respective
areas of operation. I would also like to thank
Lieutenant General Obiakor, the Military Adviser for
Peacekeeping Operations, for his service to the United
Nations and wish him success in his future endeavours.
My delegation welcomes this interactive meeting
with the Force Commanders. While we acknowledge
the many successes that United Nations peacekeeping
has achieved over the years, it is also clear that there
are existing and emerging challenges that have to be
addressed. This debate therefore provides an
opportunity for the Council to better appreciate the
challenges that peacekeeping operations face on the

21

S/PV.6370

ground. We are convinced that, by addressing the
challenges identified, peacekeeping operations will
become more effective tools in the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Peacekeeping operations today have multifaceted
mandates. As we have heard from the various briefings,
the tasks range from the promotion of dialogue and
reconciliation among the parties to conflict, to the
protection of civilians, disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of former combatants, security sector
reform, supporting electoral processes, promoting
human rights and restoring the rule of law. This brings
together a number of participants from various
backgrounds to perform these interrelated functions
and calls for careful planning and coordination.
There have been cases of mismatch between
peacekeeping
mandates
in
dynamic
mission
environments and the provision of adequate or
appropriate resources. In other instances, inordinate
delays in the deployment of peacekeeping operations
have resulted in the escalation of conflict and loss of
lives, affecting the credibility of the United Nations in
the eyes of the affected population.
We commend the ongoing initiatives for intermission cooperation in addressing the challenges,
including the protection of civilians, in close
cooperation with the national and regional authorities.
My delegation would appreciate hearing from the
Force Commander of MONUSCO on the extent of
cooperation amongst peacekeeping operations in the
region to combat the threat of the Lord’s Resistance
Army, what challenges the peacekeeping operations
face and what more could be done.
What is needed to enhance the effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations is greater commitment on the
part of Member States and other stakeholders to
providing the requisite logistical, financial and human
resources. There is a need for renewed impetus and
political will to ensure support for more expeditious
deployments with the requisite human resources, assets
and logistics. It is also essential that the concerned
parties cooperate with and render full support to
peacekeeping operations in the implementation of their
mandates. The United Nations should also strengthen
further its strategic partnership with regional and
subregional organizations to take advantage of their
proximity and capabilities.

22

Uganda
reiterates
the
need
for
early
peacebuilding activities within peacekeeping missions.
This, in our view, creates the conditions for efforts to
sustainably address the root causes of conflict through
peacebuilding.
Finally, my delegation pays tribute to the memory
of the peacekeepers who have paid the ultimate price,
sacrificing their lives in efforts to make this world a
more peaceful one.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this very informative
and useful debate. Let me also thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Le Roy for his introductory remarks and the
Force Commanders for their briefings. I would also
like to commend Lieutenant General Obiakor for his
service and wish him well in his future endeavours.
My delegation welcomes all the Force
Commanders here today and, on behalf of the United
States, offers our deep appreciation for their service.
We recognize the tremendous sacrifices they and their
troops make. They deserve our full support.
In its presidential statement of August 2009
(S/PRST/2009/24), the Council recommitted itself to
improving the overall performance of peacekeeping
and to addressing the challenges it faces today.
First, we committed to providing peacekeeping
operations with credible and achievable mandates. The
United States believes that mandates and means must
be better aligned and that we must be realistic about
what we can achieve. The Council committed to
ensuring that missions have the resources and
capabilities needed to effectively implement mandates.
That is why we must keep on our collective agenda the
need to address chronic shortages of enabling
capabilities,
including
transport,
helicopter,
engineering and medical units. We also need to
increase the pool of well-trained, well-equipped and
highly disciplined troops and police available for
peacekeeping operations.
Through the United States Global Peace
Operations Initiative, the United States continues to
provide training and equipment for potential
peacekeepers. We stand ready to provide expertise as
needed to enhance United Nations missions. Further,
there is ample scope for the Secretariat to improve the
administrative and logistics support it provides to
United Nations peacekeeping forces. We thus welcome

10-47717

S/PV.6370

the General Assembly’s recent positive response to key
elements of the global field support strategy, which we
hope will make early deployment and ongoing support
faster and more efficient.
Secondly, in addition to addressing mandate and
means, the United States believes it vital to continue to
improve the performance of United Nations
peacekeeping missions. This Council is improving its
ability to measure progress in the implementation of
complex mandates through the use of benchmarks
tailored to each conflict and reviewed periodically for
their viability, but we can do better.
Also, we believe it essential to strengthen the
body of guidance and training available to United
Nations peacekeeping missions, particularly regarding
when to use conciliatory or confrontational tactics in
the face of threats to civilians or United Nations
personnel, obstacles to freedom of movement, or direct
challenges to the implementation of mandates. Civilian
personnel also need enhanced guidance, training and
support for the implementation of peacemaking and
peacebuilding tasks central to successful exit
strategies. We urge the Secretariat, Member States,
troop-contributing countries and the Council to
continue to work together toward these goals.
Thirdly, we also made clear in our statement that
peacekeeping operations must be accompanied by —
and not a substitute for — critical peacemaking and
peacebuilding efforts. The United States has been
engaged and will continue engaging intensively on
fragile peace processes where key United Nations
peacekeeping missions are deployed. We are
concurrently exploring ways to enhance our support to
the work of the Peacebuilding Commission.
Fourthly, we stress the importance of ongoing
institutional reform and of strengthening not only the
United Nations but also regional organizations’
capacity to plan, deploy, manage, evaluate and
successfully complete peacekeeping operations.
The United States is committed to following
through on these commitments and has made
strengthening United Nations peacekeeping one of our
top priorities at the United Nations. The insights of the
Force Commanders here today are most helpful to us as
we consider renewing mission mandates and
establishing new missions. We ask for their continued
leadership in employing all the tools and resources at
their disposal to make their missions successful.

10-47717

My Government believes that success includes
retaining the trust, respect and confidence of the host
population in whose midst peacekeepers are deployed.
The United States therefore welcomes the steps that the
commanders have taken to address issues of conduct
and discipline. We urge all commanders to be stalwart
in carrying out the policy of zero tolerance for sexual
exploitation and abuse.
On a distinct but related note, we were gratified
by the launch this week of guidelines for integrating a
gender perspective into the work of the military in
United Nations peacekeeping operations. We thank the
generals for their professionalism, dedication and
courage. We remain grateful that they have answered
the call to protect the vulnerable and promote a more
peaceful world.
If I may, I have a couple of specific questions.
One is to General Cruz of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). We
remain concerned about the incidents of sexual and
gender-based violence within internally displaced
persons settlements and wonder what steps
MINUSTAH could take to address this scourge further.
Also, given the historic ties between my country
and Liberia, we are particularly aware of the enormous
contribution of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL) to Liberia’s stability. General Afzal
mentioned the challenges posed by the upcoming
elections, and as we prepare to discuss renewal of the
Mission’s mandate in September, we would appreciate
his perspective on any particular challenges he
anticipates in supporting these elections.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): My
delegation welcomes the initiative of the Russian
delegation to convene today’s meeting and thanks
Under-Secretary-General Alain Le Roy for his briefing.
We have also listened attentively to the thoughtprovoking briefings of the five Force Commanders of
United Nations peacekeeping operations. In particular,
I warmly welcome all the Force Commanders present
at today’s meeting of the Council. They work under
harsh conditions throughout the world to carry out the
noble responsibilities entrusted to them by the Security
Council and have made special contributions to the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
Chinese delegation pays tribute to them and to the Blue
Helmets deployed worldwide.

23

S/PV.6370

I shall highlight three points in my statement.
First, United Nations peacekeeping operations must
have an inclusive, strong and viable political process to
back them up. In circumstances where there is no peace
to keep, the most that a peacekeeping mission can
accomplish in carrying out its responsibilities,
including the protection of civilians, humanitarian
assistance and reconstruction and development, is to
play the role of firefighter, which is unsustainable.
At present, the deployment of the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) is nearing completion. However, the
political process continues to face serious difficulties.
Last week, the Council adopted resolution 1935 (2010)
extending UNAMID’s mandate and requesting it,
among other things, to prioritize the promotion of the
political process in Darfur. This not only demonstrated
the international community’s dual-track strategy in
Darfur, but also complemented and reinforced the two
tracks. We hope that the objective embodied in
resolution 1935 (2010) will be implemented.
Secondly, the main purpose of deploying
peacekeeping operations is to help countries in conflict
to stabilize the security situation and take
responsibility for their own defence, security and
governance. From the first day of deployment, a
peacekeeping operation should formulate and gradually
improve its exit strategy. This strategy should focus not
only on the eventual withdrawal of a peacekeeping
operation, but also and more importantly on effective
interface with peacebuilding to promote the eventual
smooth transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding.
Peacekeeping operations in Sierra Leone, Liberia
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo have
provided the Council with rich experience. We hope to
hear more views and suggestions from the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the Force
Commanders on how to achieve the strategic
benchmarks of peacekeeping operations.
Thirdly, United Nations peacekeeping operations
have exhibited a tendency to grow in size and to
assume multiple functions. While their logistical
systems lag behind, peacekeeping operations face such
challenges as mission deployment and inefficient
operations. My delegation welcomes the series of
studies by the Secretariat in this regard. We believe
that United Nations peacekeeping operations mandates
should be mission specific, in line with specific

24

circumstances. They should be more focused and
flexible. When discussing the deployment of
peacekeeping operations or adjustment of mandates,
the Council should listen fully to the views of the
special representatives of the Secretary-General,
military commanders and military and civilian experts.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I warmly thank
Under-Secretary-General Le Roy and the Force
Commanders for their briefings. Let me take this
opportunity to pay tribute to the work of the Force
Commanders, both those who briefed us and all the
others who are here today, and to the work of all of the
women and men who are under their command,
frequently, as we know, in very challenging
circumstances and at great personal risk.
As part of our collective efforts to strengthen the
Council’s role in peacekeeping, in our presidential
statement of 5 August 2009 (S/PRST/2009/24),
adopted almost exactly a year ago, we acknowledged
the need to improve access to military advice. Since
then, we have made some progress, but more can be
done to improve the Council’s understanding of the
operational demands placed on troops and police by the
peacekeeping resolutions we draft. If we are going to
write realistic and achievable mandates, we need the
best possible understanding of what is achievable. We
therefore very much welcome the fact, Sir, that you
have arranged this meeting today.
That is also the reason why the United Kingdom
supported changes to improve consultation and
interaction with troop and police contributors in the
lead-up to mandate renewal or change, and it is why
we support the convening of joint political and military
expert meetings to discuss peacekeeping operations, in
particular before the United Nations dispatches a
technical assessment mission. It is also why we are
willing to explore ways to make the Military Staff
Committee more inclusive and relevant, in order to
help us make decisions that enable peacekeepers to
implement their mandates fully.
The ground has already been very well covered
by other speakers, but I just have a few comments and
questions for the Force Commanders. First of all, we
heard from a number of them about the challenge of
protecting civilians and the fact that in order to achieve
protection of civilian mandates, the forces need more
agility and more mobility. But at the same time, they
face a shortage of air assets and problems over freedom

10-47717

S/PV.6370

of movement. So my question on this, for the Force
Commanders, is whether or not better technology and
intelligence could be an appropriate and effective force
multiplier to help them achieve those protection of
civilian mandates.
Secondly, with respect to robust peacekeeping or
deterrents, robustness in peacekeeping is, of course, a
sensitive concept, but we are not talking here about
peace enforcement. Nevertheless, in order to be
effective in today’s highly complex peacekeeping
environment, United Nations missions must have the
capacity and the will to deter those who would derail
the peace process or threaten civilians and United
Nations peacekeepers.
As a team from my delegation saw at first hand
recently in Haiti, when the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) patrols
the streets of Cité Soleil in Port-au-Prince each night,
Brazilian troops demonstrate a credibly robust posture
that deters any would-be attackers. That is a conscious
and deliberate tactic — one which has created an
environment in which other United Nations agencies
and international organizations can operate safely
without the need for armed escort.
Earlier this year, the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations expressed its support for this
sort of deterrent posture. I would be interested to hear
the force commanders’ views on this as a concept and
on the ability or otherwise of their own missions to
establish such deterrence.
On quick impact projects and reconstruction:
clearly, there are circumstances where peacekeeping
operations should get involved in such projects and in
reconstruction, not least in the early stages, to establish
credibility with the local communities. But we need to
make sure that our peacekeepers’ willingness to help
does not crowd out those agencies better placed or
better funded to support early recovery and
reconstruction. We need to know that activities
undertaken in the short term will not prejudice longterm sustainable development.
Where international peacekeepers provide the
only viable substitute for local services in the short
term, we must make every effort to build up local
capacity alongside such service delivery and from the
beginning. That is why the United Kingdom argues for
strict oversight and for limits to be set on funding for
quick impact projects and why we support closer

10-47717

integration among United Nations peacekeeping
operations, local Governments and other United
Nations
agencies,
donors
and
international
organizations on the ground.
This area is one that General Cruz touched upon
in his very helpful briefing. It would be interesting to
hear a bit more from him about how he ensures that the
efforts of MINUSTAH on the humanitarian and
reconstruction fronts are coordinated with other parts
of the United Nations in the field to ensure that there is
coherence and that there are no problematic overlaps.
I would like to make a point on security sector
reform in Liberia. We heard from General Afzal that
progress on security sector reform in Liberia is slow. It
would be interesting to hear from him his views on
why that is the case and what we can do to address it.
Under the United Kingdom presidency of the
Security Council in August last year, we were fortunate
to hear from Lieutenant General Agwai, then the Force
Commander of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (see S/PV.6178), and it was
striking how succinctly and persuasively he cut to the
most pertinent challenges faced by that mission at that
point. And listening to the force commanders this
morning, I was reminded once again of the enormous
value of a view from the field. I would like to thank
them very much for taking time out of their annual
conference to speak to us. I hope that this tradition can
be maintained.
Ms. Ziade (Lebanon): At the outset, we would
like to express our appreciation to you, Mr. President,
for having organized this important debate. We would
like to extend our thanks to Under-Secretary-General
Alain Le Roy for his introductory remarks and to the
Force Commanders of the United Nations Mission in
the Sudan (UNMIS), the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO), the United Nations Mission
in Liberia (UNMIL) and the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), and the
Head of Mission and Chief of Staff of the United
Nations Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO), for
their respective comprehensive presentations.
Lebanon believes that the success of United
Nations peacekeeping operations requires a partnership
among the Security Council, the Secretariat, troopcontributing countries and the host country, a
partnership that emphasizes the key role of the Special

25

S/PV.6370

Committee on Peacekeeping Operations in policy
formulation and the Fifth Committee in resource
allocation.
We further believe that the main underpinnings of
success of United Nations peacekeeping and the
transition to peace and development rest on the
following elements.
First, peacekeeping should not be an end in itself
but rather part of a political solution. Comprehensive
resolution of conflicts by dealing with their core causes
should remain the objective. The second element is
developing clear and achievable mandates matched
with the required resources is essential. The third is
adherence to the general principles of peacekeeping,
namely impartiality and the United Nations Charter
principles of sovereignty and political independence.
The fourth element is a strong link between
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. The fifth is
strengthening the role of regional and subregional
organizations, in accordance with Chapter VIII of the
Charter. Finally, the sixth element is respect for the
safety and security of United Nations peacekeepers and
positions. Crimes like the 1996 Israeli attack on the
quarters of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) in Qana, south Lebanon, and the
2006 Israeli attack on the UNTSO post, also in south of
Lebanon, should not be repeated.
After paying careful attention to the presentations
of the Force Commanders and the Head of Mission, we
would like to express our hope that such direct
interaction will continue in the future. Such candid
interaction avails us of the opportunity to understand
urgent and direct needs from the field and in turn helps
us, as the Council, to better respond to those needs.
In this regard, we would like to know from Major
General Moses Bisong Obi of the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) and Major General Babacar Gaye of
MONUSCO about the ongoing cooperation among the
United Nations missions in the region: UNMIS,
UNAMID, MONUSCO and the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad.
What are the tools needed to improve cooperation and
the sharing of lessons learned in order to enhance the
combating of transborder rebel activities being carried
out mainly by the Lord’s Resistance Army in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central African
Republic and the south of the Sudan?

26

In Liberia, we know that UNMIL is concluding
the third phase of its drawdown to 2,029 military
personnel from its previous level of 9,150. Here, we
hope that Lieutentant General Sikander Afzal will tell
us more about the risk of a security vacuum as the
Mission draws down and about the logistical problems
it faces in concluding this drawdown.
With Haiti, we renew our solidarity in the
aftermath of the humanitarian tragedy caused by the
earthquake. We highly appreciate the efforts of
MINUSTAH, particularly in terms of relief and
assistance to civilians, as well as peacebuilding efforts.
We hope that Major General Luiz Guilherme Paul Cruz
can tell us about the major logistical challenges that the
United Nations and MINUSTAH are facing in
coordinating donor assistance for the relief and
rebuilding efforts.
Turning now to my region, an end to the Israeli
occupation in Palestine, Syria and the remaining parts
of Lebanon — the core cause of the conflict — is a
prerequisite to any comprehensive resolution and to the
success of United Nations peacekeeping missions in
the Middle East. Lebanon fully supports UNIFIL and
UNTSO, and the Lebanese Government is strongly
committed to the implementation of resolution 1701
(2006) in its entirety. Both UNIFIL and UNTSO enjoy
excellent coordination with and cooperation from the
Lebanese Government and the Lebanese Armed Forces
in carrying out their mandates. We seek one
clarification from Major General Robert Mood
concerning the current mode of reporting that is
undertaken by UNTSO in terms of whether such
reporting to Headquarters in New York is done directly
or through UNIFIL.
Finally, we salute the dedication, courage and
sacrifices of the peacekeepers deployed in
peacekeeping operations around the world, and we
express our sincere thanks and appreciation to the
peoples and Governments of each and every troopcontributing country.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this interactive meeting
with the force commanders. They are doing an
excellent job under truly difficult conditions, and we
owe them our deepest gratitude. The insight they bring
from the hot spots of operational theatres is very
valuable, and we very much appreciate their presence
here today. In fact, we have always stressed the need to

10-47717

S/PV.6370

improve the Council’s access to military advice, not
only before mandate approvals and renewals but
throughout the whole life cycle of a mission. Today’s
meeting thus provides a good example, which should
continue. I would also like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Alain Le Roy for his briefing.
Today, as requested, I will focus on practical
issues, but rather than making comments, will limit my
intervention to five sets of questions addressed to the
Force Commanders.
First, on mandates given by the Council, we all
agree that mandates should provide strategic and
political guidance that helps to address the operational
challenges that missions face in the field. They must
also be feasible and realistic, rather than theoretical
and overambitious in a way that fails to take into
account the limitations of specific missions. Do the
Force Commanders believe that is currently the case,
and how can the Council better craft mandates that
match the situation on the ground and are a better
guide in the field? I know that other colleagues have
also raised these questions.
Secondly, the linkage between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding is crucial to attaining lasting peace. In
this regard, peacekeepers are often identified as early
peacebuilders. As the practitioners on the ground, do
the Commanders feel that way and, if so, are they
sufficiently equipped to discharge those peacebuilding
responsibilities? If not, who should lead peacebuilding
in the field?
The linkage between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding is also seen as a reflection of the critical
relationship between security and development. That
point has been covered by my Brazilian colleague.
How do the Commanders see this connection, and do
they think there is a sufficient level of coordination and
cooperation between peacekeepers and development
actors, either on the ground, at the operational level, or
here, at Headquarters, at the strategic level?
Thirdly, without capacity no strategic guidance
can ensure the achievement of our political and
operational objectives. In that respect, what are the
most critical capacities that missions lack in the field,
and how could that gap be most effectively closed?
Fourthly, the need to improve the quality of
consultations with troop- and police-contributing
countries is constantly stressed, and we fully agree

10-47717

with that, but what sorts of difficulties arise at the
operational level due to inadequate consultations at the
strategic level, and what might be the means of
redressing this problem?
My final question concerns interoperability. The
troops led by the Force Commanders are from different
countries and represent varied cultures, thus ensuring
that interoperability among them must be a massive
challenge. An effort is ongoing in the Secretariat to
generate standardized training models and a global
training network, which we support. But what are the
problems that the Commanders currently face, and how
can we help them overcome them? I know these
questions require long and detailed answers, which
may keep us here longer, but I wanted to highlight
them as areas where we could greatly benefit from the
first-hand input of our Force Commanders.
In conclusion, I would like once again to thank
the Force Commanders who are present here and ask
them to convey our sincere gratitude to the servicemen
and women in blue helmets who are putting their lives
in danger every day and night in order to maintain
peace and security.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.
We thank the Force Commanders for their
substantive briefings. We have listened with great
interest to their ideas and assessments. The Russian
Federation views peacekeeping as one of the most
important functions of the United Nations and actively
participates in it. Russian peacekeepers are taking part
in operations in the Middle East, in various regions of
Africa and in Haiti. We provide considerable logistical
and transport support for peacekeeping operations.
The peacekeeping activities of the United Nations
are in a process of constant evolution, conceptually and
operationally, as they respond to new political realities.
Given the growing list of complex peacekeeping
operations, in recent years the United Nations has seen
growing demand for its resources and as a result is
facing unprecedented challenges that it has to address.
The growing diversity and complexity of those tasks
requires enhanced military expertise for the steps that
must be taken within the framework of United Nations
peacekeeping.

27

S/PV.6370

Russia’s proposal to further revitalize the
activities of the Military Staff Committee is still on the
table. The Committee is drafting recommendations on
operational aspects of peacekeeping activities; its
participation in measures to determine the readiness of
contingents and infrastructure for peace operations
would allow it to supply the Council with reliable,
timely information, as well as to enhance the quality of
military expertise available to United Nations
peacekeeping as a whole.
Particular attention should be given to ensuring
the
appropriate
preparation
of
peacekeeping
contingents on the basis of common standards and
coordinated national programmes, and to providing
comprehensive support for their activities. The task of
enhancing United Nations peacekeeping also calls for
tapping more effectively into resources of regional
organizations, in accordance with Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations.
Obviously, operational mandates should be clear,
feasible and adequate to the situation. The shortfall of
financial, material and technical resources dictates the
need for making the best use of existing capacities.
Given the growing demand for police contingents, we
need to seek a rational division of labour between them
and military peacekeeping contingents. It is important
to demarcate peacekeeping and
post-conflict
peacebuilding functions in peacekeeping mandates.
United Nations peacekeepers should be given only
initial tasks in the area of peacebuilding; the process of
social and economic reform should more actively
involve specialized structures of the United Nations
system
and
regional
organizations.
Effective
coordination among all components of complex
peacekeeping operations — military, police and
civilian — should be conducted under the leadership of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
while fully maintaining his policy oversight of
activities of such operations, in strict compliance with
Security Council mandates.
When sending peacekeepers into areas of
conflict, the international community should pay
particular attention to ensuring their security. Recently,
there has been a regrettable increase in the number of
attacks on peacekeepers, which is totally unacceptable.
Our hope is that today’s meeting will reaffirm our
shared interest in further improving the effectiveness of
United Nations peacekeeping operations carried out in
accordance with the Charter and with standards of

28

international law, while necessarily maintaining the
primary responsibility of the Security Council for the
maintenance of international peace and security. That is
our policy guarantee that operations will be carried out
successfully. We believe that today’s meeting has been
extremely useful, and we suggest that such exchanges
of view with Force Commanders of United Nations
peacekeeping operations be held on a regular basis.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Normandin (Canada): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to discuss the
challenges
facing
contemporary
peacekeeping
operations. The presence of the Force Commanders of
our peacekeeping missions here in New York this week
is very welcome. They certainly merit our recognition
and our sincere gratitude for the exceptional work they
do, often in the most trying conditions and
circumstances. Their opening commentaries this
morning have afforded members a unique occasion to
gain a deeper insight into the more practical aspects of
their missions.
As we know, peacekeeping forces continue to be
put to the test in operational environments that are
characterized by multidimensional challenges and
asymmetric threats. Military, police and civilian
experts face continuous threats from belligerents who
either ignore or seek to undermine the progress of
peace processes. Casualties, unfortunately, are
becoming more common. United Nations personnel
have been taken hostage or victimized by unchecked
criminality. There is thus a growing need for the use of
force to protect United Nations personnel or others
from immediate danger. To cope with threats and
practical difficulties on the ground, it is our duty as
Member States to ensure that field commanders have
the tools for success.
We call upon peacekeeping forces to execute a
wide range of tasks. This requires mandates and forces
designed for flexibility, responsiveness and mobility.
Equally, inherent adaptability to changing conditions
on the ground has become a necessary characteristic of
forces deployed on missions. The success of field
commanders in achieving mandated tasks is shaped in
part by their awareness of the situation on the ground
and their ability to mobilize adequate forces

10-47717

S/PV.6370

appropriately to deter, disrupt or, if necessary, defend
against attacks.

Support Trainers’ Association — to ensure coherence
in pre-deployment training programmes.

Enhanced situational awareness is a key enabler
for the command function. In support of this, modern
technologies must be fully exploited to provide force
commanders with timely and accurate information
allowing them to gauge both the nature and the
criticality of threats to security. At the same time,
improving the ability to collate and analyse data,
building on the concepts of the joint mission analysis
centres and joint operations centres, is essential to
improving
decision-making.
In
addition,
the
development of staff capacities through training and
mentoring is vital to providing missions with the
ability to distil information and translate it into
effective action.

In conclusion, we have seen some significant
progress in terms of capabilities in planning, managing
and executing peacekeeping operations. It is therefore
vitally important that we keep up this momentum in
order to ensure that these missions can carry out their
work in a way that keeps pace with the changing
realities on the ground. It is by adapting resources,
equipment and training to these changing conditions
that we will be able to provide commanders on the
ground with the optimal conditions for success. We
would, of course, appreciate comments from the
Commanders on the issues that I have addressed in my
statement, in particular practical on-the-ground issues
relating to mobility, information management, doctrine
and training.

(spoke in French)
In responding to threats, force mobility, often
over extremes of terrain and distance, is now a defining
feature of peacekeeping capabilities. In this regard,
commanders appear to be hampered by two difficulties.
The first is the capacity gap, in particular in terms of
helicopters and ground transport. It is therefore
essential that the Secretariat work with existing and
potential contributors to address any systemic
impediments that limit the capacity of Member States
to support missions in this way.
The second difficulty is that contingents are
deployed without the contingent-owned equipment and
materials needed to meet expected tasks. Here,
effective cooperation among the Council, the
Secretariat, troop- and police-contributing countries
and donors can serve to quickly identify such shortfalls
at the mission-preparation stage and thus allow
solutions to be found.
As important as properly equipped forces are
troops that are properly trained to carry out the tasks
assigned them. Deployed personnel need to be given
appropriate guidance that enables them to fulfil their
complex and specialized responsibilities. From an
institutional point of view, we must continue to build a
doctrinal framework on the basis of which effective
pre-deployment training can be designed. In practical
terms, we need to make use of existing organizations
that focus on training cooperation — such as the
International Association of Peacekeeping Training
Centres, the Latin American Association of Peace
Operations Training Centres and the African Peace

10-47717

The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): I should like to
thank you, Sir, for having organized this very
important discussion. I am very glad to see the UnderSecretary-General and the Force Commanders here in
our midst.
As one of the most active participants in United
Nations peacekeeping operations, India attaches very
great significance to United Nations peacekeeping and
its role in the maintenance of international peace and
security.
The context of United Nations peacekeeping is
changing, and this changing scenario demands changes
in our response. It is therefore good that we are having
across-the-board discussions on United Nations
peacekeeping in different forums. Our delegation has
engaged constructively and made meaningful
contributions to the evolution of the policy discourse
on United Nations peacekeeping.
India’s
experience
in
United
Nations
peacekeeping is unparalleled and our credentials can be
matched by few others. We have been present in
virtually every United Nations peacekeeping operation.
Today, we are present in significant numbers in the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL),
the United Nations Mission in the Sudan, the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti

29

S/PV.6370

(MINUSTAH), the United Nations Mission in Liberia,
the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force and
the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste.
Recently, in response to a request from the United
Nations, we have tripled our police contribution to
MINUSTAH.
Indeed, as I speak here, more than 8,000 Indian
soldiers and police personnel are deployed in United
Nations peacekeeping. It is they who are converting the
Council’s words into action, and they do so in
exceedingly challenging circumstances and situations.
I am happy that in the long tradition of
supporting United Nations peacekeeping by providing
senior leadership, we have just seconded Lieutenant
General Chander Prakash Wadhwa of the Indian Army
to be the Force Commander of MONUSCO. I am
happy that he is here in the Council today.
The role of women in peacekeeping has been a
key focus for the Security Council. We have
endeavoured to meet the Council’s aspirations in this
regard, too. I have the honour to draw the attention of
the Council here to the Indian female formed police
unit in Liberia, which has not only brought credit to
United Nations peacekeeping but has also added
possible new and very much required dimensions to the
scope of the efforts of United Nations peacekeeping.
We are also working on the possibility of increasing
the number of such female peacekeepers.
The nature of the Security Council’s mandates
and the manner in which they are generated is an area
that needs to be looked at carefully. In today’s context,
mandates have been found to be too broad and
detached from realities on the ground. It is important
that mandates be clear, achievable and in keeping with
the available capabilities and resources. This is
particularly true for uniformed personnel, who, by
virtue of their organizational culture, are used to clear
instructions and objectives. Unrealistic mandates also
lead to situations in which missions start asking
contingents to undertake tasks and utilize contingentowned equipment in a manner that is inconsistent with
the framework of their deployment agreed between the
contributing countries and the United Nations. This, of
course, demands the substantive engagement of the
countries that contribute manpower and resources to
the peacekeeping operations, and we can only reiterate
the absolutely critical imperative that such
consultations be substantive, meaningful and result in

30

views of troop contributors providing the bedrock of
the mandate decision. There have been improvements
in this regard, but much more needs to be done. For
example, we have yet to be briefed in detail about
recent developments in the UNIFIL operational area
despite our troops being there. We have also had
occasions in recent times, in terms of specific events in
a United Nations operation in West Africa where we
have peacekeepers, when we have been concerned by
command and control issues on the ground and have
had concerns in terms of keeping us in the loop in New
York.
Peacekeeping, for a long time, was essentially
about Blue Helmets and establishing a measure of
security. In the type of crises that we face today we
need a much broader array of responses than the pure
security one. Today’s peacekeepers have come to play
a critical role in humanitarian emergencies and are
often thrust into the midst of civil wars. Frequently
they are called upon to protect civilian populations
when they have been uprooted from their homes. Law
and order challenges have added the civilian dimension
to peacekeeping operations. Disarming combatants and
reforming the security sector have also become
essential to a peacekeeping strategy.
In such circumstances we need to be particularly
concerned about ensuring a high degree of operational
support. Lack of equipment and spares and inadequate
living conditions are critical areas that rarely receive
attention. Forces are not given sufficient time to
prepare for operations on the ground. Hence, I think it
is very important that there be a clear recognition that
better peacekeeping requires more resources, human
and material, including command.
In closing, I salute peacekeepers from my country
and fellow nations who have laid down their lives for
United Nations missions. India reiterates its
commitment to working with the United Nations in the
maintenance of international peace and security.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): Thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s meeting, although normally at
this time of year we look forward to a more in-depth
exchange. And, while welcoming all the bemedalled
gentlemen and officers sitting in this Chamber, I would
like to have seen a more interactive format. But
perhaps that can be done at some other time. The

10-47717

S/PV.6370

initiative to get views of the force commanders on
peacekeeping themes is commendable. I will briefly
touch on the concepts discussed in today’s meeting.
At the outset, I would like to mention that I
endorse a lot of what my colleague from India closed
his speech with.
As a leading troop contributor with vital stakes in
United Nations peacekeeping operations, Pakistan has
been supportive of peacekeeping missions with
complex and challenging mandates. That is evident
from our record in the Security Council. Council
resolutions 1509 (2003) and 1565 (2004), which
authorized strengthened missions in Liberia and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo respectively, were
supported by Pakistan during its term in the Council in
2003 and 2004. Pakistani troops have also participated
in those very challenging Missions.
But I feel that not enough has been said or
attention paid in the Council. We should have taken the
Council as the absolutely correct forum to discuss the
concept of robust peacekeeping. I have heard the
discussion by force commanders on this issue, and I
would beg to disagree with some of what has been
said. I believe that it is here in this Chamber that we
must make the decisions. While we must listen to them,
we must also encourage them to act more boldly and to
seek to meet the wishes of the Council in a more
decisive manner.
The complex mandates often ascribed as robust
peacekeeping are conceived, drafted and adopted here.
It becomes the responsibility of the Council to ensure
that existing peacekeeping architecture provides for
sufficient troop strength, trained and well-equipped
personnel, force enablers and multipliers, rapid
deployment, tactical and strategic reserve capacities
and logistic backups to sustain the challenges of what
we call robust peacekeeping. Needless to say, sufficient
finances should also be kept in mind as an enabler.
Equally important is applying robust peacekeeping
with reference to a particular conflict zone and not
treating the concept with the broad brush of political
generalizations. Robustness of the required extent is
present in all the missions. Beyond this, generalizing
the concept of robust peacekeeping can risk
overloading the United Nations peacekeeping
architecture.
It is evident that success in complex missions
with robust mandates requires a comprehensive

10-47717

approach that ranges from conflict prevention to
conflict management to preventing relapse. Protection
of civilians and support to humanitarian assistance are
the cardinal objectives, which cannot be accomplished
without ownership by the host entity. Engagement of
the host Government and local political actors,
however instable and rudimentary they may be, is
therefore essential. Emphasis on security sector reform,
together with disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and peacebuilding strategies, will only
cushion the physical challenge inherent in the
protection of civilians and support to humanitarian
assistance. In the context of a comprehensive approach,
engagement of strong regional actors can only be
described as propitious. The African Union’s
participation in the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur and the African Union
Mission in Somalia is invaluable in both political and
military terms. We welcome replicating that template
in other missions.
United Nations peacekeeping has graduated from
its traditional form to multifaceted missions with
complex mandates. This evolution is part of the
discourse on peacekeeping reform. Just like the
peacekeeping missions, such discourse must remain
depoliticized. We hope that today’s meeting will steer
our collective deliberations on the challenges of
modern day peacekeeping towards professional and
pragmatic realms.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Cabactulan (Philippines): On behalf of the
Philippine delegation, I warmly congratulate you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of August. Let me assure you of
my delegation’s full support and cooperation during
your term as President of this body. I also wish to
express my appreciation to the Security Council for
this opportunity to address it on this important issue.
The Philippine delegation also conveys its appreciation
for the briefing by the Under-Secretary General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Alain Le Roy, and
commends the men and women in the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations both here at United Nations
Headquarters and in the various field missions
overseas.
I also wish to acknowledge the contributions
made by the force commanders: Lieutenant General

31

S/PV.6370

Sikander Afzal of Pakistan for the United Nations
Mission in Liberia; Major General Luiz Guilherme
Paul Cruz of Brazil for the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti; Lieutenant General
Babacar Gaye for the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo; Major General Moses Bisang Obi of
Nigeria for the United Nations Mission in the Sudan;
Major General Robert Mood of Norway for the United
Nations Truce Supervision Organization; and our very
own Major General Natalio Ecarma III for the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force. Their
initiatives and efforts have certainly made a difference
in their respective missions and operations.
At the risk of sounding nostalgic, if not mellow, in
the face of the very serious issue before us, allow me to
recall that it has been 47 years since the Philippines first
engaged in and contributed to the maintenance of
international peace with the deployment of a 40-member
air force squadron to the Congo. Since that time, the
Philippines has endeavoured to fulfil its international
commitment to contribute to the preservation of peace
and security in the world. Despite our limited resources,
the Philippines strives to find ways to help shoulder the
peacekeeping burden by addressing the need of the
United Nations for troops and police officers for
existing and emerging missions.
I am pleased to share with Council members and
all other delegations present that, at present, there are
about 1,057 Filipino military and police personnel
serving with peacekeepers from other Member States
in nine mission areas around the world. Just last year,
the Philippines expanded its participation in United
Nations peacekeeping operations with the deployment
of a 336-man infantry battalion to the Golan Heights.
The Philippines has also been given the honour of
leading United Nations operations in the Golan, with,
as I have already mentioned, the appointment by the
Secretary-General of Major General Ecarma as Head of
Mission and Force Commander.
I also wish to inform the Council that the
Philippines is now in the process of strengthening its
own peacekeeping mechanisms to allow it to respond
more effectively to United Nations requests for troop
contributions. We are now working on a new road map
that takes into account recent developments in the field
of peacekeeping and which, we hope, will lead to the
expansion of our participation in United Nations
operations in the near future, wherever they may be.

32

The Philippines has been closely monitoring
developments in how we help keep the peace in conflict
areas abroad. We remain satisfied with the
achievements made by the United Nations thus far and
would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the
courageous and dedicated men and women serving
under the blue and white flag of our United Nations.
The Philippines is especially aware of the sacrifices
that our peacekeepers make — especially those who are
deployed in harsh and hostile areas — and salutes all
those who have given their lives in the cause of peace.
For the past several years, we have seen how the
United Nations has struggled to meet the increase in
the demand for peacekeepers worldwide. As an active
troop-contributing country, the Philippines is aware of
the deep operational demands of peacekeeping and
how these demands continue to grow and evolve.
Certainly, the extension and, in some cases, the
expansion of mandates are among the manifestations
that we can see. We continue to note that often this
surge or increase in the demand has not always been
matched with the capabilities and resources required to
meet our peacekeeping commitments. However, the
Philippines acknowledges the continued efforts made
by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO) and the Department of Field Support (DFS) to
fully address these increased demands, despite other
challenges and difficulties.
With regard to the protection of civilians in
conflict areas, especially women and children, it is well
known that the Philippines supports the three-tiered
framework proposed by DPKO and DFS in
conceptualizing the role of United Nations
peacekeeping operations in protecting civilians. To
reiterate, these are providing protection through the
political process, providing protection from physical
violence and establishing a protective environment.
The Philippines agrees that the elements of this
framework must be implemented simultaneously in
order to achieve concrete results in the most efficient,
expeditious and proper manner.
With regard to peacebuilding, our position is also
well known. The Philippines believes that United
Nations peacekeepers should not be considered longterm peace builders, as peacebuilding is a national
challenge that entails national ownership and
responsibility. We have said before that only national
actors can address in a sustainable manner the needs and
goals of their respective societies. Hence, national

10-47717

S/PV.6370

ownership of the process is the ultimate goal and must
be emphasized to both our peacekeepers and the
national actors and stakeholders. The handover of tasks
and responsibilities from peacekeepers to national
partners in the post-conflict period must be given
priority in the early stages of the peacebuilding process.
However, the Philippines acknowledges that in an
immediate post-conflict scenario, United Nations
peacekeepers are more often than not tasked to carry out
initial peacebuilding responsibilities such as providing
basic security, delivering peace dividends, shoring up
and building confidence in the political process and
strengthening core national capacity — all intended to
lay the foundation for sustainable development.
In closing, allow me to reiterate our full
cooperation with the Security Council as well as our
continuing commitment to help keep the peace and
security and to prevent the escalation of conflict in
various regions across the globe.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Park In-Kook (Republic of Korea): I thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this meeting today
and for giving my delegation the opportunity to
participate in the debate. I would like to express my
appreciation to Under-Secretary-General Alain Le Roy
and the force commanders here with us today for their
comprehensive and informative briefings.
For the last six decades, United Nations
peacekeeping operations have evolved to successfully
address diverse challenges arising from various
conflicts in a rapidly changing political landscape. The
overall number of United Nations peacekeeping
personnel in the field has increased nine-fold over the
last eleven years. Last year, the Fifth Committee
approved a record high budget of $7.7 billion for 20092010 for peacekeeping missions. United Nations
peacekeeping has already reached a level that
transcends what the Brahimi report (S/2000/809) had
envisaged 10 years ago.
My delegation notes the report of the SecretaryGeneral dated 22 December 2009 (A/64/573) and
supports the four interlinked building blocks to focus
on.
At the outset, I would like to recall the words that
Under-Secretary-General Alain Le Roy delivered to the

10-47717

Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations this
past February when he said that
“To develop the required capabilities to
implement all mandated tasks, including through
training of personnel, we need further clarity and
practical guidance regarding the roles and
expectations on peacekeeping operations.”
Moving forward, we should consider those words
carefully.
In this regard, partnerships with regional
organizations, civilian partners and the private sector
need to be further developed. Regional and subregional
organizations, such as the African Union and the
European Union, have become crucial partners of the
United Nations, especially in sharing the burden of
peacekeeping
operations.
A
concrete
and
comprehensive model or modality of cooperation with
such organizations should be developed.
In order to ensure that operations are effective
and efficient, a global and responsive rapid deployment
system is key. The support system should also
correspond to the nature of the peacekeeping operation.
In this regard, I am glad to announce that the
Government of the Republic of Korea has recently
adopted domestic legislation that enables the
deployment of standby forces on short notice. I hope
our efforts will help to further enhance the readiness
and responsiveness of the United Nations.
On the support side, the creation of the
Department of Field Support (DFS) is one of the major
successes of the reform driven by Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon and was instrumental in providing
integrated field support. We anticipate that the strategic
support plan that DFS is deploying will take United
Nations field support capability to another level.
But deploying quickly must not be the only
planning factor during the early stages of a mission.
United Nations peacekeeping operations have become
increasingly multidimensional, involving situations
that are aptly termed complex emergencies and varying
greatly in scope and mandate. Hence, peacekeeping
should be pursued on a two-track parallel approach,
alongside peacebuilding efforts. In fact, peacebuilding
efforts have now become an important feature of many
peacekeeping missions. That relationship underscores
the need for clear planning among the various

33

S/PV.6370

stakeholders, with a view towards exit and transition
strategies.
To ensure sustainability and ultimate success,
peacekeeping must extend beyond meeting more
immediate needs, such as overseeing ceasefires, to
laying the foundations necessary to maintain lasting
peace. Only when such basic structures for sustainable
peace are put in place can a peacekeeping operation
disengage successfully, resulting in a smooth transition
and a timely exit. To achieve that, peacekeeping
operations today must not involve just the military
dimension. They must also encompass intertwined
strategies rooted in development, human rights, and
disarmament — in particular with regard to
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration
programmes.
Similarly, preventive actions or alternatives to
heavy peacekeeping operations need to be actively
pursued. Although a peacekeeping operation might be
less costly than other military options, mediation,
civilian and military observers, police observation and
preventive deployments are more cost-effective. In that
regard, we welcome the setting up of the Mediation
Support Unit in the Department of Political Affairs.
Mediation and other preventive measures should not be
considered separately from a peacekeeping operation.
They should be seen as a complementary and integral
part of everyday peacekeeping operations.
Close coordination with various actors such as
the World Bank, the United Nations Development
Programme, UNICEF and others involved in
peacekeeping missions will be crucial in creating the
conditions that allow for gradual phase-out and exit,
with a view towards lasting peace. Those actors can
remain on the ground after the drawdown or
withdrawal of peacekeeping forces and continue to
provide the necessary assistance to ensure mission
success.
More than six months ago, DPKO and the United
Nations suffered tragic loss of lives and injury after the
earthquake struck in Haiti. The Republic of Korea
remains steadfast in our efforts to help reconstruct
Haiti following the earthquake. Beyond humanitarian
contributions, Korea has also dispatched a 240-strong
engineering company to the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti. The company is
currently active in the area of responsibility in
Leogane, one of the hardest hit areas of the country.

34

Our troops have focused on providing targeted relief in
the areas of electricity restoration, public health
infrastructure
expansion
and
water
supply
reinstatement in the country.
The Republic of Korea is also encouraged by the
strengthening of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) after the war in the summer of
2006. We take note of the mention in the report of the
Secretary General issued on 1 July (S/2010/352) that
the Governments of Lebanon and Israel are showing
their commitment to the implementation of resolution
1701 (2006). However, as the recent violence has
shown, we are concerned that stability in the region
continues to be threatened. UNIFIL must therefore
remain vigilant and promote communication and
coordination with both Lebanon and Israel to ensure
that the border remains calm.
Finally, my delegation welcomes the remarkable
increase in the number of women serving in the field,
in particular in leadership positions. In the past few
years, there has been a drastic increase in the number
of women serving in senior civilian positions in field
missions. Furthermore, women now make up 30 per
cent of those deployed as civilians in peacekeeping
operations. My delegation hopes that such progress
will continue.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): I thank you,
Mr. President, and the other members of the Security
Council for organizing this meeting. I also especially
thank Under-Secretary-General Alain Le Roy and the
force commanders who are participating in this
meeting.
As we have mentioned elsewhere, United Nations
peacekeeping operations are a unique flagship activity
of the Organization that entail risking human lives for
the cause of international peace and security. I take my
hat off to those who have made the supreme sacrifice
to maintain peace and stability in the world.
The success of peacekeeping in recent years has
led to high expectations and to a surge in demand. An
assessment of future conflict trends suggests that the
need for peacekeeping will increase, not decrease, and
that
the
nature
of
peacekeeping
will
be
multidimensional and more complex, not simple.
Historical experience in conflict zones and current

10-47717

S/PV.6370

political dynamics substantiate the notion that
upcoming demand will fall on the shoulders of United
Nations peacekeeping. The onus is therefore on us to
lead the process through effective cooperation, with
clearly stipulated mandates backed by sufficient
resources and specific policy and implementation
guidelines. This warrants effectively forging an
inclusive partnership among the Security Council, the
Secretariat and troop- and police-contributing
countries, as well as ensuring the capability of
peacekeepers to achieve their mandated objectives.
The success of a peacekeeping mission largely
depends on the political support it receives and on the
adequate and timely provision of financial, logistical
and human resources. In that regard, we reiterate the
importance of closer and more active involvement with
troop- and police-contributing countries when deciding
on new peacekeeping missions or extending or
amending the mandates of current missions. In that
regard, we would like to emphasize the following
specific measures. There must be broader political
partnership between the United Nations and host
Governments. There must be effective consultation
among the Security Council, the Secretariat and troopand police-contributing countries. The views of troopcontributing countries must be reflected in deciding
mission start-ups and making any changes in the
mandate of existing missions. Initial mandates must be
crafted carefully while giving a full picture to potential
TCCs. Specific timelines must be stipulated, in
consultation with TCCs, in the course of finalizing
memorandums of understanding. Any change in
operations must accord with the views of those
working in the field. And we must ensure fair
representation for TCCs in the Secretariat’s decisionmaking process and in the process of implementation.
At the operational level, a partnership must be
forged with all relevant stakeholders. In our view, the
following specific actions are imperative in that regard.
There must be sufficient political partnership between
the United Nations and host authorities. There must be
necessary coordination with the host Government or
authority to allow peacekeepers to operate. General and
specific coordination needs to be ensured among all
parties, including regional organizations. And
concerted efforts need to be made by United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes and the Bretton
Woods institutions working in the field.

10-47717

We also believe that the following elements must
be reflected in the process of start-up, operation and
expansion for successful peacekeeping operations:
First, mandates must be clear, specific and well
defined. Secondly, mandates must be supported by
sufficient resources, both financial and human. Thirdly,
necessary political support must be ensured. Fourthly,
sufficient measures must be taken to ensure the safety
and security of the peacekeepers. Fifthly, the United
Nations must take the necessary measures to ensure
sufficient training in all areas of activities included in
the mandate.
I would like to reiterate Bangladesh’s principled
position that gender sensitivity and the involvement of
women in peacekeeping operations, in line with
resolution 1325 (2000) and the subsequent follow-up
resolutions, should be adhered to. We are pleased that
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support are working together in
this context and have recently launched gender
guidelines in United Nations military peacekeeping.
Bangladesh, for its part, has played a cardinal
role in the maintenance of international peace and
security. Since 1988, Bangladesh has been involved in
36 United Nations peacekeeping operations, with
approximately 90,000 personnel. Today, Bangladesh is
ranked first in the field. We take pride in our modest
contribution to the maintenance of international peace
and security. Through the years, nearly 100 of our
valiant peacekeepers have laid down their lives for the
cause of United Nations-sponsored peacekeeping
missions. We reiterate our commitment to continuing to
work with the United Nations for the maintenance of
international peace and security.
The President (spoke in Russian): We have now
reached the second round of our discussion.
I shall now give the floor to Mr. Le Roy, pursuant
to rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Security Council, to respond to comments and
questions raised.
Mr. Le Roy: At the outset, I would like very
much to thank you one more time, Sir, for organizing
this debate and for the great support we have heard this
morning for our peacekeeping missions, and especially
our Force Commanders, from Security Council
members and of course from those who spoke under
rule 37, representing countries that participate in
peacekeeping operations.

35

S/PV.6370

At the outset, because not all of our Force
Commanders will have the opportunity to speak, allow
me, Sir, to just introduce those who have not been able
to speak this morning. I will start with Colonel
Svystak, Chief Military Officer of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo; Colonel
Logan, Chief Military Officer of the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste; Major General
Kandji, Force Commander of the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad;
Major General Hafiz, Force Commander of the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI);
Lieutenant General Prakash, incoming Force
Commander for the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo; Major General Ecarma, head of Mission
and Force Commander of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force; Rear Admiral
Sánchez, Force Commander of the United Nations
Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus; Major General Zhao,
Force Commander of United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara; and Major General
Kim, Chief Military Officer of the United Nations
Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan. I think
the others have spoken and were introduced this
morning.
For the rest of the debate, as many questions have
been asked and some have been targeted to specific
Force Commanders, I would propose an order for the
sequence of events, to make it interactive. I would
suggest that Lieutenant General Afzal of the United
Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) should answer
the questions directed to him about transition and the
time to draw down in Liberia, the slow progress in
security sector reform, the early peacebuilding
activities of UNMIL, the challenges for the elections
and the risk of a security vacuum. Those questions
were specifically directed towards General Afzal.
Then I propose that Lieutenant General Gaye
answer the questions on, of course, the protection of
civilians; the conditionality policy, technology,
intelligence needs for our missions, mobility, and
cooperation with other missions, especially concerning
the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA).
Then I propose that Major General Cruz of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti answer
the questions directed to him on sexual and genderbased violence in internally displaced persons camps,

36

deterrence, the role of the engineers, and the efforts
and coordination undertaken with development actors.
Then I would propose that Major General Hafiz
of UNOCI answer the questions on the protection of
civilians, transition, interoperability — which have
been raised on several occasions — and formation of
the troops.
Then I propose that General Kandji answer the
question on deterrence and interoperability, especially,
of course, for a mission that has transitioned from a
European Union operation to a United Nations
operations.
Then I propose that Major General Obi of the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan answer the
question on cooperation with other regional missions,
especially on the question of the LRA; the question on
capacities; and of course the key question on
helicopters.
Then I would propose that Major General Mood
answer the question raised by the representative of
Lebanon about the reporting of the United Nations
Truce Supervision Organization.
I would give the last word — if you agree, Sir —
to General Obiakor to conclude, for our part.
The President (spoke in Russian): The
coordinating role of the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping can only have a very strong impression
on Council members. The presidency of the Security
Council fully agrees with the procedure he has
proposed, and I believe that other members are in
agreement as well.
I shall now give the floor to Lieutenant General
Afzal, pursuant to rule 39 of the provisional rules of
procedure of the Security Council, to respond to
comments and questions raised.
Lieutenant General Afzal: I appreciate the
concern shown by the members of the Council in
respect of Liberia and will endeavour to answer the
questions that they have raised.
I would like to thank all participants for their
questions, especially the question dealing with the
transition from the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL) to the security forces of Liberia and the
concern they have shown for the successful completion
of the Mission.

10-47717

S/PV.6370

First, to start in a sequential manner, the
drawdown, as envisaged to date by the Security
Council, has been completed, and the present strength
of the UNMIL military and police components,
including the enablers, is more than sufficient to meet
the requirements that the Security Council has
mandated for the conduct of the forthcoming elections
by the end of next year.
Secondly, the transition phase, which is the
handing over of security responsibilities from UNMIL
to the Government of Liberia’s security agencies, is
already in progress. On the instructions of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, UNMIL
commenced with a workshop, which was held in June
this year, between not only UNMIL and the Government
of Liberia’s different departments and ministries, but
also experts from other missions that had transitioned to
this phase. As a consequence, we identified a list of
those actions or functions that UNMIL undertakes at
present to provide security and those persons who, from
the side of the Government of Liberia, would be taking
over that responsibility in the future. We also identified
the existing capacity of that particular agency of the
Government of Liberia to undertake the task and the
assistance and guidance that would be required to
develop that capacity and capability.
Moving on to the forthcoming elections, UNMIL
is mandated to provide logistical support and, as I
mentioned earlier, we can do it with the existing
resources. However, there is definitely going to be an
area of concern, and that would be the capacity of the
security forces of Liberia themselves, especially the
police and the military, to ensure security during this
period.
As the Council is well aware, the existing United
Nations police strength in Liberia is 4,000 personnel,
whereas the strength of the Liberian National Police
stands at 3,000. The existing United Nations military
strength in Liberia is 8,000, and the existing military
strength of the armed forces of Liberia stands at 2,000.
The Council is well aware of where the gap
already lies, and what is essential is to raise more
officers for the Liberian National Police, which should
be able to fulfil the security requirements during the
forthcoming elections and afterwards. This would not
only mean raising additional police, but also
establishing police stations, providing them with
vehicles, wherewithal, communications and, last but not

10-47717

least, the sustenance required for the police personnel
to be operable in the long run. This also relates to
Liberia’s limited budget. With a limited budget, they
can only provide so much space for the security sector
within the existing budget. As has been noted, the
existing budget for this year has been increased
nominally for the Government security sector.
Last but not least, I would like to conclude by
saying that without providing security, there can be no
governance and no security.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Lieutenant General Afzal for the clarifications
provided. I give the floor to Lieutenant General Gaye.
Lieutenant General Gaye (spoke in French):
The impact of the conditional support policy on the
security and protection of civilians is positive, first in
terms of the Congolese military authorities’ awareness
of protection issues. Secondly, that policy has obliged
us in the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), now the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
to develop procedures — primarily to monitor
activities of the Forces armées de la République
démocratique du Congo (FARDC) within the dictates
of conditional support policy. But it is clear that by
reducing our support to the FARDC, as required by the
conditional support policy, we have thus created
conditions where more FARDC forces may live off of
the population. There has been a growing awareness of
human rights issues and respect for international
humanitarian law, but a reduction in the number of
battalions supported and thus an increased risk that
FARDC forces will seek to live off the population.
(spoke in English)
Concerning technology assets for providing
additional intelligence to the force commanders, I think
that all of the force commanders will welcome this
important step. The issue will be to examine its costeffectiveness and political implications, notably as
concerns the relations between the force and the host
country, and, last but not least, to look at this from a
military perspective. Will we focus on tactical
intelligence, operational intelligence or strategic
intelligence? But there is definitely a need, particularly
when operating under Chapter VII, to provide the force
with intelligence assets. That will definitely help
improve the protection of the population.

37

S/PV.6370

Concerning cooperation among neighbouring
missions, that has already been done. There is a
framework for meetings among MONUC, the United
Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and
Chad (MINURCAT), the United Nations Mission in the
Sudan, the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur and the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic
(BINUCA). Several meetings have already been held in
Entebbe and in the various missions. Unfortunately,
because of visa issues, we did not succeed in holding a
meeting in the Sudan or one in MINURCAT. But
definitely, at the Force Commander level and also at
the level of Head of Mission, there is a framework for
regional coordination.
At the tactical level, MONUSCO’s intent is to set
up a joint operations centre in Dungu among the
FARDC — that is the Congolese military —
MONUSCO and the Uganda People’s Defence Forces
(UPDF), because UPDF is currently operating in the
four countries I have just named — Uganda, Southern
Sudan, Central African Republic and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo — so their participation will be
part of the coordination.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Lieutenant General Gaye for the clarifications
provided. I give the floor to Major General Paul Cruz
to respond to questions.
Major General Paul Cruz: I thank the Council
for giving me the opportunity to clarify some issues. I
will begin with engineer participation, which has been
reinforced in our mission. We were not only reinforced,
but well reinforced by the Japanese and Korean
companies of engineers. They are doing remarkable
work on main roads that had major damage; they are
now repaired. There was a big effort made to remove
debris, so we are opening sites, mainly Government
facilities, hospitals, schools and orphanages. This
process is ongoing. We have had very good
reinforcement on those issues.
On the issue of sexual and gender-based violence,
one month after the earthquake, when the main camps
for internally displaced persons (IDPs) were being
established — in the area of Port-au-Prince there are
now about 900 IDP camps — we began to notice an
increase in violence against women, and we changed
our approach to address this problem. This problem
must be addressed from a broader perspective that

38

includes community violence reduction personnel and
humanitarian people, as well as the presence of the
military, the police and the local police. We encourage
various actors in this joint strategy, which exists
mainly in the larger camps — such as the Jean-Marie
Vincent camp — where we had many problems that
were reduced by major operations involving the United
Nations police, formed police units, the military and
the Haitian National Police. This was carried out not
only through a security approach, but also with a view
to improving living conditions and to spreading the
message that persons most at risk, such as women and
children, must be protected. This is an ongoing process
by which we hope to reduce the number of threats
against women in the camps, because their lives there
are already difficult.
Our deterrence posture is part of what we are
doing, mainly in the poorest areas of Port-au-Prince
and other cities. My guidance to the military is: “Be
there on foot. Stay there as part of the local
community. Be part of the community. Be accepted by
them, work with them and thus maintain their
confidence in our job and our work.” And this has
resulted in a very good approach towards the local
Haitian people and the local leadership, and it has
made our lives much easier than before.
With respect to humanitarian efforts, in the
emergency phase we had the challenge of quickly
distributing large quantities of food, water and shelter,
which was done by a joint operations task centre,
where all requests were posted and tasks assigned to
the proper sector for appropriate action development,
not just towards the military or the police, but also
towards all the humanitarian organizations and United
Nations agencies that were on board.
But after the emergency phase, under the
direction of Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Edmond Mulet, the Deputy Special
Representative
of
the
Secretary-General
and
Humanitarian Coordinator established a strategy to
bring coherence to the delivery of humanitarian
assistance. This delivery needed to be coherent with
the Haitian Government’s plan and with that of the
Interim Haiti Recovery Commission. We studied their
documents and, under the direction of the Deputy
Special Representative, we prepared a plan for a more
coherent delivery of assistance in the recovery phase in
order to prepare for the next phase.

10-47717

S/PV.6370

Today, our major logistical challenge is debris.
We are working on opening the roads and streets of
Port-au-Prince. Of course, delays are expected.
Progress can be achieved only in a safe and stable
environment. Notwithstanding all the things that have
happened in Haiti, with the electoral process that is
currently being launched, we are optimistic that the
country will recover, that it will soon enter a new phase
of greater stability and that it will be better in general.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
give the floor to Major General Hafiz, pursuant to rule
39 of the provisional rules of procedure of the Security
Council, to respond to comments and questions raised.
Major General Hafiz (spoke in French): I am
the Force Commander of the United Nations Operation
in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI). It is my honour and
privilege to briefly address the issue of the protection
of civilians in Côte d’Ivoire. As the Council is aware,
under our mission’s mandate we have the role and task
of protecting civilians who are in imminent danger of
violence in areas under our deployment.
Our view is that this task is crucial and
significant. We also believe that it is a difficult task to
carry out because, to do so, we need resources and
means. Our troop strength is 7,000 soldiers in a country
that is quite large.
Secondly, in Côte d’Ivoire, threats are sometimes
made against civilians by State authorities charged
with maintaining order in the country during antiGovernment demonstrations. The Council is aware that
it is politically difficult to act against authorities
charged with maintaining order who threaten civilians.
That having been said, we are fully aware of our
mission to protect civilians in imminent danger of
violence. To that end, we count on our presence in
major cities and in high-risk areas that may be hotspots
in times of crisis, protest or violence.
We have deployed troops to play a deterrent role.
We undertake regular patrols in the field that allow us
to monitor the situation and provide intelligence that is
useful for carrying out our protection of civilians tasks.
In each sector, we maintain an early warning force that
enables us to respond rapidly in case of a deteriorating
or exacerbated situation. I would underscore that this
task is incumbent on all components of the mission:
military, police, civilian affairs, the human rights
section and all others.

10-47717

In this regard, we enjoy full cooperation with the
other components of our mission. I would like to add
that UNOCI is now in the process of developing and
drafting a strategy or plan for discharging our task to
protect civilians in imminent danger of violence. I
believe that, having developed this plan, we will be in
a strong position to protect civilians in imminent
danger.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
give the floor to Major General Kandji, pursuant to
rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Security Council, to respond to comments and
questions raised.
Major General Kandji (spoke in French): I have
been asked to speak to the Council about the United
Nations Mission in Central African Republic and Chad
(MINURCAT), specifically the transition phase from
the European Union Force (EUFOR) to MINURCAT,
and about our achievements and to briefly touch upon
deterrence.
I believe — and the Council would agree — that
MINURCAT can be considered a textbook case. The
youngest of the missions, it will be the first to expire
after a mere 21 months of activity. Over these 21
months, the Mission has gone through all the most
critical phases of any deployment. First came the
launching of the Mission, followed by the transition
from EUFOR to MINURCAT, and now the drawdown
announced for 31 December 2010. These three key
phases divide the life of the Mission into three
sections.
(spoke in English)
The first section phase of nine months during
which we went at a slow pace because of the
difficulties related to the start-up of the Mission. It was
only when we had achieved a comfortable operational
capability that we entered the second phase, which was
five months long. We were almost at the high point of
the Mission when we were suddenly asked to stop our
operations and start to withdraw.
(spoke in French)
The three periods were nine months, five months
and seven months, respectively.
(spoke in English)
Naturally, those three phases affected our
achievement’s on the ground. Because of the slowness

39

S/PV.6370

of our deployment, during the first nine months we had
to accept a great many compromises because we were
not there. It is always difficult to reverse a compromise
once it is established. Here, we did not respect one of
the main aspects of any relief operation, where it is
necessary to be strong in relieving a weak unit. But in
this case, we had a weak unit to relieve a strong unit.
That is where all our difficulties arose.
And our achievements were many. From the
military point of view, we were not really in a warfare
situation, so the military challenge was not too great.
But starting in December, we were at the peak of our
deployment — and that peak, again, was 65 per cent of
our authorized mandate. We never reached the total
authorized strength, and that was how we had to face
all those difficulties.
In the other areas of the Mission — civilian and
police — the achievements were even greater. I am not
here to speak on the substantives, but the Mission has
done a lot for prisons, the judiciary, gender issues, and
so forth. It has changed mindsets and behaviours in
eastern Chad in only 21 months. It is important to
mention here that, as part of our activities, we had a
military unit that drilled for water in that part of the
country, where it is said that they will now have water
for 50 years. And we know how important and strategic
water can be in that part of the world.
To sum up, I am not ashamed of what we have
done. Much has been said, even in this Chamber,
accusing the force of having done nothing. So this is a
divine opportunity for me to denounce that; it was not
true. We have done a lot; the statistics are here. And I
think that the seminar that will be conducted in
September, as planned by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, will cover all these issues,
give clarity and just re-establish the truth for the
record.
The last point I was asked to touch on was
deterrence. The principle of deterrence is to show force
simply in order to be respected, so that the others know
that these guys have the capability to operate and to
make the difference. What does that mean? You need to
have adequate resources. It means presence and force
projection all over the theatre. One cannot deter if one
cannot move, and in order to move, we come back to
the same old story of having helicopters, and so forth.
I think I will just end here, and express the hope
that the difficulty we had at the beginning will not

40

come back again. It took too long for us to start the
Mission. The mandate to start the Mission was signed
two months before 15 March. I think we should agree
that we need at least six months for the resources to be
developed and force generation to happen, and then we
will be in better shape to avoid the difficulties I had to
go through during the start-up phase.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
give the floor to Major General Obi, pursuant to rule
39 of the provisional rules of procedure of the Security
Council, to respond to comments and questions raised.
Major-General Obi: I will touch briefly on the
issue of cooperation as it relates to the Lord’s
Resistance Army (LRA), and also on the requirement
for helicopters.
As far as the LRA is concerned, it is useful to
clarify that cooperation exists between the missions.
Here, I would like to say that the missions — the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS), the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur, the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad — jointly exchange intelligence
and have recently designated desk officers for this
purpose. We share intelligence on the activities of the
LRA. I would also like to say that the various missions
have what we call the Force Commanders conference,
which is held periodically. During these conferences,
issues such as the LRA are also addressed.
I would also like to say here that the issue of the
LRA was discussed at the meeting held in June in
Entebbe, which took place days after I assumed
command. At that meeting, it was generally agreed that
right now the LRA operates in small numbers, that it
moves across borders, and that it revolves around the
leadership and most of the time is surviving by instinct.
It also undertakes missions to recharge its ranks by
taking on new captives to increase its numbers.
It was also generally felt that the permanent
responsibility for addressing the issue of the LRA is
that of the host nations around the region, and that they
should coordinate their efforts. For our part, we share
information and generally address the issue as it relates
to civilian protection, because the LRA’s activities also
affect the protection of civilians. In my own Mission,
our planning takes due consideration of activities
around the coastal border. We also encourage the

10-47717

S/PV.6370

Sudan People’s Liberation Army, which has permanent
responsibility for addressing the issue, while we
address the challenges as they relate to civilian
protection.
On the issue of helicopters, I would like to say
here that the Sudan as a whole is the largest nation in
Africa in terms of land mass, and that Southern Sudan
is bigger than most African countries. The UNMIS
military force is 10,000 strong. I believe that is related
to its mandate, which is mostly about monitoring and
giving support to the host nation. Sixty per cent of the
force is made up of enablers, while the other 40 per
cent includes such components as infantry — the
forces you really need for physical operations,
patrolling and the like.
Its deployment is over a very wide area. I can
give an example of one of my battalions in Juba, which
is one of my sectors. The battalion covers an area
larger than its own home nation. This means that its
team sites are located far apart, perhaps 70 kilometres
from each other. One finds oneself travelling long
distances by helicopter to go to one team site. Support
for this force obviously requires mobility. I should also
add here that Southern Sudan presents the very big
challenge of a lack of infrastructure capacity. There is
an absolute lack of roads. In the rainy season, the place
is muddy. Even on foot one can hardly move. One
needs special tires to drive in Southern Sudan. Thus, to
move in Southern Sudan one needs mostly air mobility.
Water transportation is limited to the Nile, and so will
not provide enough coverage.
Here I would like to add that UNMIS has been
asked by the parties to play a bigger role in supporting
the referendums. For this, UNMIS will now be
required to give support down to the county level.
During the last elections, our support was up to the
state level in the state capitals, of which there are 10.
But now we are dealing with 79 counties, so
preparation
for
the
referendums
requires
reconnaissance missions and the setting up of
infrastructure; after which the Force must be prepared
to extend into these areas to provide the security that is
required of us, since we must provide security to the
United Nations observers and protect civilians.
Now, with a limited force in a large area, and
with more counties to cover and more team sites that
we must address, we must do more frequent patrolling;
we must be in the air most of the time; we must operate

10-47717

with mobile reserves that can react quickly and be
delivered where they are needed in the shortest
possible time. So our operations will be heavily
dependent on mobility, and that generally has to be air
mobility because of the terrain and the absence of
infrastructure. This makes the issue of helicopters a
priority, and they are limited as of now.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank Major
General Obi for his comments. I now give the floor to
Major General Mood.
Major General Mood: We, the force
commanders, have discussed our concerns related to
the increasing capability gap, the caveats and the
challenges of achieving integrated effects, to mention
only a few. We also fully recognize that it is our
responsibility to keep the situational awareness of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the SecretaryGeneral and the Security Council up to date through
timely and accurate reporting.
To respond the specific question from the
representative of Lebanon on the reporting of the
United Nations Truce Supervision Organization
(UNTSO), the answer is that UNTSO reports directly
to the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations on our dialogue and activities. Our
observers in southern Lebanon contribute to the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) reporting
in accordance with an operational control relationship,
which simply means that, on a day-to-day basis, they
report to the UNIFIL Force Commander, in a way that
is similar to how those on the Golan interact with the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force. I am
confident that these arrangements ensure impartial,
factual reporting for the benefit of the awareness of
Headquarters related both to the regional perspective
and to incidents and violations of Security Council
resolutions.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank Major
General Mood for his assessments.
I shall now give the floor to Lieutenant General
Chikadibia
Isaac
Obiakor,
Military
Adviser,
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, pursuant to
rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Security Council.
Lieutenant General Obiakor: I should like, on
behalf the heads of military components — the force
commanders present here today — to express gratitude

41

S/PV.6370

for this opportunity to speak to the Council on some of
our missions. We are indeed encouraged by this
interaction.
Although we function in very difficult political
and physical environments, and although there is at
times, as the Council has heard from the force
commanders, a mismatch between the tasks and the
resources available, I heard them state that they are
encouraged and ever more dedicated to deliver on their
mandates.
I should also like to seize this opportunity to
thank the Security Council for having given me the
opportunity to serve in the United Nations. I also thank
the Council on behalf of my colleagues.

The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Lieutenant General Obiakor. And, once again, we
should like to express our gratitude to him for his
productive efforts in the service of the United Nations.
Before adjourning the meeting, I should like, on
behalf of the Security Council, to thank all the force
commanders who participated in today’s meeting for
the frank assessments they provided and the ideas they
put forward. There is no doubt that everything we
heard today will be extremely useful to the Council in
its further practical work in this crucial area of
peacekeeping operations.
There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 2.05 p.m.

42

10-47717
