~t,'····_·

SECURITY' CO uN CI L ,
QF F1 CIA l.·R EC OR DS .
SECOND YEAR

CONSEIL· DE SECURITE
(

.

.

.

PROCES ..Y ER BA U XO tFF 1C IEl
S
,
. DEUXIEME ANNEE

No~ 7

Ninety-sixth Mee ting
28 January 1947 .

Quatte-vingt-seizieme· seance
.
\ 28 janvier 1947

Lake Success

New York

TABLE OF CONTENTS

\

TABLE'DES MATIERES
Q~atre-vin~t-seizieme

Ninety-sixth mee.ing

seance

Page

Pages

24. Provisional agenda ..... ,............ 129

24. Ordre du jour provisoire. . . . . . . . . . . . .. 129

25. Communication from tr.e Go·Ternment of
._ Brazil ..••••••••....•.••......... 129

25. Communication du Gouvernement du
Bresil
129

26~ Adoption of the agenda

26. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.. " .,

129

,

129

27: Continuation of the di'>cussion of the
United Kingdom -complaint against
130
Albania

27. Suite de la discussion sur la plainte du
Royaume-Uni contre l'Albanie
130

Documents

Documents

Annex

Annexe

The fonowing document, relevant to the ninety-sixth-meeting, appears !n Supplement
No. 3, Second Year:

Le document suivant, se rapportant a la
quatre-vingt-seizieme seance, figure au Supplement No 3, Deuxieme Annee:

Letter and enclosures from the l'epresentative of the linited. Kingdom on the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General dated 10 January .1947
, (document S/247)

Lettre et pieces jointes adressees au Secretaire general par le representant du
Royaume-Uni au Consei1 de securite, en
date du 10 janvier H~47 (document
5/247)

8

8

JUE5

UNITED NATIONS

NATIONS UNIES

SECURITY

CONSEIL

COUNCIL

DE SECURITE

OFFICIAL RECORDS

~ROCES-VERBAUX OFFICIELS

SECOND YEAR

No. 7

DEUXIEME ANNEE

No 7

NINETY-SIXTH MEETING

QUATRE-VINGT-SEIZIEME SEANCE

Held at Lake Success, New York,
on Tuesday, 28 January 1947 at 11 a.m.

T enue aLake. Su~cess, N ew-York,
le mardi 28 janvier 1947, all heures.

President: Mr. N. J. O. MAKIN (Australia).

President: M. N. J. O. MAKIN (Australie).

Present: The representatives of the flJJ10wing
countries: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China,
Colombia, France, Poland, Syria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom,
United States of America.

Presents: Les representants des pays suivants:
Australie, Belgique, BrCsil, Chine, Colombie;
France, Pologne, Syrie, Union des Republique$
socialistes sovietiques, Royaume~Uni, Etats..U nis
d'Amerique.

24. Provisional agenda

24. Ordre du iour provisoire

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Letter from the representative of the United
Kingdom on the Security Council addressed
to the Secretary-General concerning incidents
in the Corfu Channel {document S/247).1

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.
2. Lettre relative aux incidents survenus dans le
detroit de Codou, adresse au Secretaire gen6ral par le representant du Royaumf;;-Uni au
ConseiI desecurite (document S/247).1

25. Communications from the Government
of Brazil

25. Communication du Gouvernement
b:esilien

The PRESIDENT: Before coming to the matters that are associated with the agenda, I should
like to arinounce that I have received from the
representative of the Brazilian Government,
Mr. Ra-oul Fernandes, the following communication:
."Please accept and transmit to all members
of the Security Council my warm appreciation
of their moving tribute to the memory of
Ambassador Leao Velloso.
.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Avant
de passer aux questions qui ont trait a notre
ordre du jour, je voudrais vous faire savoir que
j'ai re~u, du representant du Gouvemement bresiIien, M. RaouI Femandes, la communication
suivante:
"VeuilIez agreer et transmettre a tous lea
membres du Conseil de securite mes vifs remerciements pour l'emouvant hommage qu'lls
ont rendu a la memoire de rAmbassadeur
Leao Vclloso.
"(signe) RaouIFERNANDES"

"(signed) Raoul FERNANDES"

26. Adoption of the agendQ

26. Adoption de I'ordre du iour

. The PRESIDENT: The first item if! the adoption of the agenda.
Has any member of the Security Council any

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Notre
premier point est l'adoption de I'ordre du jour.
Les membres du Conseil de securite ont-ils des.

I See Se:urity Council Official Records, Second Year,
Supplement No. 3, Annex 8.

t Voir Proces-verbaux afficiels du C.onseil dB securitl6
Deuxieme annee, Supplement No 3, Annexe 8.

question, or does any membe r wish to speak in
any way with reference to the adopti(,>n of the
agenda?
Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russia n): I do not
know whether it would not be better to raise my
point for consideration during the discussion of
the agenda or later on, but it seems to me that
the situation is such, that we cannot consider the
statement of the United Kingdom Government
today, owing to the fact that the representative
of Albania is not present.
I have read the telegram received a few days
ago, from the Prime Minister of the Albani an
Republic. He requests the Security Council to
postpone the consideration of this question until
the arrival in New York of the replesentative of
Albania. I think the request of the Albani an
Government is understandable and legitimate.
In view of this, we should decide, today, that
the Security Council shall proceed to consider
this question only after the arrival in New York
of the representative of the Albani an Government.
The PRESIDENT: I would suggest to the representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics that this pOint might possibly be more
appropriately raised when we examine item 2 of
the agenda, when I shall be glad to give him
the opportunity to express his views with regard
to this matter .
I think it is essential for me to communicate
to members of the Security Council, this morning, the communication which was addressed to
the Government. of Albania, as well dS the reply
we have received; the Council will then be in a
position to know exactly what should be done
with regard to the discussion of this matter .
Do I take it that the agenda, as set out, meets
with members' approval?

The agenda was adopted.

questions a poser, ou des remarques a faire au
sujet de l'adopt ion de l'ordre du jour?
M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): Monsieur
le President, j'aurai s une observation a presenter,
mais ne sais si je dois le faire maintenant, ~ors
que nous discutons de notre ordre du jour, ou
plus tard. J'ai I'impression que dans la situation
actuelle, nous ne pouvons pas examiner aujourd'hui la declaration du Gouvernement britannique, etant donne que le representant de I'Albanie n'est pas id.
J'ai pris connaissance du teIegramme que le
Premier Minlstre de la Republique albanaise
avait adresse il y a que1ques jours au Conseil de
securite; il demande d'ajou mer l'examen de cette
question jusqu'a l'arrivee a New-York du representan t albanais. 11 me semble que la demande
du Gouvernement albanais est comprehensible
.
et legitime.
Je crois, par consequent, que le Conseil de
securite devrait decider aujour d'hui de n'abor der
l'examen de cette question qu'apre s l'arrivee a
New-York du representant du Gouvernement de
l'Albanie.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Je me
permets d'indiq uer au representant de l'Unio n
des Republiques socialistes sovietiques qu'il vaudrait peut-etre mieux soulever cette question
lorsque nous discuterons le point 2 de l' ordre du
jour. A ce moment, je me ferai alors un plaisir
de lui donner l'occasion d'exposer ses vues en la
matiere.
J'estime qu'il est de mon devoir de faire part,
ce matin, aux membres du Conseil de securite,
de la communication adresse au Gouvernement
albanais, ainsi que de la reponse que nous en
avons re~ue. Le Conseil sera ainsi en mesure de
decider ce qu'il convient de faire, lorsque nous
aborderons cette question.
Si personne n'eleve d'objection, je considere
que l'ordre du jour est adopte sous sa forme
actuelle.
L'ordre du jour est adopte.

27. Continuation of the discussion of the
Urdted Kingdom complaint again st Albania

27. Suite de la discussion sur la plainte
du Royaume-Uni contre I'Albanie

.. The PRESIDENT: With regard to item 2, before actually proceeding with that item, I should
like· to intimate that it was my desire that we
might meet on Friday, but in view of not having
received a reply from the Government of Albania, I felt it would be more appropriate to
defer the meeting of this Council until this morning. In the meantime, we have received a reply
to the communication which was addressed to
the Government of Albania, and I propose to
read both the communicatioll which was sent to
the Government of Albania and the reply we
have received. The following communication
was addressed by Mr. David Owen, Acting Secretary-General, to Colonel-General Enver Hoxha ,
President of the Council of Ministers of the
People's Republic of Albania. It reads:
"With reference to my cable of 15 Januar y,
I have the honou r to inform you that the

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Avant
d'entam er la discussion du point 2, je voudrais
vous dire qu'il etait dans mes intentions de
reunir le Conseil de securite vendredi. Cepenclant, comme nous n'avions pas re~u de reponse
du Gouvernement albanais, j'ai juge preferable
de remettre la seance du Conseil a ce matin.
Dans l'intervalle, nous avons re~u une reponse
mement
a la communication adressee au Gouve
du
lecture
albanais, et je me propose de donner
rneGouve
ce
a
envoye
message qui avait ete
ment et de la reponse que nous avons re~ue.
M. David Gwen, Secretaire general par interim,
a adresse au colonel-general Enver Hoxha,
President du Conseil des Ministres de la Republique populaire d'Albanie, la communication
suivan te:'
"Me referant a mon teIegramme du 15 janvier, j'ai I'honn eur de vous faire savoir que

letter from the United Kingdom representative to the Security Council, concerning the
incidents in the Corfu Channel, was placed on
the agenda of the Security Council meeting
which took place today.
"In accordance with Article 43 1 of the
Charter, the Security Council decided to invite the Albanian Government to participate,
without a vote, in the proceedings with regard
to this dispute, on condition that Albania accepts, in the present case, all the obligations
which a Member of the United Nations would
have to assume in a similar case.
"I should be obliged if you would kindly
inform me as soon as possibl~ whether the
Albanian Government accepts this invitation,
and if so, if you would advise me of the name
of the delegate which it appoints to represent
it and the date on which he will arrive in
New York. The Security Council wishes to be
in a position to study this matter as soon as
possible. Please acknowledge receipt of this
cable."
The reply that has been received from ColonelGeneral Enver Hoxha, the President of the Council of Ministers and Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the People's RepubE:: of Albania, addressed
to Mr. Trygve Lie, reads as follows:
"Acknowledging receipt of your cable,
M5453, dated 20 January, by which you inform me that the Security Council ha> placed
on its agenda the United Kingdom complaint
against Albania with regard to the Corfu
Channel incidents, I have the honour to inform you that the Albanian Government accepts the Security Council's decision. Its representative to the Security Council for that question will be Mr. Hysni Kapo. He and his suite
will leave soon but, because of very difficult
communications, it is impossible to fix date of
his arrival in New York. Please postpone proceedings until his arrival."
Does any member of the Council wish either
to speak or ask a question on this matter?
Mr. ZURAYK (Syria): Just for record purposes, I wish to ask if the reference to the Article
of the Charter is the correct one, whether in this
communication it is Article 43 of the Charter or
Article 32?

The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative
of Syria for drawing our attention to this. In the
original cable which has been forwarded to the
Government of Albania, I note that the Article
mentioned is Article 32. There has evidently
been some typographical error in the typing of
this document. We shall, of course, take note of
this essential correction. Thank you.

la lettre adressee par le representant du
Royaume-Uni au Conseil de securite sur les
incidents survenus dans le detroit de Corfou a
ete inscrite a I'ordre du jour de la seance du
Conseil de securite qui a eu lieu aujourd'hui.
"Conformement a l'Article 431 de la Charte,
le Conseil de securite a decide d'inviter le
Gouvernement albanais a participer, sans droit
de vote, aux discussions relatives a ce differend, a la condition que l'Albanie accepte,
dans le cas actuel, toutes les obligations qu'aurait a assumer un Membre des Nations Unies
dans un cas analogue.
"Je vous serais reconnaissant de bien vouloir me faire savoir le plus tot possible si le
Gouvernement albanais accepte cette invitation, et dans l'affirmative, de bien vouloir
m'indiquer le nom du deIegue qu'il va designer
pour le representer et la date de son arrivee
a New-York. Le Conseil de securite voudrait
ctre en mesure d'etudier cette afl'aire le plus
tot possible. J e vous serais reconnaissant de
m'accuser reception de ce telegramme."
Le colonel-general Enver Hoxha, President
du Conseil des Ministres de la Republique populaire d'Albanie et Ministre des Affaires etrangeres d'Albanie, a adresse a M. Trygve Lie la
reponse suivante:
"J'ai l'holllieur d'accuser reception de votre
teIegramme M5453, en date du 20 janvier,
par lequeI vous m'informez que le Conseil de
securite a inscrit a son ordre du jour la plainte
deposee par le Royaume-Uni contre l'Albanie
au sujets des incidents du detroif de Corfou, et
de vous faire connaitre que le Gouvernement
albanais accepte la decision du ConseiI de
securite. Il sera represente en cette matiere au
Conseil de securite par M. Hysni Kapo.
partira bientot avec sa suite, mais les communications etant tres difficiles, il est impossible de fixer la date de son arrivee a NewYork. Veuillez differer la discussion ju...~u'a
son arrivee."
L'un des membres du Conseil desire-t-il faire
une remarque, ou poser un question a ce sujet?
M. ZURAYK (Syrie) (traduit de l'anglais):
Monsieur le President, simplement, pour l'exactitude du proces-verbal, je voudrais demander si
la reference a l'Article de la Charte est bien
exacte, et si, dans cette communication, il ne
s'agit pas de l'Article 32 de la Charte au lieu
de I'Article 43.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Je remercie le representant de la Syrie d'avoir attire
notre attention sur ce point. Je constate, en effet, que sur I'original du teIegramme envoye au
Gouveruement albanais, il est question de l'AI';'
ticle 32. n y a evidemment eu une erreur de
frappe a la dactylographie. Nous devons noter
bien entendu cette rec~_· _ation essentielle. Je
vous remercie.

n

Sir Alexander CADOGAN (United Kingdom) :
I cannot take exception to anything that has
been said here. Plainly, in a case of this kind, all

Sir Alexander CADOGAN (Royaume-Uni) (traduit de l'anglais ): Monsieurle President, je n'ai
rien a objecter aux remarqu~ qui onf. ete formu-

1 f.s the represe!ltative of Syr!a later pointed out, the
Article here mentioned should In fact be Article 32 of
the Charter.

1 Ainsi que le representant de la Syrie le fit remarquer
ulterieurement, it s'agit en realite de l'Article 32 de la

Ch~rlte.

the parties to the dispute should be present at
the Council table when the matter is discussed.
J hope, however, that we shall not be subjected
to undue delay in this matter. It will not have
escaped the. attention of the Council that the
possibility of this matter coming before it must
have been known for a long time to the Albanian
Government. The United Kingdom Government,
in their note of 9 December 1946 to the Albanian
Government, indicated that, unless the matter
could be satisfactorily settled by a direct exchange, the matter would be brought before the
Council. On 9 January 1947, my Government
informed the Albanian Government that they
were placing it on the Council's agenda. Therefore, plenty of warning was given to the Albanian
Government.
It is true that the formal invitation to the
Albanian Government to be represented could
not be telegraphed until 20 January, but with all
the warning they had, one would have thought
that the Albanian Government would have made
provisional arrangements which might have been
put rapidly into effect.
The Council has a lot of work in front of it
during the coming weeks. I had hoped that we
could have disposed of this case before turning
to other matters. Therefore, I do think there is
need for an urgent handling of the matter.
I wonder if it would be possible for the Council to agree to send another telegram today to
the Albanian Government, acknowledging the
one we have just received from them, pointing
out the urgency, and perhaps referring to the
period which the Albanian Government have
already had for making the necessary prep~:ra­
tions, and urging them to indicate to us by telegraph, at the earliest possible moment, the date
on which their representative can be expected
to be here and attend the session 'of the Council.
The PRESIDENT: Does any other member wish
to speak?
Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): I do not
think there is any need for a communication of
the kind suggested by the United Kingdom representative, for the simple reason that we have
ol' the People's Republic of Albania. This telegram stated that the representative of Albania
was about to leave, and that the date of his arrival in New York depended solely on means of
transportation. Therefore, taking into consideration the nature of the telegram we have just
r~ceived from the Government of the People's
Republic of Albania, I think there is simply no
sense in sending a second communication of this
kind to the Albanian Government.
The PRESIDENT: I wish to make a statement
to the Council on this matter.
The Albania."1 Government was warned on
"1.5 January that the case would be coming before
thl;; 8ecurity Council, and it was officially notified on 20 January that the Security Council
had decided to invite the Albanian Government
to participate, without vote, in the discussions.

lees ici. n est evident que dans une affaire de ce
genre, toutes les parties intereSsees a un differend
doivent etre presentes lorsque le Conseil en discute. J'espere cependant que cela n'entramera
pour nous aucun delai injustifie. 11 n'a pu echapper au Conseil que le Gouvernement albanais
devait savoir depuis longtemps que le Conseil
pOlurrait etre saisi de cette question. Dans sa note
du 9 decembre 1946 au Gouvernement albanais,
le Gouvernement du Royaume-Uni precisait que,
si la question ne pouvait etre reglee de fa~on
satisfaisante par negociations directes, eUe serait
portee devant le Conseil de securite. Le 9 janvier
1947, mon Gouvernement a informe le Gouvernement albanais qu'il demandait que la question £O.t inscrite a l'ordre du jour du Conseil. Le
Gouvemement albanais etait donc bien prevenu.
11 est exact que c'est seulement le 20 janvier
qu'on a pu adresser au Gouvernement albanais
un telegramme l'invitant officieUement a se faire
representer. On est toutefoisen droit de penser
que le Gouvernement albanais avait ete suffisamment prevenu pour avoir pris des dispositions
provisoires qui auraient pu etre mises a execution
rapidement.
Le Conseil aura beaucoup a faire au cours des
semaines avenire J'avais espere que nous aurions
pu regIer cette affaire avant de passer a d'autres
questions. J'estime done qu'eUe doit etre examinee d'urgence.
Je me demande si le Conseil ne pourrait pas
se mettre d'accord pour envoyer aujourd'hui un
nouveau teIegramme au Gouvemement" albanais
par lequel il accuserait reception de celui qui
vient de nous parvenir, et "insisterait sur la question d'urgence avec, peut-etre, une allusion au
dela;\ dont le Gouvernement albanais a deja pu
disposer pour prendre les dispositions necessaires.
n faudrait egalement insister pour qu'il nollS
telegraphie au plus tat la date a laquel1e nollS
pouvons compter sur la presence de son representant a la seance du Conseil.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Un
autre membre desire-t-il prendre la parole?
M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques sodalistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): Je ne vois
pas l'utilite d'une communication du genre de
ceUe que vient de suggerer le representant du
Royaume-Uni, pour la simple raison que nollS
venons de recevoir un telegramme du Gouvernement de la Republique populaire d'Albanie.
Celui-ci indique que son representant est sur le
point de partir, et il precise que la date de son
arrivee a New-York ne dependra que des fadlites de transports. Aussi, etant donnt~ la nature du
telCgramme que nous avons re~u du Gouvemement 'de la Republique populaire d'Albanie,
j'estime qu'adresser une seconde communication
de ce genreau Gouvernement albanais n'aurait
aucun sense
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Je desire faire une declaration au Conseil sur la question qui nous occupe.
Le Gouvernement albanais a ete averti le 15
janvier que le Conseil de securite allait etre bientat saisi de la question, et il a ete avise officiellement le 20 janvier que le Conseil de securite
avait decide d'inviter le Gouvernement albanais
a participer, sans droit de vote, aux discussions.

l:r.l

lIP
The Albanian Government has accepted this invitation to participate and has designated a representative, but it has given no definite indication when the representative will be available in
New York.
While appreciating the difficulties of transport, the Security Council can reasonably expect
to be given at least an approximate date on
which the Albanian representative will be available. That is a courtesy which is due to the
Council, and it is also necessary, in order that the
Council may plan its agenda and arrange its
meetings.
The representatives of eleven Governments are
involved in arranging the business of this Council and it might be expected that the Albanian
Government, while having regard to its own convenience, might also pay some regard to the
convenience of the members of this Council and
do what it can to facilitate the work of this body.
The Council has invited the Albanian Government to participate in the discussions of the complaint brought against it. That is only fair, and
it is a procedure which is enjoined by the Charter. The obligation of the Council, however, both
as required by the text of the Charter and as
required by the dictates of common :ustice, is to
issue the invitation and give the Albanian Government a reasonable opportunity to be i'epresented. Neither the Charter nor the principles
of justice require us to defer the hearing of the
case indefinitely until such time as the Albanian
Government wishes the Council to proceed. It is
for the Council to decide, having regard to all
the circumstances, when it wishes to commence
the hearing of this case and whether or not it
will commence the hearing in the absence of the
Albanian representative.
This Council has a duty to hear the complaint
brought by the United Kingdom, and it also has
a wider duty to consider this matter which has
been properly brought before it, in accordance
with the Charter, h'l order to discharge its obligation under the Charter in regard to the specific
settlement of disputes.
I therefore propose to the Council that we
should adjourn until next Friday morning and
that, in the meantime, the Albanian Government
be asked to state definitely when its representative will reach New York, and if that representative cannot reach New York by next Friday or
soon afterwards, to give the Council such information as will satisfy it that there has been no.
undue or avoidable delay in arranging for Albanian representation at the discussion of this
case.
I place before the Council the proposal I have
made: that further consideration of item 2 be
deferred until next Friday, and that the Council
be adjourned until Friday at 11 a.m. In the
meantime, a communication should be sent to
the Albanian Government asking it to state an
approximate date on which they feel their representative could conveniently be here to attend
the meetings of the Security Council.
Mr. LANGE (Polan d): I quite concur witll
your proposal to ask the Albanian Government
to infOI'IIl us of the approxinlate date on which

3

L .. ~.

K

~O

Le Gouvernement albanais a accepte cette invi·
tation, et a designe un representant, mam il n'a
pas indique d'une maniere prec~e quand ce representant arriverait a New-York.
Tout en reconnaissant qu'll existe des difficultes de transport, le Conseil de securite est normalement en droit d'attendre qu'on lui indique,
au moins d'une fa~on approximative, la date
d'arrivee du representant de l'Albanie. Il y a la
une question de courtoisie. Le Conseil a egalement besoin de cette indication pour etablir son
ordre du jour et son programme de seances.
L'organisation de nos travaux interesse les
representants de ooze Gouvernements. On est
en droit de s'attendre a ce que le Gouvernement
albanais, tout en ayant le soud de ses convenances personnelles, puisse egalement tenir
compte de celles des membres de ce Conseil et
fasse son possible pour en faciliter le travail.
Le Conseil a invite le Gouvernement albanais
a prendre part aux discussions relatives a la
plainte deposee contre lui. Ce n'est que justice,
et la Charte nous prescrit de proceder ainsi.
Toutef(\~, ie devoir qu'imposent au Conseil le
texte de la Charte comme les principes de la
simple justice est d'adresser l'invitation au Gouvernement albanais et de lui donner dans une
mesure raisonnable la possibilite de se faire representer id. Ni la Charte, ni les principes de la
justice ne nous obligent a ajoumer constamment
la discussion de I'affaire et a attendre, pour en
traiter, le ban vouloir du Gouvernement albanais. Il appartient au Conseil de decider, compte
tenu de toutes les circonstances, a que! moment
il desire commencer l'audition de cette affaire,
et s'il y procedera ou non en I'absence du representant de l'Albanie.
Le Conseil a le devoir d'entendre la plainte
formulee par le Royaume-Uni; il a encore davantage le devoir d'examiner une affaire qui a ete
regulierement portee devant lui, conformement
aux dispositions de la Charte, afin de s'acquitter
ainsi de I'obligation qui lui incombe a ce titre,
en ce qui conceme le reglement pacifique des
differends.
Je" propose done au Comeil que nous remettions nos debats a vendredi matin. D'ici la, nous
demanderons au Gouvernement albanais de'nous
faire savoir exactement quand son representant
arrivera a New-York, et, s'il ne peut arriver a
New-York vendredi prochain ou un peu plus
tard, de fournir au Conseil des indications suffisantes pour le convaincre que Ies dispositions
prises par le Gouvernement albanais pour se
faire representer aux debats n'ont pas subi de
retard excessif ou qui se pouvait eviter.
Je propose done au ConseiI de remettre a
vendredi prochain I'examen du point 2 et de
s'ajourner jl.1SClu'au meme jour, a 11 heures;
dans I'intervalle, une communication serait
adressee au Gouvernement albanais pour lui demander de nous indiquer approximativement a
quelle date il estime que son representant pourrait etre ici pour assister aux seances du Conseil
de securite.
M. LANGE (Pologne) (traduit de l'anglais):
Monsieur le President, j'approuve entierement
votre proposition de demander au Gouvernement

...
we may· expect their representative to be here.
I doubt, however, whether it is useful to fix the
exact date of the next meeth'g, and I wonder
whether it would not be preferable to leave this
to the discretion of the President. I think that
some members of the Council may be underestimating the technical difficulties of transportation in Europe and parJ.cUlarly in eastern
Europe.
I just want to say, for instance, that even by
plane, it usually takes a week to get from here to
Poland. Judging from my last experience, I
waited four days in Wat:saw for the arrival of a
Royal Air Force plane to take me to London,
and in addition, I waited a further two days at
Gander, thus making a total of six days; therefore, I have the impression that it is rather difficult to expect the Albanian representative to be
here as early as Friday. By holding a meeting
then, we may be merely wasting our time for he
may not have arrived.

Furthermore, although I do not know whether
the Albanian representative has already left or
when he will be leaving, I think he will probably
need a few days to assemble his documents, his
evidence, etc. Thus, I think it might indeed be
preferable to leave the fixing of the exact date of
our next meeting to the discretion of the President.
Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Repub!ics) (translated from Russian): It was already obvious, on the eve of this meeting of the
Council, that we would not be able to deal with
the substance of the case today, because the representative of Albania had not arrived. I think
the Security Council may find"itself in the same
position if, today, we were to set a definite date
for the consideration of this question,-let us
say, this week, even next jfriday,-for the simple
reason that, in view of transportation difficulties,
none of us can say when the representative of
Albania will arrive here; if we decide to hold a
meeting on Friday, we may find ourselves in the
same position as that in which we are today. I
cannot see why we should place ourselves in this
position and convene merely in order to adjourn
without having done anything with regard to the
substance of the question.
I think the proposal put forward by Mr. Lange
would be the best solution of the problem. I
thought it necessary to add these remarks to
those I made at the beginning of the present
meeting.
I repeat that I do not see any necessity either
to adopt your second proposal to dispatch a special communication to the Albanian Government, for the simple reason that we have just received a relevant and, in my opinion, a clear
reply from the Government of Albania. Why
should we indulge in this unnecessary exchange
of telegrams?
The PRESIDENT: Does any other member wish
to speak on this question?

albanais de nous faire connaitre la date approximative a laquelle nous pouvons compter sur la
presence id de son rc;,presentant. Je doute cependant qu'il soit utile de fixer la date de la prochaine seance. Je me demande s'il ne vaudrait
pas mieux en laisser le soin a la discretion du
President. Je crois que certains membres du
Conseil ne se rendent pas tout a fait compte des
difficultes techniques des transports en Europe,
et~particulierement dans l'est de I'Europe.
Je citerai simplement un exemple: meme si
l'on voyage par avion, il faut d'ordinaire une
semaine pour aller d'ici en Pologne. Si j'en juge
par ma derniere experience, j'ai· attendu quatre
jours a Varsovie I'arrivee d'une avion de la
Royal Air Force qui devait me transporter de
Varsovie a Londres. Aces quatre jours de retard
sont venus s'ajouter deux autres jours d'attente
a Gander, ce qui fait un total de six jours. J'ai
donc I'impression qu'on ne peut guere compter
que le representant de l'Albanie puisse etre ici
des vendredi. Si nous nous reunissons a cette
date, nous rlsquons de perdre purement et simplement notre temps, car il pourrait ne pas etre
arrive.
De plus, bien que j'ignore si le representant
albanais est deja parti, ou quand il partira, je
pense qu'il lui faudra probablement quelques
jours pour reunir sa documentation, ses preuves,
etc. Il serait donc certainement preferable a mon
sens de laisser au President le soin de fixer la
date exacte de notre prochaine seance.
M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques sodalistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe); Monsieur
le President, il etait evident des hier que nous
ne pourrions pas traiter aujourd'hui la question
quant au fond, puisque le representant albancis
n'est pas arrive. Je crois que le Conseil de securite risquerait de se trouver dans la meme situation s'il fixait aujourd'hui une date precise pour
l'examen de cette question, par exemple, cette
semaine, et meme vendredi prochai~, pour la
simple raison qu'etant donne les difficultes de
transport, personne d'entre nous ne peut predire
la date de l'arrivee du representant albanais. Si
nous decidions de nous reunir vendredi, nous
pourrions nous heurter alors a la meme difEculte
qu'aujourd'hui. Je ne vois pas pourquoi nous
nous mettrions dans cette situation, et nous
reunirions seulement pour nous separer sans avoir
aborde le fond de la question.
Je crais que la proposition de M. Lange representerait la meilleure solution du probleme. J'ai
tenu a ajouter ces observations aux remarques
que j'avais faites au debut de notre reunion.
Je repete que je ne vois pas non plus la necessite d'adopter votre seconde proposition d'envoyer un teIegramme special au Gouvernement
albanais, pour la simple raison que nous venons
de recevoir du Gouvernement de l'Albanie une
reponse a ce sujet, a mon avis, parfaitement
claire. A quoi bon proceder a cet inutile echange
de telegrammes?
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de f anglais): Un
autre membre du Conseil desire-t-il prendre la
parole a ce sujet?

p ••••

-------------lIfi'DS'l!llS--------------.z'!i!!e_:

IIl&&&&-2•••

I would just like to emphasize to the members
of the Council that early in the proceedings of
this Council, next week, items which have been
deferred until a certain date and which are of
the utmost importance and urgency, will be the
immediate subject of your consideration.
We must keep in mind just how far it will be
possible to give the necessary tilne to the consideration of those questions, and possibly proceed
at the same time with the discussion of this matter which is listed on the agenda this morning.
There is also this additional thought that I
should like to convey to the Council: surely the
Council is entitled to know, at the earliest possible moment, when it will be convenient for the
representative of a Government which has been
invited to take part in the discussion of this
Council to be here, thus I do feel that some
definite date should be determined, so that at
least the Council would not be indefinite with
regard to its own affairs. That being so, I feel
that even if we only have a formal meeting, were
it only to be advised of the wishes of the Albanian Government in this ma,tter as far as time
is concerned, the Council should meet, so that
it may be kept up to date with all these circumstances. Then, you would be able to determin~,
at that stage, what shall be the procedure with
regard to this, or any other matter, and the date
at which it could be discussed. I think it is our
duty to meet at such a time as would give us an
opportunity to receive from the Albanian Government some information concerning the approximate date at which they could be present
here, and the;u for the Council to arrange its
business accordingly.
I will put this resolution to members of the
Council.
.
Mr. LANGE (Poland): I already said earlier
that I quite concur with your proposal to inquire
from the Albanian Government the possible date
of the arrival of its representative. However, I
wonder whether the matter is of sufficient importance for us to take a formal vote on this subject. I think it is really within the normal prerogatives of the President to take whatever action
he deems necessary, since this ie simply a matter within, so to speak, the administrative field
of the President. I just suggest that we leave this
to the decision of the President, withGut taking
a vote on it.
The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative
of Poland for the suggestion he has made; possibly we might be able to find common agreement by the suggestion that the Council be adjourned to a date when the President would find
it imperative to call the Council, and that, in
the meantime, I should communicate with the
Albanian Government with the view of ascertaining the approximate date at which it could
have their representatives here in New York. If
this proposal could be made to represent the
unanimous wishes of the Council, I would be
very happy to make it in that way.
Is it then your wish that the Council shall
adjourn to a date to be determined by the

_

Je voudrais seulement signaler aux membres
du Conseil que nous devons commencer la semaine prochaine la discussion de questions dont
l'examen avait ete reporte a une certaine date,
et qui sont d'une importance et d'une urgence
extremes.
n s'agit de savoir dans quelle mesure nous
pourrons consacrer le temps necessaire a l'etude
de ces questions, et poursuivre egalement la discussion de l'affaire inscrite a l'ordre du jour de
cematin.
l' aimerais egalement vous soumettre cette idee:
le Conseil a certainement le droit de connaitre
au plus tot la date a laquelle le representant d'un
Gouvernement qui a ete invite a prendre part a
ses debats pourra etre la. 1'estime done qu'il
convient de fixer une date precise, pour que le
Conseil ne reste pas dans l'incertitude en ce qui
concerne les affaires dont il doit s'occuper. Ceci
etant, meme si nous ne nous reunissons que pour
la forme, ne serait-ce que pour etre avises des
intentions du Gouvernement albanais en matiere
de date, j'estime que le Conseil doit se reunir,
pour etre tenu au courant de tout ce qui se
passe. VOllS serez alors en mesure de decider
quelle doit etre la methode a suivre en ce cas
coniIne pour tout autre, et queUe sera la date a
laquelle cette question pourra etre discutee. Je
pense qu'il est de notre devoir de nous reunir au
moment ou nous pourrons avoir rec;;u du Gouvernement albanais quelque information quant
a la date approximative d'arrivee de son representant, et que le Conseil organise alors son travail en .;:onsequence.
Je soumets cette motion aux membres du
Conseil.
M. LANGE (Pologne) (traduit de l'anglais):
Monsieur le President, j'ai deja dit que j'approuve entierement la proposition que vous avez
faite et qui tend a demander au Gouvernement
albanais d'indiquer la date probable d'arrivee
de son representant. Toutefois, je me demande
si la question est d'une importance suffisante
pour que nous la ~ettions officiellement aux voix.
Il entre, a mon avis, dans les prerogatives normales du President de prendre toutes mesures
qu'il jugera necessaires puisque cette question
releve, pour ainsi dire, de la competence administrative du President. Je propose done que nous
laissions au President le soin de regler cette question sans la mettre aux voix.
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Je remercie le representant de la Pologne de sa suggestion. Nous pourrions peut-etre nous mettre
d'accord sur cette sug-gestion que le Conseil va
s'aJourner jusqu'a la date OU le President jug-era
indispensable de le convoquer, et qu'entre temps,
je me mettrai en relations avec le Gouvernement
albanais en vue de connaitre la date approxima.,.
tive a laquelle ses representants pourront arriver .
a New-York. Si cette proposition pouvait representer l'opinion unanime du Conseil, je serais
tres ~leureux de la formuler ainsi.
Desirez-vous que le Conseil s'ajourne jusqu'a
une date a fixer par le President et qu'entre

136
President, and that in the meantime I shall send
such communications as I may find necessary
in regard to this matter? Is there any objection
to that suggestion?

temps, j'envoie toutes communications en la matiere que je jugerai indispensables? Que1qu'un
a-t-il des objections a presenter a cette propooition?

The proposal of the President was adopted.

La proposition du President est adoptee.

Thc PRESIDENT: The Council stands adjourned until a datc to be determined by the
President.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): La pro-chaine seance du Conseil aura lieu a une date
qui sera fixee par le President.

The meeting rose at 12.08 p.m.

La seance est levee tl12 h. 08.
