SECURITY
OFFICIAL

COIJNCIL
RECORDS

TWENTY-FIFTH

YEAR

th

1536

MEETING:

NEW

11 MAY 1970

YORK
CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l536)

, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . #.. . . . . . . . .

1

Expression of thanks to retiring Presidents ..............................

1

Adoption of the agenda ................................................

1

Question of Bahrain:
(a) Letter dated 4 May 1970 from the Permanent Representative of Iran to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/9779);
(b) Letter dated 5 May 1970 from the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/9783);
(c) Note by the Secretary-General (S/9772) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . 1

S/PV. 1536

.

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents we composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published
in quarterly Supplements
of the Official Records of the Security Council. The
date of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information
about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

FIFTEEN

HUNDRED

AND THIRTY-SIXTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Monday, 11 May 1970, at 3 p.m.
President:

Mr. Jacques KOSCIUSKO-MORIZET
(France).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Burundi, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Spain, Syria, Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
and Zambia.

3. The Council will, I am sure, allow me to excuse
myself from introducing his successor. Confidentially,
I believe that I can assure you of his devotion to the
United ,Nations, of his conviction of the role that it
has to play in the establishment of peace, security and
justice between peoples by means of assistance to the
less developed countries and, finally, of his willingness
to work with every one of you to bring a little closer
to realization that ideal which is our common heritage.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l536)

Adoption of the agenda

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2.

The agenda was adopted.

Question of Bahrain:
[cr) Letter dated 4 May 1970 from the Permanent
Representative of Iran to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security 4
Council (S/9779);
(b) Letter dated 5 May 1970 from the Permanent
Representative
of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/9783);
(c) Note by the Secretary-General (S/9772).

Question of Bahrain:
(a) Letter dated 4 May 1970from the Permanent
Representative of Iran to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/9779);
(b) Letter dated 5 May 1970 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the
United Nations addressedto the President of
the Security Council (S/9783);
(c) Note by the Secretary-General (S/9772).

Expression of thanks to retiring Presidents

4, The PRESIDENT
(interpretntion from Frerzch):
In a letter dated 7 May 1970 [S/9784] the representative
of Iran requested to be allowed to participate in the
discussion of the question before the Council. If there
is no objection, I shall assume that the Council agrees
to invite the representative of Iran to participate in
the debate, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the rules of procedure and the practice of the
Council.

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
Ji-orn French):
Before we take up the agenda I should like to convey
the Council’s thanks to my two predecessors Ambassador Vallejo Arbelaez-who,
as he had wished, had
an active but peaceful month of March, and whose
presidency did honour to his country, Colombia, and
demonstrated once again his devotion to the cause of
justice and peace-and the representative of Finland,
who did not have occasion to convene an official meeting of the Council during the month of April, although
the absence of official meetings does not signify an
absence of work: indeed I would be tempted to say
that the contrary is true. Ambassador Jakobson
initiated many contacts and consultations with great
intelligence and tact; his mediation was particularly
effective, and it is right that we should be grateful
to him.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. Vakil(Zran)
took a place at the Security Council table.

5. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation .f?orn French):
In a letter dated 8 May 1970 [s/9788] the representative
of Southern Yemen requested to be allowed to participate. in the discussion of the question before the
Council. If there is no objection, I shall assume that
the Council agrees to invite the representative of Southern Yemen to participate in the debate, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the rules of procedure
and the practice of the Council.

2. As President of the Council I should like to ask
the delegation of France to convey our great regard
ans sincere remembrance to Mr. Armand B6rard who,
during the course of his two missions, so often sat
in this Council and gave it the benefit of this remarkable
Personality and his invaluable experience.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. I. S. Abdulla
(Southern Yemen) took a place at the Security Council
table.
1

6, The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
The Council is meeting today at the request of the
representatives
of Iran and the United Kingdom to
examine the question of Bahrain on the basis of the
report of the personal representative of the SecretaryGeneral [see S/9772].

12. Bahrain was separated from Iran 150 years ago
as a result of the colonialist policy of the British
Government of those days, whose aim was the establishment of military bases in the Persian Gulf area,
Now that the era of colonialism is ending, and now
that the Government
of the United Kingdom has
decided to withdraw its forces from the regions east
of Suez, it was of the utmost importance that the question of Bahrain be solved in such a manner as to contribute to creating a climate of peace, friendship and
stability in the Persian Gulf. It was my Government’s
wish that the solution of the question should be one
acceptable to the inhabitants of Bahrain and not contrary to their wishes. Much as we wished to see Bahrain.
reunited with us, we contemplated only a voluntary
reunion, not one involving a resort to force, which
was likely to foster resentment and encounter resistance.

7. Following consultations conducted over the past
week, a draft resolution relating to this question has
been prepared [,S/9792]. Since the members of the
Council have had several days to acquaint themselves
this text with I propose, with their permission, to put
it to the vote during this meeting.
A vofe was taken By show of harzds.
The draft resolution

was adopted ulzarrimously.’

8. The PRESIDENT
@tterpretntion j?om French):
I now give the floor to the first speaker on my list,
the representative of Iran.

13. It was in the light of the foregoing considerations
that my Government decided to re-examine the matter
of Bahrain in all its aspects and to seek a solution
in a spirit of realism and good-will. As a founding
Member of the United Nations animated by respect
for and faith in the principles of the Charter-foremost
among them the principle of non-resort to force in international relations contained in Article 2, paragraph 4
-the Government of Iran was committed to seeking
peaceful means of resolving the problem of Bahrain.

9. Mr. VAKIL
(Iran): Mr. President, though I am
here by invitation, the Council will, I feel sure, permit
me first to say a word of congratulation to you on
your assumption of the high office of President of the
Security Council. My admiration and my respect for
your great ability and fine qualities of character derive
from a friendship begun many years ago in the service
of the United Nations. It is matched by the happy
relations between our two countries, which go back
to the time, in the year 1295, when the Iranian ambassador was first received in the court of Philippe Le
Bel. Incidentally,
the letter which the ambassador
brought from the Shah is preserved to this day in your
Archives Nationales. Finally, let me express my confident belief that your presidency of the Council will
display such wisdom and impartiality as will be a sburce
of inspiration to all of us in the vital work of the United
Nations.

14. Accordingly, after obtaining the acquiescence of
the United Kingdom Government, we requested the
Secretary-General to use his good offices with a view
to ascertaining the true wishes of the inhabitants of
Bahrain concerning their future status. The SecretaryGeneral, to whose wisdom, impartiality and skill we
pay tribute, acceded to the request and named Mr.
Winspeare Guicciardi as his personal representative
for the purpose of proceeding to Bahrain and ascertaining the wishes of its inhabitants. Mr. Winspeare’s findings are contained in the report which the SecretaryGeneral has submitted to the Security Council.

10. I should like first of all to thank the Security Council for affording me this opportunity to say a few words
on behalf of my Government in connexion with the
decision which the Council has just taken to endorse
the report of the Secretary-General’s
personal representative. With the taking of this decision, the longstanding dispute betweenIran and the United Kingdom
over Bahrain has come to an end, both sides having
agreed to defer to the wishes of the inhabitants of Bahrain, as ascertained by the Secretary-General,
if his
findings were endorsed by the Security Council. The
reduction of tension and the peaceful adjustment of
an international
difference thus achieved are an outcome which all who cherish the principles of the Charter must welcome.

1.5. Had the people of Bahrain wished to reunite with
us, my Government was ready to shoulder the burdens
and make the sacrifices that would doubtless have been
required to make the reunion a happy one. They have
expressed the wish for a separate future. The Security
Council has endorsed the report of the SecretaryGeneral’s personal representative. We abide by this
outcome. My Government instructs me to say that we
wish the people of Bahrain well, and look forward to
a future of co-operation and intimate relations with
them in the region in which we are-destined to live
together. Given the close ties of ethnic kinship, culture
and religion which bind us to the people of Bahrain,
we are certain-and
it is on this assurance that we
have acted-that
the basic human rights of persons
of Iranian origin in the islands will be respected and
safeguarded as fully as the rights of other inhabitants.
It would be an unhappy outcome if the faith shown by
my Government were to be disappointed in this respect.

11, The record which is being made today of this
settlement of the dispute between the United Kingsom
and Iran would be incomplete without some account
of why we have brought it to the United Nations, inasmuch as the case itself is sui generis.
’ See resolution

278 (1970).

2

16. Finally, it gives me much pleasure to say that
with the Council’s decision, a major obstacle has been
removed from the path of fruitful co-operation in the
Persian Gulf.

no limit to what we can achieve. We know equally
well that when we disagree, to our humiliation,
we
achieve nothing.
23. So in this matter with which we have dealt today
in agreement, we have, I believe, a classic example
of how the peaceful settlement of disputes should be
won. All of us know very well that such results are
not attained without long, patient, careful, indefatigable effort. I readily acknowledge our debt to all those
who have made such a prolonged and persistent effort
on this occasion.

17. Lord CARADON
(United Kingdom): Mr. President, first let me express our gratitude to the Ambassadors of Colombia
and Finland-our
previous
Presidents-and
also ask you to send to our good
friend, Ambassador B&ard, our highest regards. I also
wish to take this opportunity to express delight at being
able to welcome the new Ambassador of France on
his return to the United Nations. Those of us who
knew him well realize how fitting it is that on his return
he should step straight to the presidency of the Council,
for he is a man who assumes and exercises authority
naturally. He is destined, I am sure, to be an outstanding leader amongst us. The grasp of his intellect is
matched by the incisiveness of his eloquence. He will
be impatient, I have no doubt, with procrastination
and contemptuous
of prevarication,
restless in the
search for agreement and always eager to translate
clear words into strong action.

24. Here we had a set of circumstances not unfamiliar
to those of us who have worked in the Council in the
past. We had a deeply rooted dispute. There were
strongly held views. At times the prospect of agreement
seemed remote. There were many halts and checks
along the way. We knew that if a full and agreed settlement could be reached there opened out inviting possibilies of progress and development, and friendships
which would spread widely. We knew also that failure
to agree would create suspicion and mistrust and
.perhaps disruption to the detriment of the people
directly concerned and to the despair of all those who
dearly wished to see a peaceful settlement. So the
stakes were high.

18. I myself count it as one of the happiest days in
my experience of the United Nations that I can resume
in this Council and outside it the association and friendship with you, Mr. President, which I enjoyed years
ago-an association and friendship with a man I SO
warmly admire.

25. Happily there was a number of fortunate and convergent and favourable factors. I need refer to them
only shortly but all of them contributed to success.

19. I might perhaps add with reference to relations
between your country and mine that since we first
worked together nearly ten years ago there have been
occasionally some minor differences between France
and Great Britain-differences
in approach, differences of emphasis, some differences of presentation
perhaps. I never regarded them as fundamental or permanent, And now, I am happy to say, we rejoice on
both sides of the Channel to see those differences
diminish and see them disappear, I prophesy that the
seventies will be a period in which our two countries
will advance in closer understanding and co-operation
than ever before.

26. I might first of all, with the modesty for which
my countrymen are famous, refer to the factor of British restraint. This is a quality which has made a valuable
contribution in so many international settlements. And
I hope to give another exhibition of that quality of
restraint by refraining, if I can, from replying to any
provocative statements which may be made later in
this debate. Today we do not reply in discord: today
we rejoice together in unity. And I should like to take
this opportunity of expressing my gra.titude and admiration to the Ambassadok of Iran who has spoken to
us today in terms of such restraint and, to use his
words, realism and friendship.

20, I am glad, too, that at this first meeting under
your presidency we should respond to your leadership
in unanimous agreement and in happy harmony. What
a fortunate augury!

27. Having said that, I wish at once to recognize how
important was the statement made by His Imperial
Majesty the Shah of Iran in New Delhi on 4 January
1969 when he said-1 am not quoting his exact words
-that Iran would accept an expression of the will
of the people of Bahrain. That was an act of statesmanship for which every one of us should be duly and
respectfully grateful. It was that act which opened the
door to the settlement we celebrate today. Nor should
I fail to pay tribute to His Imperial Majesty’s trusted
advisers, not least to Ambassador Mehdi Vakil himself,
who have shown throughout the quick understanding
and diplomatic skill of which they are masters.

21. It is unnecessary to speak for long about the vote
we took today. The task is completed, the object
attained, success achieved. We shall not add to it or
improve it by long dissertations now. Indeed what we
say might postiibly take away from what we have done.
22. We should not underestimate the value or the
importance of the accomplishment. Our purpose here
at the United Nations must always. be to seek
agreement. That is our aim and that is our justification.
-- _We all know very well that when we agree there is

28. I go on to express our admiration to the SecretaryGeneral-and
those working closely with him-for
his
readine’ss to respond to the request which came from
3

.

those directly concerned. Sometimes we are apt to
.take the understanding and the impartiality
and the
persistence of the Secretary-General for granted. His
qualities are amongst the principal assets of the international world in which we live. We pay tribute to his
indefatigable efforts in the cause of peace. It is well
for the world that while others inflame disputes and
embitter conflicts he and his small company are constantly searching for the common ground of agreement,
applying the test of international advantage.

resentative of Fi-ante to the United Nations. You bring
to the service of your great country diplomatic talents
of the highest order, further enriched by full and varied
experience, some of which has b&en gained in the
United Nations itself and has been accompanied by
superb cultural attainments. These two aspects in particular will make yours a fruitful presidency of our
Council, for which we would like to pay to you sincere
and respectful tribute in advance, and which we hope
augurs well for the future. This has already been
demonstrated by the happy outcome of the first item
with which the Council has had to deal under your
presidency. I should also mention here, Mr. President,
your high academic distinction-crgrL;gatiolz
de lettr.es
avec homeur -and thus, at a time when the international atmosphere has been profoundly affected, by
the arrogance of power and the victims that it claims,
you bring to our work a profound sense of humanism
and refinement, accompanied by the fruits of a long
career so happily blessed by both political and cultural
attainments.

29. We also pay our respectful tributes to the
Secretary-General’s personal representative, whom we
are happy to see with us here today, who has given
us such a lucid and comprehensive report-a model,
if I may say so, of what such a report’should be: concise
and convincing, including an admirably clear statement
of the whole problem. No one can doubt the thoroughness of his inquiries, and no one can doubt the fairness
of his conclusions.
30. While all have made their contribution, and while
all can share in the satisfaction of achievement, perhaps
most of all we should congratulate the people of Bahrain, In a matter in which they were so deeply concerned, a matter which could bring to their relations
with their neighbours an end to suspicion and the disappearance of friction and a new era of fruitful and
friendly co-operation, in a matter in which indeed their
whole future was at risk, they have shown throughout
a dignity and courtesy and steadiness and confidence
which are beyond praise.

35. I do not wish to let this occasion pass, Mr. President, without requesting you to convey to your predecessor, His Excellency Ambassador Btrard, our
greatest appreciation for the fruitful contribution which
he made, particularly during his term of office in the
Security Council, and to wish him happiness and prosperity.
36. On the subject of the friendship between France
and the Arab countries, I could perhaps go back in
history and mention that in the ninth century the first
embassy was sent to Charlemagne by the great Caliph
of Baghdad, Harun al-Rashid.

31. So the favourable factors have converged and
met: British restraint, Iranian magnanimity,
United
Nations impartiality, Italian fairness of judgement, and
Arab dignity and self-respect. An irresistible combination.

37. In this connexion, I should like also to pay tribute
to the representative of Colombia, who presided over
the Council in March with competence, wisdom and
tact.

32. I am sure that every one of us here in this Council,
and indeed in the wider membership of the United
Nations, will joiri today in a universal expression of
good-will towards the people of Bahrain, who have
so clearly demonstrated their belief in independence
and freedom-freedom
not only to manage their own
affairs, but freedom also to maintain and enhance their
international friendships.

38. It is my duty also to pay tribute to His Excellency
Ambassador Jakobson of Finland, who was President
of the Council during the month of April. The Council
held no meetings during that month, but that did not
prevent Ambassador Jakobson from dev,oting his time
and efforts to the diplomatic work of the Council. Vigilant, assiduous and always on the job, he expressed
ideas and began debates which will have a great influence on the future work of the Council. We should
like to express to him and his delegation our best
wishes.

33. The PRESIDENT
(interprctntion fionz Frerwh):
I have just received a letter from the representative
of Pakistan [S/9793] in which he requests to be invited
to take part in the debate of the Council on the question
now before it. If I hear no objection, I shall assume
that the Council agrees to invite the representative of
Pakistan to take part, without the right to vote, in the
debate in the Council, in accordance with the rules
of procedure and the practice of the Council.

39. Our thanks are extended also to SecretaryGeneral U Thant, whose good offices, as well as the
mission of his personal representative, have facilitated
our disposal of the item on the agenda.
40. I should like also to note with appreciation the
statement of the representative of Iran, indicating his
government’s attitude of co-operation with the Security
Council and respect for its resolution.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. Shahi
(Pnkistart} took a plrrce at the Security Council table.
34. Mr.
TOMEH
(Syria) (interpretation
from
F’relzch): Mr. President, it is a great honour for my
delegation to bid you welcome as the Permanent Rep-

41. The council has just approved unanimously the
report of the personal representative of the Secretary4

be pointed out that the happy outcome of the issue
of the full sovereignty of Bahrain stands out in sharp
contrast to the alarming situation which seriously
threatens all international peace. It is here in the region
of the Middle East as well as in Southeast Asia and
in southern Africa that we find neo-colonialism
rampant, driving people from their homelands, massacring
them or making refugees of them and subjecting to
invasion, occupation, annexation and colonizing by
settlement the territories of sovereign Member States
of the United Nations. Atrocities are committed against
the civilian population,
factories and schools are
bombed, cities and villages are cleared, and there is
a mortal threat to the rule of international
law and
to the Geneva Conventions on the conduct of States
in times of war. In the midst of this darkness the resolution adopted today by the Security Council encourages
our hope that right and justice will perhaps finally
triumph.

General in Bahrain, a report which is striking because
of its remarkable conciseness and the spirit of right,
justice and equity with which it is informed. In affirming
the Arab character of Bahrain in paragraph 42, which
says: “Secondly,
the Bahrainis I met were VirtuallY
unanimous in wanting a fully independent sovereign
State. The great majority added that this should be
an Arab State” and by translating into terms of a
simple, true and just conclusion the real aspirations
of the people of Bahrain in his final paragraph; the
personal representative was simply stating an obvious
truth, whatever its relevance.
42. In fact there is nothing to suggest a contrary conclusion: this is a cohesive and homogeneous country,
as indeed is indicated by the conclusions of the personal
representative. Its 200,000 inhabitants are unanimous
in their aspiration to become equal citizens:of a completely free and sovereign State in which they can flourish and hold out the hand of friendship and co-operation
to their brothers and neighbours and play a constructive
role in the development of this important region. To
do this they possess natural resources, some of which
are already being exploited but whose potential is even
greater and sets a challenge which I am sure the people
of Bahrain will be able to meet. They must play this
constructive role to the full in order to ensure their
happiness and that of their brothers on the basis of
equality and social justice and without indulging any
illegitimate appetites or the greedy urge towards the
exploitation of man by man.

47. Of’all that can be said about this, nothing equaIs
in conciseness the words uttered by the representative
of Brazil, Mr. Araujo Castro, in the First Committee
of the General Assembly in the debate on the
strengthening of international peace and security, an
item which, as we are all aware, was put on the agenda
on the initiative of the Soviet delegation. I have the
honour to quote in English these words from the original text:
“No nation is secure today. Power has not brought
about complete security for any nation, however
powerful or super-powerful. If force and power have
failed to bring about the desired goal of security,
there is no reason why we should not explore other
paths and avenues, the avenues of justice and
equality. Realism has been a failure and has made
imminent the possibility of destruction. There is no
reason why we should not try idealism instead, however Utopian it may seem.“2

43. Hence the sooner the recommendations
of the
personal representative,
,which have been now
approved by the Security Council and have now
become obligatory decisions, are put into effect the
better.
44. Indeed, the restoration of full sovereignty to Bahrain should coincide with the awakening of national
consciousness which is characteristic of all parts of
the region, and with the revolution of the spirit which
aims at consolidating renewal, accelerating progress
and promoting social justice and equity.

48. Let us hope that the emergence of Bahrain will
be the point bf departure for the primacy of force giving
way to the primacy of right and justice. To the fraternal
people of Bahrain we extend our most cordial congratulations and our best wishes, and we are sure that they
will be in a position to contribute to the cause of justice,
renewal and progress.

45. The time has now come for the people of Bahrain
to take their place in the vanguard of this movement
of renewal. But the lesson of Bahrain goes even further.
It throws into relief the deplorable situation which
exists in a neighbouring country, Muscat and Oman,
where, because of the negative attitude of the United
Kingdom, there reigns nothing but backwardness, stagnation and injustice. Has not the time now come for
the people of Oman to throw off their chains and to
become masters in their own land? Is it too much to
hope that the United Kingdom will abandon its rigid
attitude and engage sincerely in the implementation
Of the many resolutions
of the General Assembly on
this question and restore to this unhappy people its
rights to independence, sovereignty and progress?

49. With your permission Sir, I reserve the right to
speak again if I think it necessary.
50. Mr. YOST (United States of America): Mr. President, I should like &st to extend to you on my own
behalf and that of my government a most cordial welcome in your capacity as representative of France,
the first country to recognize some years ago the newly
emerged Republic of the United States. You are no
stranger, Mr. President, either to the United States
or to the United Nations. For five years you represented your country on the United Nations Trusteeship Council and it was during that time that I had

46. From the overall regional point of view-and by
this I mean the whole region of the Middle East-as
well as from the international .point of view, it must

2 See Official Records
Session, First Committee,

5

of the General

Assembly,

1653rd meeting, para. 29.

Twenty-fourth

51. It is a very deep pleasure to welcome you back
to our midst. We are especially pleased to see you
in the office of President of the Security Council. Your
high intellegence, long experience and wisdom have
contributed to the auspicious circumstances under
which we meet today, and we are sure they wiI1 contribute to many more such occasions in the future.

too iufrequently to allow for timely recourse to the
processes of peaceful accommodation.
We in this
Council have perhaps more reason than most to lament
this unfortunate fact, and it therefore obliges us to
ensure that when recourse is had to those processes,
the Council is not found wanting. Our action today
has served this obligation well. It has fulfilled the hopes
of both the people of Bahrain and the inhabitants of
the entire Gulf region. In a wider sense, it can only
enhance the image of the United Nations as a force
for peace and thus buoy the hopes of nations for the
peaceful resolution of other disputes that continue to
afflict our world.

52. I should also like to pay a tribute to the representative of Finland, Ambassador Jakobson, who served
as President of the Security Council during April.
Although there were no meetings during his presidency, he conducted consultations on several matters
ofgreat delicacy with the outstanding ability, impartiality and tact that we have long come to associate with
him.

57. Mr. DE PINIES
(Spain) (interpretation
from
Spanish): Mr. President, may I congratulate your two
predecessors, Ambassador Vallejo Arbelaez of Colombia and Ambassador Jakobson of Finland on their outstanding accomplishments as presidents of this important body of the United Nations. I should also like
to extend my greetings to your distinguished predecessor, Ambassador Btrard.

53. The Government of the United States welcomes
the unanimous and highly constructive action that this
Council has taken today on the question of Bahrain.
Our action marks the successful culmination of a dip.lomatic effort to resolve a dispute that has complicated
the life of the Persian Gulf for mot-e than a century.
For -this, we are indebted to the parties concerned,
which have demonstrated the will and vision to act
responsibly in an attempt to minimize the danger of
future conflict in that important part of the world and
to enhance the prospects for fruitful co-operation
among the peoples of the Gulf in determining
its
destiny. The readiness of the parties to make the necessary accommodations
and to seek a solution by
negotiation, inquiry, and other peaceful means should
stand as an example for all nations of the successful
application
of Charter principles
to international
affairs.

58. Mr. President, we have known you for many years
now in the work of this Organization. You are no doubt
aware of the friendship which has existed between our
two countries throughout history. There is certainly
no need for me today to praise the cordial and excellent
relations which exist between our two countries, Personally and as the representative of my country 1 am
delighted to see you at the head of this distinguished
body. May 1 assure you that you will enjoy the support
of our delegation as you perform your various duties.

the privilege of making your acquaintance both professionally and personally. Since leaving the United
Nations you have served your country and enriched
your experience in a number of capacities Of great
importance and distinction.

59. The Secretary-General, in accordance with the
request sent to him by the Governments of Iran and
the United Kingdom, has submitted a report to this
Council on the question of Bahrain for consideration
and approval.
60. The Secretary-General in a note contained in
document S/9726 informed the Security Council that
in reply to requests from those two Governments he
had agreed to exercise his go,od offices in a matter
related to the legal status of Bahrain. The situation
in Bahrain differs according to whether one takes the
point of view of the Government of Iran or the Government of the United Kingdom.

54. We are also grateful for the role played in this
matter by our Secretary-General. We salute his willingness to co-operate fully with the parties concerned,
as well as his selection of an able and experienced
diplomat as his personal representative. In so doing,
he has acted in the best traditions of his office and
in fulfilment of the purposes of the United Nations
relating to the settlement of international disputes and
the development of friendly relations among nations,
We are happy to see that his efforts have resulted in
a solution which has merited our unanimous endorsement,

61. According to the former [see S/9772, pnra. II],
Bahrain is part of Iran and only the L‘protection which
Britain has asserted for more than a century over these
islands has prevented Iran from exercising her
legitimate rights there”. The United Kingdom, for its
part [ibid., para. 121, has asserted that “Bahrain is
a sovereign Arab State with which the Government
of the United Kingdom is in special treaty relations”.
In spite of this difference of opinion, the fact remains
that Bahrain is subject to the Il@ facto protection of
the United Kingdom. Therefore, the situation of the
United Kingsom vis-&-vis Bahrain is not that of an
administering
Power but that of a protective Power,
This is not a case of decolonization,
for Bahrain is
not a Non-Self-Governing
Territory. Rather we have.

55, We are also happy to note in Mr. Winspeare’s
report that all those he consulted in Bahrain wished
for tranquillity,
stability and friendliness in the area,
as well as being virtually unanimous in wishing for
recognition of their identity in a fully independent and
sovereign State. This spirit augurs well for the future
of Bahrain and the entire area.
56. The turmoil and turbulence that so often attend
events in many parts of our fast-moving world seem
6

a problem which has arisen as a result of the termination
of protective relations without prejudice to the rights
which may be claimed by the parties.

ence and ability, will certainly do an outstanding job.
You will be a credit to your great country, with which
we share deep Latin bonds. We are indebted to your
country for the spiritual, cultural and material contribution which France has always made to us and for which
we are most grateful.

62. The General Assembly, which, on a number of
occasions when considering
territories
to be
decolonized, has said that it was in favour of applying
the principle of self-determination
or the principle of
territorial integrity, has not stated its views on Bahrain
and has not done so because Bahrain has never been
defined as a territory to which Chapter XI of the Charter
should apply. Therefore it is not covered by General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and neither the Committee of Twenty-Four,
a subsidiary body of the
General Assembly, nor the Fourth Committee or the
General Assembly has ever considered this matter.

68. As regards the resolution, we voted in favour of
it on instructions from our Government, which wishes
the people of Bahrain, every possible success, and we
will certainly welcome Bahrain, as an independent
country, to our Organization.
69. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russi&):
Mr. President, on behalf
of the Soviet delegation may I offer my cordial congratulations on your assumption of the high post of
President of the Security Council and also on your
joining us as the new representative of France.

63. In spite of the difference of opinion between the
Governments of the United Kingdom and Iran on Bahrain, by common consent they requested the SecretaryGeneral to exercise his good offices so that as a result
0f.a study to be carried out by him it might be determined what the future status of the territory should
be. The judgement of the Secretary-General has been
accepted in principle by these two Governments, provided that the conclusions be adopted by the Security
Council,

70. I should like to take this opportunity to ask you
to transmit our sincere congratulations and very best
wishes to your predecessor, Ambassador BCrard, with
whom we had such a pleasant working relationship
both in the Security Council and in the course of consultations on the Middle East. During his stay we unfortunately failed to achieve much success in the consultations, but we hope that, together with you, we will
be able to make progress on this question, too.

64. The fact that the Secretary-General has found
a formula acceptable to the Governments of Iran and
the United Kingdom is a source of satisfaction, for
this has doubtless prevented a conflict between the
two Governments and a continuation of the tense situation caused by their differences of opinion. Action by
the Secretary-General
to solve problems arising
between States is acceptable in our view, for this means
using the good offices of a highly qualified person,
the Secretary- Jcneral of the Organization.

71. I had the opportunity and the pleasure of making
your acquaintanc’e long ago, in the fifties, in the coldest
years of the cold war. At that time, you introduced
me to your President and I introduced you to our Minister for Foreign Affairs. Our conversations were very
interesting and fruitful, with a great deal of mutual
understanding. Since that time, relations between our
countries have undergone significant changes for the
better, and it is a great pleasure for me to welcome
you here as the representative of a European Power
with which we are developing good relations based
on co-operation and mutual understanding
in the
economic, cultural and political fields. In welcoming
you, I should like to wish you success in your work
as representative of France to the United Nations and
as President of the Security Council.

65. This Cou.:cil had the following choice before it.
Had it not endorsed the report, a conflict which was
in the process of being resolved would in fact not have
been eliminated, for we have been told that the United
Kingdom and Iran require endorsement by the Council
Of the conclusions contained in the report of the
Secretary-General’s
personal representative.

72. On behalf of the Soviet delegation, I should also
like to extend a welcome and offer congratulations to
your predecessor and our mutual colleague, the
Ambassador of Finland, a country with which we have
friendly relations. During his term of office, he was
active and energetic and displayed deep knowledge
and understanding of international problems. Although
there were no official meetings, he always kept the
members of the Security Council in a state of preparedness, and this activity on his part led to some
accomplishments
during the time he was President.

66,. In the opinion of my delegation, the Council
should have confined itself to taking note of these conclusions. However, if all parties concerned agree and
have no reservations as regards the conclusions of the
Secretary:General,
my delegation has no objections
either. But, in view of the special nature of this case,
we wish our vote to be interpreted in the light of those
considerations.
67. Mr. ROMAN (interpretationfrom
Spanish): The
delegation of Nicaragua is pleased to associate itself
with the representatives who have taken the floor
before us in expressing thanks to the outgoing Presidents, Ambassador Vallejo of Colombia and Ambassador Jakobson of Finland, for the effective way they!
performed their tasks. We also would like to con-\
gratulate you, Mr. President, who, with your experi-

73. Turning to the substance of the question under
discussion, I should like to say the following. The
Security Council is considering the question of Bahrain
in connexion
with the Secretary-General’s
note
[S/9772]. As to the procedure which was employed
7

secure special rights and privileges for themselves by
forcible means in many countries of Asia, Africa and
the Arab East and in other parts of the world at the
expense of the vital interests of the peoples of those
countries.

in the action taken by the Secretary-General
with
regard to the problem of Bahrain, the Soviet, Union’s
position on the matter was, as you are aware, set forth
in detail in the letter from the Permanent Mission of
\i the
USSR to the President of the Security Council
\ [s/9737]. The Soviet delegation still adheres tothe view
presented in that document.

79, The just demand of the people of Bahrain for
national liberation 4s without any doubt a direct result
and an integral part of a great historical process, the
national liberation movement and the struggle of
peoples, whose foundations were laid by the Great
October Socialist Revolution in Russia and whose vietorious
development
accelerated
at such an
unprecedented rate after the Second World War and
the destruction of the forces of fascism and aggression,
which threatened to enslave the peoples of the entire
world for thousands of years. Before our very eyes,
in the course of a single generation V. I, Lenin’s scientifically founded prediction concerning the revolutionary
awakening of the peoples of the East and the inevitable
downfall of the colonial system has come true. A worldwide system of socialism has emerged, the colonial
empires have collapsed and the struggle of the peoples
against imperialism and colonialism has become truly
universal in character and scope. It is now obvious
to everyone that imperialism, as a political and socioeconomic system, has no future and cannot have one.
There is no longer any question that this system of
enslavement and oppression, which is so detested by
all peoples, is doomed by history to inevitable destruction. More than seventy independent sovereign States
have emerged from the ruins of the colonial empires.
This great historical process of the revolutionary
awakening of peoples is graphically reflected in the
very composition of the United Nations. Of the 126
States Members of the Organization, more than half
are former colonies and semi-colonies which have now
become independent and sovereign States.

74, The substance of the question under discussion
is that the people of Bahrain wish to attain full independence and sovereignty and to transform Bahrain into
a State which, without foreign interference or pressure,
can take its own decisions on questions concerning
its relations with other States and peoples. This just,
entirely understandable and historically justified aspiration appears as the main conclusion of the report
now under consideration.
75. The Soviet Union has always firmly and consistently supported the application of the principles of
self-determination, freedom and national independence
to those countries and peoples which art? on were under
colonial rule or in a state of colonial or semi-colonial
dependence on imperialism.
76. The great founder of the Soviet State, Vladimir
Ilyich Lenin, the centenary of whose birth was so
widely celebrated on 22 April of this year by all of
progressive mankind, scientifically proved and demonstrated back in the early part of the twentieth century,
when imperialism dominated the entire world, that the
colonial system would inevitably perish; and he thus
inspired patriots and revolutionaries in the colonial and
dependent countries-or,
as they were called at that
time, the countries of the East-to undertake
a patriotic
struggle for liberation from their foreign enslavers,
77. After the victory of the Great October Socialist
Revolution in our country, Lenin said the following:
“If the revolutionary war being waged by the oppressed
peoples can truly awaken the millions of workers and
exploited people, it contains within itself such possibilities and such wonders that the liberation of the
peoples of the East is now feasible in a quite practical
sense.”

80. The demand being made by the people of Bahrain
is yet another vivid demonstration of the success of
the just and courageous struggle pf the peoples of the
Arab East for their national freedom and human dignity
and for the consolidation of their independence against
the policies and designs of the imperialists and their
agents in the Middle East and other parts of the world,
who are seeking by every possible means, including
armed aggression and intervention, to stop the clock
of history, to keep various peoples under imperialist
rule, to force the yoke of neo-colonialism
upon them
and to continue the predatory exploitation
of their
wealth.

78. The peoples of the Soviet Union, schooled in the
Leninist concepts of equality and brotherhood among
all peoples, have complete understanding and sympathy for the hopes and aspirations of the people of
Bahrain, who are seeking to assert their national identity and to attain complete
independence
and
sovereignty. In accordance with the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter, the people of
Bahrain have an inalienable and legitimate right to secure complete independence and sovereignty for their
country and to free themselves for ever from the
treaties imposed on them by the British Empire back
in the early nineteenth century, which have limited
Bahrain’s sovereign rights, The vigorous demand being
made by the people of Bahrain for complete independence and sovereignty is eloquent testimony to the
fact that the time is gone for ever when the colonial
Powers could, on various pretexts and in various ways,

81. Retreating under the pressure of the national liberation struggle of the peoples, the imperialist Powers
and their monopolies are engaging in various manoeuvres in an effort to maintain their positions as long
as possible and prolong their explaitation of the wealth
of the peoples of the Arab East so that the monopolies
can earn super-profits. In this connexion, the Security
Council cannot but turn its attention to the well-known
plans of the imperialist monopolies to perpetuate their
privileges and their presence in the Persian Gulf area
after the United Kingdom’s announced withdrawal
8

from the region “East of Suez”. The ,plans of the
American monopolies to intensify their expansion in
the Arab East are also common knowledge. It is a
secret to no one that these pohtical manoeuvres are
aimed at merely changing labels, as the saying goes,
while at the same time preserving colonial positions
and privileges in this region, enabling the colonialists
to maintain their strategic positions and to remain, as
before, in possession of the wealth which belongs to
the Arab peoples. Therefore, in the consideration of
such questions as that of Bahrain in the United Nations,
the peoples must be given a special warning: “Be vigilant against the intrigues
of imperialism,
neocolonialism and their agents”.

although during that period there were no formal meetings. My delegation is pleased to pay tribute to the
outstanding manner in which he carrier out his tasks.
89. Without analysing the legal aspects of the question at present before the Council, my delegation
wishes to point to the essential fact that the solution
agreed upon was in accordance with the dictates of
justice and the right of peoples ot self-determination
and represented the constructive and cordial will of
the parties concerned. That is why my delegation voted
in favour of the draft resolution.
90. Mr. NICOL (Sierra Leone): Mr. President, the
delegation of Sierra Leone would like to congratulate
you on your assumption of the presidency of this Council and to welcome you back to the United Nations.
Your country has a notable record in matters of
decolonization over the past decade, to ,which your
eloquent predecessor, Mr. Berard-to
whom we send
greetings-made
significant contributions. You yourself also played an active and praiseworthy part in
that process.

82. The Soviet Union firmly supports the just demand
of the people of Bahrain for complete independence
and sovereignty. In order to implement this demand
without delay of any kind, the Security Council has
given clear and explicit support to the unanimous desire
of the people of Bahrain that their country, as is stated
in the conclusions of the report under discussion in
the Council, should become “a fully independent and
sovereign State free to decide for itself its relations
with other States” [S/9772, para.571. By its decision,’
the Council has confirmed this finding, which is incontestable and fully in keeping with the spirit of our times.

91. Mr. President, you bear a name and ancestry
indelibly associated with freedom in many continents.
We wish you a happy and productive period during
your term of office as President of the Council and
as your country’s Permanent Representative.

83. A decision on the question of complete independence and sovereignty for Bahrain should therefore
not be confined to a mere renunciation of any rights
Or claims to the latter. It should be regarded as completely terminating
Bahrain’s
dependence on all
treaties which limit the sovereign rights of that country
and its people.

92. Last month, although we did not have a formal
meeting, we were all witnesses of the wise and intensive
work that the Ambassador of Finland carried out as
President of the Security Council. We congratulate him
most warmly.

84. It is in the light of these considerations that the
Soviet delegation defined its attitude towards the draft
resolution adopted by the Council on the question
under consideration,

93. We wish to recall with much praise the skill and
sincerity shown by the Ambassador of Colombia during
his period of office as President, during the difficult
month of March, when results were obtained which
are still being explored. We thank him for work.

85. In conclusion,
my delegation would like to
express its very best wishes to the people of Bahrain
for the emergence and development of Bahrain as a
fully independent and sovereign State.
86

Mr.

94. The delegation of Sierra Leone has followed with
considerable interest the interventions of the representatives of Iran and the United Kingdom. We have also
noted the considerable amount of Iranian understanding and British restraint expressed by those representatives. My delegation notes also the intention of the
Governments of both Iran and the United Kingdom
to abide by the findings of the Secretary-General
as
endorsed by this Council.

SUAREZ (Colombia) (interFirst of all, on behalf of
Ambassador Vallejo Arbelaez, I should like to express
my thanks for the cordial references made to the President of the Council for the month of March.
pretation

MORALES

from

Spanish):

87. Mr. President,
my delegation is particularly
pleased to see you assume the presidency of the Security Council, not only because of your very considerable
experience and ability but also because of the friendship between our two countries which is based inter
din on the decisive influence that French thinking has
had on the structure of the legal institutions of many
countries in the New World.

95, My delegation praises the Secretary-General’s
efforts at bringing the parties together to work in the
interests of peace and tranquillity in the region.
96. My delegation is satisfied with the thoroughness
of the conclusions and the findings of the SecretaryGeneral’s personal representative, and we are glad he
is here with us on this auspicious day. His findings-the
virtual unanimity of the citizens of Bahrain in wanting
a fully independent sovereign State-as endorsed by
this Council a few minutes ago will help to promote
peace and harmony in this area.

g8. Your predecessor;‘Ambassador
Jakobson of Finiand, demonstrated his great competence and ability
Inguiding the Council, which was in many senses active
9

97. We should like, finally, and indeed as our most
important task, to congratulate the people of Bahrain
on gaining their independence* In so doing we should
like at the same time to express our best wishes for
their development and especially for their racial harmony and the progress of their youth. The mineral
resources of Bahrain and its neighbours are great in
comparison with their populations and with those of
many other countries. Great wealth has great meaning
when used with responsibility for great purposes. If
it is used as an investment in the education and training
of many of the citizens of Bahrain, it will bear returns
which will be as long-lasting as, and perhaps more
precious than, all the jewels of Arabia.
98. Mr. KU,EAGA
(Poland) (interpretation
fiorn
Fwnclz): Mr, President, this meeting of the Security
Council gives me the opportunity to welcome you as
the representative of France and to congratulate you
on becoming President of the Council. 1 do so with
the greatest pleasure, in view of the traditional friendship of Poland and France, which has recently been
confirmed once again by the visit of our Foreign Minister to Paris, by our awareness of the important role
France is playing in the international
arena, and
through our knowledge of your distinguished diplomatic talents and your attachment to the cause of the
United Nations and international understanding,
an
attachment which you have been good enough to confirm to us confidentially.
99. I should like also to take this opportunity to thank
the Presidents of the Security Council for March and
April-the
representatives of Colombia and Finland
-for the work they dii and the mastery they exhibited
in their handling of the presidency, both in the Council
and in the course of the many consultations that were
held outside it.
100. Permit me further associate myself with the feelings of friendship and respect for your distinguished
predecessor, Ambassador BCrard, which have already
been expressed by many representatives in the Security
Council,
101. On our agenda, we have the item of Bahrain,
The Polish delegation has noted with interest the
Secretary-General’s note and also the report of his personal representative concerning the question of Bahrain [S/9772]. We have also listened attentively to the
important statements made during the present debate.
In our view, the report of the Secretary-General’s
personal representative confirms the age-old feelings of
the people of Bahrain with regard to their independence
and full freedom. It shows the strength and unanimity
of these feelings. Permit me to remind you once again
of paragraph42of the report, which says that the people
of Bahrain were “virtually unanimous in wanting a
fully independent sovereign State. The great majority
added that this should be an Arab State.”
102. The historic process of the liberation
of the
peoples of the world from colonialism and their attainment of the right to full self-determination,
which we

have observed in the past and will continue to observe,
cannot fail to include the Arab peninsula. For decades
now, imperialism has tried to entrench itself in this
region by all possible means, from direct domination
to the so-called protectorate treaties. Regardless of the
forms used, the purpose of this domination has always
been economic exploitation, the use of the territory
of the region’for military and strategic purposes and,
consequently, opposition to the aspiration of the people
of this region to freedom and independence.
103. The difficult but victorious struggle of the Arab
peoples for their independence and their determination
to ensure the defence and consolidation of this independence could not fail to influence this part of the Arab
world. The people of Southern Yemen acquired their
independence after a long and arduous struggle, For
many years now, the people of Oman have been waging
an active struggle for their liberty.
104. A new element enters the picture today with
regard to the situation in a region which has for so
long been subjected to the interests of imperialism and
the effects of the classic motto “divide and rule”, a
region which no longer wishes to be the subject of
such a policy but wishes to exercise fully its right to
self-determination-not
as a result of what some would
like to call an act of altruism, but as a result of rights
which have always belonged to it. The elimination of
domination and imperialistic control in this region cannot be guaranteed except by the fulfilment of the trend
towards liberty and independence of the peoples of
territories which have so far been dependent, and only
by the co-operation of the people of this region based
on these principles. Such relations also serve the cause
of international peace and security.
10.5. This position of principle which we adopt determines our attitude towards the problem of Bahrain.
We support the aspiration of the people of Bahrain
to gain “recognition of their indentity in a fully independent and sovereign State free to decide for itself its
relations with other States”[ibid., pm-a. 573, a conclusion which has been brought out in the report of the
personal representative of the Secretary-General.
106. We are in favour of the speediest possible
implementation
of the aspirations of the people of Bahrain, to whom we should like to express our most sincere and cordial best wishes. We express the hope
that this will constitute an important step forward on
the road to liberty, progress and peaceful co-operation
among the peoples of this region, in an atmosphere
totally free from the nefarious influences of colonialist
interests, and, consequently, in an atmosphere propitious to international and security peace.
107. Mr. MWAANGA (Zambia): Mr. President, Ijoin
those representatives who preceded me in fittinglycongratulating you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of May, Since
this is also the first time we have been privileged to
sit around this table with you in your capacity as
Ambassador of France, I extend to you a very warm

\velcome. May I offer my co-operation and that of my
delegation in the performance of your difficult task.

117. Mr. KHATRI
(Nepal): Mr. President, let me
first of all welcome you as your country’s new representative to the Security Council, and extend my
delegation’s warm congratulations
to you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. We salute you as a man of high intellectual
and diplomatic distinction and a representative of a
major Power-a country deeply committed to the ideal
of world peace and having great cultural and democratic traditions. My country enjoys the most cordial and
friendly relations with yours. It is indeed a pleasure
for me to pledge to you my whole-hearted co-operation.

108. It is a matter for deep regret that we were not
able to benefit from your wide experience at the time
when you represented your country in the Trusteeship
Council because our country was then represented by
none other than our distinguished friend and colleague
Lord &radon.
We are, however, glad to be able to
share this experience with you this time.
109. I wish also to express our deep appreciation to
the Permanent Representatives of Colombia and Finland for the able manner in which they conducted the
affairs of our Council during the months of March and
April respectively.
110. We have voted in favour of the resolution
very simple and straightforward reasons.

118. I should like also to express our deep appreciation to Ambassador Vallejo Arbelaez of Colombia and
Ambassador Jakobson of Finland for the manner in
which they discharged their responsibilities
as President of the Council for the months of March and April
respectively.

for

111. First, on the basis of information available to
us-and unlike those of most delegations our sources
are rather limited-the
report of the SecretaryGeneral’s representative, Mr. Winspeare Guicciardi,
is representative of the views of the people of Bahrain.
112. Secondly, we are reasonably satisfied that,
under the circumstances, the Secretary-General acted
honourably by so promptly responding to the requests
of the Governments of the United Kingdom and Iran
to use his good offices to find a solution to this problem
in order to create an atmosphere of tranquillity, friendship and stability.
113. Thirdly, and perhaps most important, Mr. Winspeare Guicciardi’s report, in our view, reflects the
desire of the people of Bahrain to become an independent and sovereign State. We have always supported
the right of all peoples to decide their own destinies,
and it is in this spirit that we have supported the resolution just adopted. Further, it is in this same spirit that
we shail continue to support all other peoples who
are fighting to determine their own destinies.

119. May I request the French delegation to convey
our highest regards to Ambassador Berard.
120. With regard to the matter under consideration,
may I say at the outset that my delegation has given
its full support to the resolution which has just been
adopted. Having stated this, it is only appropriate for
me to express, on behalf of His Majesty’s Government,
our most profound appreciation
to the Imperial
Government of Iran and Her Majesty’s Government
of the United Kingdom for the statesmanship displayed
by them in seeking a peaceful resolution of a difference
in respect of Bahrain. By submitting the matter to the
good offices of the Secretary-General and agreeing in
advance to accept the result of the findings of his good
offices mission subject to endorsement by the Security
Council, both Iran and the Unite Kingdom have shown
1their abidingfaith in the principle of peaceful settlement
of disputes in the true spirit of the Charter of the United
Nations. The Secretary-General
has paid high commendation to Iran and the United Kingdom; my delegation joins him in that tribute.
121. By promptly agreeing to exercise his good offices
as requested by the Governments
of Iran and the
United Kingdom, the Secretary-General has acted in
the best tradition of the United Nations. The office
of the Secretary-General should always remain a valuable means of relieving and preventing
tension.
Secretary-General U Thant deserves our highest praise
in this ‘matter. We hope not only that the office of
the Secretary-General as an instrument for the peaceful
solution of disputes will be further strengthened, but
also that Member Governments of the Organization
will increasingly resort to that instrument in order to
settle their differences peacefully.

114. We look forward to the day when the Security
Council will be able to escape the threat of the veto,
which is constantly hanging over our heads, thus enabling the peoples of Rhodesia, Namibia, South Africa,
Angola, Mozambique,
Guinea (Bissau) and all nonindependent territories to decide their own destinies.
115. Lastly, allow me to place on record our gratitude
to the Secretary-General, U Thant, and to his representative, Mr. Winspeare Guicciardi, for having produced
the report which we have just endorsed and which
we hope will bring about more peaceful relations
between the countries directly involved,

122. As personal representative for the SecretaryGeneral’s good offices mission in Bahrain, Mr. Winspeare has carried out his responsibility with dispatch,
objectivity and wisdom. The findings of the good
offices mission are clear and unequivocal. They are
to the effect that the overwhelming majority of the
people of Bahrain wish to gain recognition of their

116, l’vly statement would be incomplete without paying tribute to the Governments directly involved in
this delicate problem for the conciliatory and accommodating spirit that they have so amply displayed
throughont our consideration of this problem.
11

identity in a fully independent and sovereign State free
to decide for itself its relations with other States, Nepal
respects the wish of the people of Bahrain, and we
wish them peace, prosperity and happiness.

operation and unity in Europe and a peaceful world
order based on respect for the independence of every
nation. My delegation looks forward very much to
working with you in the months ahead.

123. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfrom
French):
As President of the Security Council I call on the representative of China.

130. Now I should like to state the position of my
delegation on the question before the Security Council,
and I am able to do so in very few words.

124. Mr. CHANG
(China): I wish first of all to
associate my delegation with the words of welcome
and congratulations
extended to you, Mr. President,
by previous speakers on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council. I wish also to express
our appreciation of the services rendered by your two
predecessors in the Chair, the representatives
of
Colombia and Finland who presided over the work
of the Council during the months of March and April.

131. This meeting of the Security Council is exceptional, in that we are not meeting this time to deal
with a complaint or a dispute; we are not responding
to violent events. Instead we have the agreeable, yet
none the less important, task of endorsing a peaceful
solution negotiated between the parties, utilizing the
good offices of the Secretary-General and his personal
representative. In our view, this is an encouraging
example of the constructive role of the United Nations
in contributing to a process of peaceful change in international relations.

125. My delegation voted for the resolution. In our
view the findings of the Secretary-General’s
personal
representative,
based as they are on the expressed
wishes of the overwhelming majority of the people of
Bahrain, deserve the unanimous support and endorsement of the Security Council. It is gratifying to note
that the Governments
of both Iran and the United
Kingdom, parties directly interested in the results of
the findings, are prepared to accept the conclusions
as binding. The spirit of conciliation and good-will manifested by them should be emulated by all.

132. I am therefore happy to join in congratulating
the Governments of Iran and the United Kingdom,
as well as the Secretary-General and his personal representative, for their joint efforts in achieving this
agreement, thus removing a source of potential friction
and danger, and enabling the people of Bahrain to gain
independence in a peaceful way.
li3.
The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
I now call on the representative of Southern Yemen.

126. The obligation to promote the advancement of
colonial peoples towards self-government and independence has been one of the major commitments
af the
United Nations. It is hoped that with the adoption of
the present resolution the people of B&ram will be
enabled to proceed without delay towards the goals
that they have set for themselves in an orderly and
peaceful manner. I wish to extend ‘to the people of
Bahrain the good wishes of rn# Government
and
people.

134. Mr. ABDULLA
(Southern Yemen): Mr. President, allow me at the outset to thank you and the other
members of the Council for giving me this opportunity
of participating in the deliberations of the Security
Council on the present agenda.
135. My delegation wishes to congratulate you as
President of the Council for this month. We are assured
that you will guide the discussions of the Council to
a successful end.

127. My delegation would like also to thank the
Secretary-General
for the readiness with which he
extended his good offices and to thank his personal
representative for the able and skilful way in which
he has carried out his task.
128. Mr. JAKOBSON
(Finland): Mr. President, may
I first of all thank you and all our other colleagues
who have spoken for the kind words that have been
said about my activities as President’ of the Council
in April. I also recall with great respect and admiration
the manner in which the Ambassador of Colombia conducted the affairs of the Council in the month of March.

136. The Security Council has convened today to
consider the report of the Secretary-General’s personal
representative on Bahrain [see S/9772]. It is only
logical, therefore, that my delegation should reiterate
once again our firm conviction that Bahrain, as an
integral part of the Arabian Gulf, was and is and will
continue to be an Arab country. Nevertheless, we are
gratified to learn that the Secretary-General has confirmed our conviction as regards the Arab character
and identity of Bahrain. On this occasion the People’s
Republic of Southern Yemen salutes the great people
of Bahrain.

129. I wish to take this opportunity,
Mr. President,
to join in welcoming you as the representative of France
to the Security Council and as President for the month
of May. I do so with all the more pleasure in view
of the close affinity of views on fundamental
issues
existing between Finland and France. We in Finland
are greatly encouraged and supported by the policy
of France-a
policy aiming at reconciliation,
co-

137. My delegation is of the opinion that the fundamental issue in this discussion is the just ‘struggle of
the indigenous peoples of the Arabian Gulf against
imperialism and neo-colonialism.
We hardly need to
mention the enormous oil and strategic interests of
the capitalist States in the region, It is well understood
by us that the capitalist States and their local agents
will continue to draw up numerous designs in order
12

to protect and preserve their inhuman exploitation of
the Arab masses of the Gulf. On the other hand, we
have no doubt that the progressive forces in the area
are bound to prevail.

report and the pledges made in advance by the Governments .of Iran and the United Kingdom to accept the
results have enabled the Security Council to register
the peaceful settlement of an international problem.

138. Recent history has taught us that the toiling
masses are capable, in the final analysis, of breaking
free of their shackles. The poor peoples of the Arabian
Gulf have decided to take arms against British colonial
rule and its puppet regime in Muscat and Oman. This
Popular revolution, which started from Dhofar, under
the leadership of the popular Front for the Liberation
of the Occupied Arabian Gulf, has already dealt many
blows against the British military bases in Al Masirah
and Salalah. We are convinced that this liberation
movement,
by closing ranks and stepping up its
revolutionary
activities, will defeat the enemy and join
the peace-loving forces of the world.

144. My Government believes that the present occasion is one of those which, unfortunately, are all too
rare in contemporary international experience. We
have witnessed today statesmanship of the highest
order being brought to bear on a situation which otherwise would have led to bitterness and friction. In agreeing to abide by the wishes of the population of Bahrain
to become a fully independent, sovereign State, and
in signifying their willingness to forsake a long-standing
claim to this territory if it was not confirmed by the
free opinion of the people, His Imperial Majesty the
Shahinshah of Iran and his Government have demonstrated moral courage, far-sightedness and vision of
a kind which is sorely needed in situations involving
the principle of self-determination of peoples.

139.
My delegation feels that the time has come for
the United Nations to implement its resolutions concerning the question of Muscat and Oman. Furthermore, we feel that the announced British intention to
withdraw from the Gulf will be incomplete if it does
not include Oman and Muscat.

145. The Shahinshah has shown how a high-minded
fidelity to the principles and purposes of the United
Nations Charter can dispel tension and overcome discord. We have no doubt that His Imperial Majesty
is entitled to tribute from the international community.

140. In conclusion, my delegation wishes to state that
colonial domination in all forms and manifestations in
the Arabian Gulf is one in nature, and therefore
inseparable. The imperialist States and their henchmen
should not lose sight of an essential fact: that all their
attempts to undermine the just struggle of the Arab
masses in the Gulf are bound to fail; they are only
temporarily
delaying the final victory of the people’s
revolution.

146. We should also like to extend our felicitations
to the Government of the United Kingdom for the
manner in which it arranged for this affair to be settled
in the democratic spirit of the Charter and through
the instrumentality of the United Nations.
147. Pakistan, as is well known, has always upheld
the principle that where an agreement calls for ascertaining the wishes of a population, the process must
be carried out in a fair and impartial manner, free from
pressure or intimidation from any quarter. As long as
the ascertainment is conducted impartially under the
aegis of the United Nations, the precise method of
consulting popular opinion will of course depend on
the circumstances of each case. In the present instance
we note the following statements in the report of the
Secretary-General’s personal representative in charge
of the good offices mission in Bahrain: first, that he
ascertained the opinion of a comprehensive crosssection of the people of Bahrain-in fact he consulted
as he reports, “all associations and organized groups
in Bahrain” [ibid., para. 281; secondly, that he had
ready and full access to all persons whom he wished
to see or who wished to see him and that there was
no intimidation
or influence interfering with such
access.

14 1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
I now call on the representative of Pakistan.
142. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): Mr. President, the Pakistan delegation is grateful to you and to the other members of the Security Council for according us permission to make a statement on the subject under discussion. I requested this permission under instructions
from my government because of three special factors.
The first is Pakistan’s close relationship with the people
of the islands of Bahrain, which are located in geographical
proximity to Pakistan. The second is our
friendship with our immediate neighbour, Iran-afrienship to which we attach the highest. value. Though
each of these factors was sufficient reason for us to
request permission for participating in this debate,
without a vote, there is also a third factor of particular
significance
to us. It is that the parties concerned
should have decided to have recourse to the procedures
of pacific settlement to end a situation that would have
led to tension and conflict,

148. We note also that neither of the two parties who
requested the Secretary-General’s good offices, Iran
and the United Kingdom, exercised any direct administrative control over Bahrain. If either had been doing
so, the avoidance of the method of plebiscite for consulting the popular will could have been open to challenge by the other.

143. The method adopted-that
of requesting the
good offices of the Secretary-General on a confidential
basis with a view to fact-finding-led
to a mission that
has been carried out in so objective and impartial a
manner by his personal representative that it has turned
out to have been both appropriate and felicitous. His

149. In the present case there is obviously no room
for doubt that the conclusions reached by the good
13

\ and demonstrating
some imagination
provided the
icouncil had the last word in considering and approving
Ithe conclusions of the inquiry, although we and others
in the Council would have wished the Council to be
associated earlier with this action. This is, however,
$s should be stressed, a special case which cannot
be considered as having established a precedent.

offices Mission are the same that would have been
reached by a plebiscite. May I therefore pay my delegation’s tribute to the Secretary-General
and to his personal representative,
Mr. Winspeare Guicciardi. The
Secretary-General’s
action, we believe, did not militate
against any principle of the distribution
of powers
embodied in the United Nations Charter and greatly
facilitated a peaceful settlement in accordance with
its purposes and principles.

157. We wish to express similar views on the substance of the matter before us. The conclusions of
the report are reasonable. The inquiry conscientiously
carried out by Mr. Winspeare Guicciardi and his collaborators seems to cover all the representative elements of the population, who spoke out freely. The
fact remains, however, that sounding out public opinion cannot have the legal value of a democratic consultation, and it is justified in this particular case only
by the objective to be attained. The intention was not
to determine the future status of Bahrain, but to ascertain the general feelings of the people with a view to
facilitating the settlement of the dispute. The conclusions of the report are quite in line with the terms
of reference which were agreed upon by the common
consent of the two countries which are at the origin
of this mission.

150. The personal representative has discharged his
delicate responsibility
with tact and wisdom. For the
harmonious conclusion of this good offices Mission,
it is again the Governments of Iran and the United
Kingdom,and
I should also like to add the Governments of the neighbouring Arab States-which
deserve
the gratitude of the United Nations. We look forward
to the emergence of Bahrain as a fully sovereign Arab
entity, in the full confidence that it will symbolize the
beginning of a new era of tranqu’illity in a sensitive
part of the Middle East.
1.51, The PRESIDENT
(inte,pr-etationfroln
French):
I should like, my dear colleagues, to tell you-how very
much I appreciate the expressions of friendship
addressed to my country. I believe that the bilateral
relations which France has with all the countries represented here may prove extremely valuable in the
search for multilateral
solutions to world-wide problems.

158. In the circumstances we welcome the agreement
reached and we cast our vote in favour of the resolution.
159. Now, as PRESIDENT
of the Council, the explanations of vote being concluded, I give the floor to
two speakers who have asked to exercise their right
of reply. I shall first call on the representative of Iran.

152. As for the excessive praise which greeted my
arrival, my impression was really not so much that
I was arriving, but that I was leaving. Perhaps what
was said was somewhat premature, but you may rest
assured that I will endeavour not to disappoint you
and will do my utmost in working with all of you in
an effort to find solutions to all our problems.

160. Mr. VAKIL (Iran) (inter.pr’etationfiom
French):
This is not exactly a matter of exercising my right
of reply but rather of giving some indications to out
colleague from Southern Yemen.

153. Speaking as the representative of FRANCE, I
should like now to make known to the Council the
views of my Government.

161. The first thing I want to say is that all geographers and historians of the Arab world car1 the Gulf
where the Bahrain Islands are situated “the Persian
Gulf”. If necessary, he could ask me and I would inform
him of the sources for this.

154. What was at issue? There had been a longstanding dispute the continuation of which might very
well have led to complications
i,n international
relations. The Governments of both Iran and the United
Kingdom, whose views differed, reached agreement
on the need for a peaceful settlement in the United
Nations, for which they are to be commended, They
then asked the Secretary-General
to exercise his good
office.

162. Secondly, he said that the Bahrain Islands were
an integral part of the Persian Gulf. I do not deny
this. They are there and everyone knows it.
163. Thirdly, he said that the situation in Bahrain
has always been the same as now under international
law. I regret to have to refer you on this to a letter
which the Sheikh of Bahrain addressed to His Majesty
the King of Iran on 12 April 1860. I would venture
to quote a single sentence from that letter. I have the
text in Arabic available and I could give it to him.
I shall read out the English translation of a single sentence, as follows: “It is more self-evident than the
sun that the islands of Bahrain, from the days of preceding sovereigns until this moment, have been of the
land of the dominions of the Exalted State,” which,
as our colleagues will see from the Arab translation
in question, is the Kingdom of Iran.

155. The results are before us in this report and
resolution. Let me say straight away that what was
accomplished
was within the spirit of the United
Nations Charter, which requires that Member States
seek a peaceful solution to their disputes and provides
under Article 33, paragraph 1, that they may use any
peaceful means of their choice. That is what matters.
Peace has been consolidated in an area of the world
which was, as I need not stress, particularly vulnerable.
i

156. As far as the actual procedure is concerned,
.~ there was no rule against going off the beaten track,
\\

14

168. Mr. ABDULLA
(Southern Yemen): I wish to
reply to the representative of Iran. In his explanation
of vote, or rather in his clarification of vote, he chose
to differ with me as regards the naming of the Gulf.
I hope that he would not find it necessary for the United
Nations to send a mission to determine the exact name
used by the people of the area.

164, The PRESIDENT
(intqmtationfrom
French):
1 now call on the representative of the United Kingdom,
Lord Caradon .
165. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I promised
previously to exercise restraint and I have only two
points to make very shortly in reply. First, I do not
think it will be a surprise to anyone in this Council
if I repeat that the Sultanate of Muscat and Oman is
a sovereign and independent State. Secondly, there
were a few references in this debate-which
I respectfully say has been maintained at a high level-to which
1 might take objection, but in the interests of harmony
I think I will leave them, regarding them as irrelevant.

169. The PRESIDENT (intevpr’etntionfiom French):
I believe that Lord Caradon will not hold it against
me if I too in conclusion come out on stage to take
a curtain call. As President of the Council, I welcome
this happy outcome. Though limited, this question of
Bahrain was delicate and difficult, and it is always
very dangerous to allow disputes to drag on and grow
bitter. The resolution of this affair is a credit to the
United Nations. Our warmest wishes and congratulations go first of all to the people of Bahrain, to their
leaders and to their youth. We wish them prosperity
to match their wisdom and foresight.

166. Now, Sir, although the hour is beginning to be
late, I wonder if you would be kind enough, with the
indulgence of the Council, to allow me to communicate
to you a few lines which I should like to dedicate to
Bahrain.
Rejoice, again 1 say, rejoice.
We spoke with a united voice,
The play is over. Witness now
The actors come to make their bow.

170. One cannot overstress the role played by two
Member States, Iran, which ‘worked hard for conciliation, and theUnited Kingdom, both of which have
acted as loyal Members of the Organization, abiding
by the tenets of the Charter.

Praise first the Shah; what joy to see
Imperial magnanimity.
Cheer next U Thant who never tires
In harmonizing our desires.

171. The Secretary-General once again was active
in facilitating a settlement. I should like to thank him
for that and I would ask him to transmit our thanks
to Mr. Winspeare and the members of his team.

Thank God that Bunche is with us still
And his, indomitable will.
Next the Italian wins applause,
For Roman justice is his cause.
His findings rightly earn him fame
(We’re proud he has an English name).
In gratitude we cry Long Live
The Special Representative.

172. I should like to pay a tribute to all the members
of the Council, and especially those who were spokesmen of larger groups, for their cooperation and understanding. Thanks to them, in the few days preceding
this meeting an agreement was reached on a resolution
that has now been approved unanimously. May this
result, which is a credit to our Council, set an example
and guide us in other matters which are a serious threat
to the security of nations and peoples.

All these endeavours were not vain.
The people made their wishes plain,
Their independence they retain.
So let us all repeat again
Good luck, God speed to Bahrain.

167. The PRESIDENT
(interpretdonfiom
French):
The representative of Southern Yemen wishes to make
a few additional comments, and I now call on him.

The meeting rose at 5.45 p.m.

1.5

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Notions
publications
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

may be obfained
bookstore
or write

from bookstores
and dlslribufors
to1 Unilad
Notions,
Sales Section,

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

SE PROCURER

thwghout
New York

UNIES

10s publications
des Notions
Unioa
sent en vents
danr
Ies librairies
01 tar q gencrs
ddporitoires
du monde
entier.
Informer-vour
aup&
de volre librairie
ou edrorrrr-vour
ci:
Nations
Unies, Section
des venlcs, Now York ou Genhve.
,HAtl

flOIlYqIITb

H3AAHHR

QPTAHHIAUHH

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

Los publlcau’onsr
de lar Nacioner
Unidas
ert&n
en iodas parler
de1 mundo.
Conrulte
o su Illnero
Ventoc,
Nusva
York o Ginebra,

Litho

in United

Nations.

New

York

P&-e:

$U..‘i.

06bEAHHEHHblX

UNIDAS

en venta en librerfas
o dirijore
a: N&ones

I.00 lor equiv:llent

HAuCIl

in other

currencies)

y cosas distrlbuidorar
Unidas,
Secci6n

de
