VII.

Resoludons adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

Reaffirming the principles established in the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, set out in its resolution 1514 (XV) of
14 December 1960, in particular that all peoples have
the right to self-determination, by virtue of which right
they freely determine their political status and freely
pursue their economic, social and cultural development,
Recognizing the special responsibility of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as the
administering Power, to take urgent and necessary steps
to enable the people of Belize to exercise freely and
without fear their right to self-determination and to the
firm and early independence of all of their territory,
Noting with regret the continuing failure of the parties
concerned to settle their differences in a manner which
will not prejudice the right of the people of Belize to
self-determination, independence and territorial integrity
in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Belize to self-determination, independence and the
preservation of the inviolability and territorial integrity
of Belize;
2. Urges the Government of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, acting in close
consultation with the Government of Belize, and the
Government of Guatemala to continue their efforts to
conclude their negotiations without prejudice to the
right of the people of Belize to self-determination, independence and territorial integrity and in furtherance of
the peace and stability of the region and, in this connexion, to consult as appropriate with other specially
interested States in the region;
3. Requests the Governments concerned to report
to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session on any
arrangements which have been made to enable the people of Belize to exercise freely and without fear their
right to self-determination and an early and secure
independence;
4. Calls upon the parties concerned to refrain from
exerting any pressure or the use of threats or force
against the Government and people of Belize to prevent
the full exercise of their inalienable right to self-determination, independence and territorial integrity;
5. Urges all States to respect the right of the people
of Belize to self-determination, independence and territorial integrity and to render all practical assistance
necessary for the secure and early exercise of that right;
6. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples to remain seized of the question and to
assist the people of Belize in the early exercise of their
inalienable rights.

75 th plenary meeting
21 November 1979

34/39.

Question of Guam

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Guam,
Having ex~mined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard

205

to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,31
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
all other resolutions and decisions of the United Nations
relating to Guam,
Noting that the administering Power continues to
maintain military installations in the Territory,

Considering that the policy of maintaining military
bases and installations in Non-Self-Governing Territories
which inhibit the right of self-determination of peoples is
incompatible with the relevant resolutions of the United
Nations,
Having heard the statements of the administering
Power, 32
Welcoming the active participation of the administering Power in the work of the Special Committee and
expressing the hope that this co-operation will be
strengthened further so as to accelerate progress towards
the full implementation of the Declaration with respect
to Guam,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
Visiting Mission dispatched to the Territory in July
1979, 33
Noting the observations of the Visiting Mission relating to the results of the constitutional referendum held
in Guam on 4 August 1979,
Conscious of the need to accelerate progress towards
the full implementation of the Declaration with respect
to Guam,
Mindful that Guam requires the continued attention
and assistance of the United Nations in the achievement
by its people of the objectives embodied in the Charter
of the United Nations and in the Declaration,
Aware of the special circumstances of the geographical
location and economic conditions of Guam and stressing
the necessity of diversifying the Territory's economy as
a matter of priority in order to reduce its dependence on
fluctuating economic activities,
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to Guam; 34
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Guam to self-determination and independence in accordance with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
3. Reaffirms its conviction that questions of territorial size, geographical location and limited resources
should in no way delay the implementation of the
Declaration with respect to the Territory;
4. Calls upon the Government of the United States
of America, as the administering Power, in consultation
with the freely elected representatives of the people of
Guam, to continue to take all the necessary steps to ensure the full and speedy attainment of the goals set forth
in the Declaration with respect to the Territory and to
81 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/34/23/Rev. l), chaps. IV and
XXVII.
82 Ibid., Thirty-fourth Session, Fourth Committee, 22nd meeting, paras. 17-21, and 27th meeting, paras. 64 and 6S.
88 Ibid., Thirty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/34/23/
Rev.l), chap. XXVIl, annex.
84 Ibid., chap. XXVII.

GeDenl AINmblJ-Tlllrty-fomtll SudoD

take such additional measures as will ensure preservation of the identity and cultural heritage of the people
of Guam;
S. Expresses its appreciation to the members of the
United Nations Visiting Mission dispatched to the Territory in )uly 1979 for the constructive work accomplished
and to the administering Power and to the Government
and people of Guam for the co-operation and assistance
extended to the Mission;
6. Takes note of the report of the Visiting Mission
and the observations, conclusions and recommendations
coptained therein; 88
7. Calls upon the administering Power to take all
possible steps to strengthen and diversify the economy
of Guam and to work out concrete programmes of assistance and economic development for the Territory;
8. Recalls that the administering Power has the
responsibility to ensure that the people of Guam are
kept fully informed of their inahenable right to selfdetermination and independence, in accordance with
the Declaration;
9. Further calls upon the administering Power to
take the necessary action to enable the inhabitants of
Guam to regain possession of unutilized land held at
present by the federal authorities and by the military;
10. Recalls its relevant resolutions concerning military bases in colonial and Non-Self-Governing Territories, recognizes that the presence of military bases
could constitute a factor impeding the implementation
of the Declaration and reaffirms its strong conviction
that the presence of military bases in Guam should not
prevent the people of the Territory from exercising their
inalienable right to self-determination and independence
in accordance with the Declaration and the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations;
11. Urges the administering Power, in co-operation
with the freely elected authorities and representatives of
the people of Guam, to safeguard the inalienable right
of the people of the Territory to the enjoyment of their
natural resources by taking effective measures which
guarantee the right of the people to own and dispose of ·
those natural resources and to establish and maintain
control of their future development;
12. Requests the administering Power to continue to
enlist the assistance of the specialized agencies and other
organizations of the United Nations system in accelerating progress in all sectors of the national life of Guam;
13. Requests the Special Committee to continue the
examination of this question at its next session, including
the possible dispatch of a further visiting mission to
Guam at an appropriate time and in consultation with
the administenng Power, and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session.
75th plenary meeting
21 November 1979
34/40.

Question of East Timor

Bearing in mind the part of the Political Declaration
adopted by the Sixth Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Havana
from 3 to 9 September 1979, relating to East Timor, 85
Having examined the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to the Territory,86
Having heard the statements of the representatives of
Portugal,87 as the administering Power, and Indonesia, 88
Having also heard the statements of the petitioners, 39
including the representative of the Frente Revolucionaria
de Timor Leste Independente, 40
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
East Timor to self-determination and independence, in
accordance with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
2. Declares that the people of East Timor must be
enabled freely to determine their own future, under the
auspices of the United Nations;
3. Expresses its deepest concern at the suffering of
the people of East Timor as a result of the situation now
prevailing in the Territory;
4. Calls upon all parties concerned to facilitate the
entry into the Territory of international relief aid in order
to alleviate the suffering of the people of East Timor;
5. Requests the United Nations Children's Fund
and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to render, within their respective fields of
competence, all possible assistance to the people of East
Timor, particularly the children and those seeking to
leave for another country for purposes of family reunion;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to follow the
implementation of the present resolution and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth
session;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fifth session the item entitled "Question of
East Timor".
75th plenary meeting
21 November 1979
34/41.

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Activities of
foreign economic and other interests which are impeding
the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting
an See A/34/542, annex, sect. I, para. 155.

Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/34/23/Rev.1), chap. XI.
87 Ibid., Thirty-fourth Session, Fourth Committee, 13th meeting, paras. 9-12.
88 Ibid., 3rd, 6th, 10th, 13th, 14th and 17th meetings.
89 Ibid., 13th meeting, paras. 24-50; 14th meeting, paras. 1447; 16th meeting, paras. 97-107; 17th meeting, paras. 52-60;
and 18th meeting, paras. 4-21; and ibid., Fourth Committee,
Session!'/ Fascicle, corrigendum.
,o Ibid., 14th meeting, paras. 25-37.
88

The General Assembly,
Recognizing the inalienable right of all peoples to
self-determination and independence in accordance with
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
of tlie I>eclaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in its resolution 1S14 (XV) of 14 December 1960,

Activities of foreign economic and other interests which are impeding the implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples in
Southern Rhodesia and Namibia and in all
other Territories under colonial domination
and efforts to elhninate colonialism, apartheid
and racial discrimination in southern Africa
