RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED WITHOUT REFERENCE TO A COMMITIEE
Question considered hy the Security Council al its 7 49th and 750th meetings,
held on 30 October 1956

Hequests, as a matter of priority, the SecretaryGeneral to suhmit to it within forty-eight hours a plan
for the setting up, with the consent of the nations conccrnecl, of an emergency international United Nations
Force tu secure and supervise the cessation of hostilities
in accordancc \Yith all the tenns of the aforementioned
re~olutiun.
563rd plenary meeting,
4 November 1956.

Resolution 997 (ES-1)
The General .·1ssem/lly,
N oting the disregard on man y (Kcasions by parties to
the Israel-Arab armistice agreements of 1949 of the
terms of such agreements, and that the armed forces
of Israel have penetrated cleeply into Egyptian terri-tory in violation of the Ceneral Armistice Agreement
between Egypt and Israel uî 24 February 1949, 4
N oting that armed forces of Fr:mcc and the United
Kingclom of Great Britain anrl Northern Ireland are
conclucting military operatioth against Egyptia11 territory,
N oting that traffic through the Suez Canal is now
interrupted to the serious prcjuclicc of many nations,
Expressing ifs gra,_.e conrern over t hesc developments,
1. Urges as a matter of priority that all parties now
involvecl in hostilities in the area agree to an immediate
cease-Ere and, as part thereof, halt the movernent of
military forces and arms into the area;
2. Urges the parties to the armistice agreements
prornptly to withdraw ail forces behind the armistice
lines, to desist from raids across the armistice lines into
neighbouring territory, ami to observe scrupulously
the provisions of the armistice agreements;
3. Reco1nmends that all Membcr States refrain
from introducing military guods in the area of hostilities and in general refrain from any acts which would
delay or prevent the implementation of the present
resolution;
4. Urges that, upon the cease-fire being effective,
steps be taken to reopcn the Suez Canal and restore
secure freedom of navigation;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to observe and
report promptly on the compliance with the present
resolution to the Security Council and to the General
Assembly, for such further action as they may deem
appropriate in accordance with the Charter;
6. Decides to remain in emergency session pending
compliance with the present resolution.
562nd plenary meeting,
2 Novembe-r 1956.

Resolution 999 (ES-1)
/'lie Gcncral .·lsscmb/_\',
.V oti11g with rcyret that not ail the parties concerned
have yet agreed to comply with the provisions of its
resol11tio11 <J97 ( l•:S- I) of 2 N ovember l 95ü,

Xotiny the spe,ial priority given in that resolution
tu an immcdiate ccase-fire and, as part thereof, to the
halting of the movcmcnt of military forces and arrns

i11t1, the arca,
Yoiiny furlht'r that tlw rcsolution urged the parties
tu the armistice agreements promptly to withdraw al!
forces hehin<l the armistice lines, to desist from raids
a,ross tl1e armistice lines into neighbouring territory,
all(l to obsen-c scrupulo11sly the provisions of the
ar111istice agreemc11ts,
1- Reafjinns its resolution 99ï ( ES-I), and once
again ca11s upon the parties immediatcly to comply
with the provisions of the saie! resolution;
l. ,-luthori:::es the Secretarv-General immediately to
arrange with the parties con:erned for the i111ple111entation of the cease-fire and the halting of the movement
of military forces and arms into the area, and requests
him to report compliance forthwith and. in any case,
11ut later than twelve hours from the time of adoption
of the present resolution;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, with the as;,istance of the Chief of Staff and the members of the
United Nations Truce Supervision ürganization, to
obtain compliance of the withdrawal of ail forces hehind
the armistice lines;
4. Decides to meet again immecliately on receipt of
the Secretary-General's report referred to in paragraph
:? of the present resolution_
563rd plenary meeting,
4 November 1956.

Resolution 998 (ES-1)
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the urgent necessity of facilitating
compliancc with its resolution 997 (ES-I) of 2 November 1956,

Resolution 1000 (ES-1)
The General Asse111bly,
llaving requested the Secretary-General, m its resolution 998 (ES-I) of 4 Novernber 1956, to submit toit
a plan for an emergency international United Nations
Force, for the purpuses stated,

4 Official Records of the Security Council, Fourth Year,
Special Supplcment No. 3.

2
