S/2020/1092

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
6 November 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 6 November 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by
Mr. Alexander Zouev, Assistant Secretary-General for Rule of Law and Security
Institutions, Department of Peace Operations; Mr. Serge Therriault, Police
Commissioner, United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti; Ms. Unaisi Vuniwaqa,
Police Commissioner, United Nations Mission in South Sudan; Mr. Pascal Champion,
Police Commissioner, United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic; and Mr. Issoufou Yacouba, Police
Commissioner, United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, as well as the statements delivered by Mr. Hans-Georg Engelke, State Secretary
of the Ministry of the Interior of Germany, and by the representatives of Belgium,
China, the Dominican Republic, Estonia, France, Indonesia, the Russian Federation,
Tunisia (on behalf of the Niger, South Africa and Tunisia as well as Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines), the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the
United States of America and Viet Nam in connection with the video-teleconference
on “United Nations peacekeeping operations: Police Commissioners”, convened on
Wednesday, 4 November 2020.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives
of the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light
of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic,
these briefings and statements will be issued as an official document of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Inga Rhonda King
President of the Security Council

20-14819 (E) 101120 041220

*2014819*

S/2020/1092

Annex I
Statement by the Assistant Secretary-General for Rule of Law
and Security Institutions, Department of Peace Operations,
Alexander Zouev
I thank you, Madam President, for convening this briefing. I am especially
pleased to be joined today by our Police Commissioners who are currently serving
in United Nations peace operations in the Central African Republic, Haiti, Mali and
South Sudan.
This annual briefing is an opportunity to reaffirm the vital role United Nations
police (UNPOL) plays across the spectrum of conflict prevention to peacekeeping to
peacebuilding. It also serves as a forum to discuss our achievements, as well as what
more needs to be done to advance the role of UNPOL as a service provider and focal
point on policing and law-enforcement matters.
Two and a half years ago, the Secretary-General launched the Action for
Peacekeeping (A4P) initiative, calling on all stakeholders to collectively address
the challenges facing peacekeeping, which remains an essential multilateral tool for
preventing conflict and sustaining peace for millions of vulnerable people around
the globe.
A4P priorities are overarching. They guide the work of Department of Peace
Operations and peacekeeping operations in the field, the implementation of Security
Council mandates and our response to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) crisis.
UNPOL, as a key component of United Nations peacekeeping, is strongly committed
to advancing A4P priorities and to further strengthening the effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations.
Today I will speak about the results we are achieving through our ongoing
efforts to reinforce peacekeeping. I will also highlight areas in need of greater
collective progress and welcome hearing members’ own plans in support of the
A4P agenda.
As we work to ensure political progress, partnerships with regional and
subregional organizations as well as across the United Nations system are critical,
particularly to facilitate transitions. In Darfur, for example, UNPOL has been
working closely with the African Union on the drawdown of the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and transition to the United
Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan, with a view to
sustaining peace and preventing a relapse into conflict by ensuring adequate interim
policing capacities.
UNPOL also plays a key role in all aspects of the protection of civilians,
including physical protection. In the Central African Republic, UNPOL helps foster
a protective environment through police capacity-building, including by assisting
with the recruitment and training of 1,000 gendarmerie and police cadets, with an
additional 1,000 cadets forthcoming. UNPOL has also been instrumental in raising
awareness about preventing the spread of COVID-19 and has distributed personal
protective equipment, hygiene products and medical supplies throughout our mission
settings, particularly to the most vulnerable communities.
To ensure the highest levels of performance and accountability, UNPOL, in
close cooperation with Member States and other partners, has advanced the Integrated
Peacekeeping Performance and Assessment Framework and the Comprehensive
Performance and Assessment System, pursuant to which UNPOL has implemented
standards to further evaluate the impact of deployed officers and to take action in
cases of underperformance. Aligning predeployment training by Member States
2/35

20-14819

S/2020/1092

with the Organization’s in-mission training is central to enhancing performance.
The Department of Peace Operations Police Division, together with our Integrated
Training Service, continues progress in developing standardized training modules
under the UNPOL training architecture programme.
In the area of women and peace and security, gender-responsive policing is
essential for effective United Nations and host State policing, and to ensure that the
different security needs of men, women, boys and girls are taken into account. That
is why UNPOL is making gender-responsive policing a core priority of its work.
In addition, UNPOL has continued to engage with police-contributing countries to
surpass the already achieved intermediate gender parity targets for 2020, including
at the command levels. Greater women’s participation at all levels sends a strong
message to host populations, which is amplified when those women occupy positions
of leadership and authority. I am pleased that three of our police components are
currently headed by women.
UNPOL has continued to reinforce zero tolerance for sexual exploitation
and abuse, including through predeployment and in-mission training. Conduct also
relates to how we manage the environmental footprints of our missions, and UNPOL
has refined its Environmental Management Framework by aligning initiatives of the
police components in the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Missions in the Central African Republic and in Mali, the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and UNAMID with
their missions’ environmental risk-management plans.
Climate insecurity, the devastating consequences of which have been laid bare
by COVID-19, is a growing threat multiplier for our missions and host communities.
I expect this, in line with the achievement of all the Sustainable Development Goals,
to become a larger focus of United Nations policing going forward.
A4P aims to refocus peacekeeping on realistic expectations, make
peacekeeping missions stronger and safer and mobilize greater support for political
solutions, and for well-equipped and well-trained forces. Through A4P, we are better
able to address today’s challenges to peace and security and ultimately improve the
lives of those we serve.
I thank all participants for their continued dedication to implementing their
respective A4P commitments. Finally, we are grateful for the Council’s commitment
to supporting our efforts and hope we can continue to count on it.

20-148193/35

S/2020/1092

Annex II
Statement by the Police Commissioner of the United Nations
Integrated Office in Haiti, Serge Therriault
I thank you, Madam President, for affording me this opportunity to highlight
police capacity-building and development efforts during the mandate of the United
Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH).
Over the past 22 years, Haiti has benefited from the support of thousands
of United Nations police and corrections advisers from the rich network of policecontributing countries, who have promoted the development of a professional and
gender-responsive police organization, in accordance with the United Nations
Strategic Guidance Framework for International Policing.
Through the successive United Nations missions, our assistance has also
progressed to a more strategic advisory role on the essentials of sound police
management and security-sector governance. Police institutions are learning
organizations, bound to constantly adapt to a changing environment and new threats.
Securing the country on its own since the closure of the United Nations Mission for
Justice Support in Haiti, the Haitian National Police (HNP) has risen to numerous
challenges and proved its operational know-how time and time again.
The Director General ad interim has led the police institution through a year
of violent street protests, sharp increases in major crimes, a global pandemic and
long-standing labour relations issues, constantly succeeding in reversing the negative
trends. The evolution of the United Nations presence in Haiti has therefore allowed
the national police to demonstrate its responsiveness and the value of investing in a
resilient and results-oriented institution.
In addition to reaffirming its operational readiness, this last transition has
been the genesis of significant human resources reforms in the police, when internal
fractures emerged and better working conditions were demanded. With the advice of
BINUH, the Haitian National Police leadership established a facilitation and dialogue
commission to address police officers’ grievances and improve labour relations.
Some of the recommendations from that commission, which have already been
implemented with the support of the Government, including formally recognizing
the right to unionize for police officers and improving medical coverage, have also
proved to be effective in appeasing internal tensions.
In its advisory role, BINUH continues to work with the Haitian National
Police to achieve gender equality and enhance the capacity to prevent and investigate
all forms of sexual and gender-based violence. Twenty years after resolution 1325
(2000), the increased recruitment and training of female police officers has been a
key element of capacity-building to professionalize the police. Currently, women
represent nearly 11 per cent of the 15,000 Haitian police officers, and United Nations
strategic advisers are engaged in additional initiatives to achieve the gender-sensitive
recruitment goal of 12 per cent female representation by 2021.
Through our involvement in areas such as those covered by the National
Coordination of Women’s Affairs, the Sexual Crimes Investigation Unit, the National
Police School and the National Police Academy, we are promoting gender-responsive
policing while trying to reach an appropriate inclusive police-to-population ratio
of professional police officers, in accordance with the 2017-21 HNP strategic
development plan.
The good offices of the United Nations and the support of the Security Council
for the continued improvement of the security environment in Haiti remain vital in
a country where insecurity is linked to the political context. The numerous episodes
4/35

20-14819

S/2020/1092

of armed gang violence over the past year and the prominence of criminality, with
a resurgence of robberies, kidnappings and homicides, are raising serious human
rights concerns. There is an urgent need for concrete and coherent action by the
Haitian authorities for accountability and an end to impunity. Encouraged by
international partners and in response to demands from the communities, State
authorities must strive to curb the gang phenomenon and marshal all efforts through
a holistic approach and nationally owned solutions, especially ahead of a crucial
electoral period, to protect its citizens from all forms of criminality and promote
democracy, justice and stability.
The Haitian National Police has built up the essential knowledge to pursue its
development to tackle new operational challenges. But much more remains to be done.
As a precondition for the success of the ongoing transition, the Government needs to
allocate sufficient and sustainable financial, operational and human resources for the
police, with the United Nations country team and national and international partners
continuing to support police development and ensuring oversight to maintain the
trust of the population in its sole public-safety institution.
With adequate support, the professionalization of the HNP can be a vehicle for
stability and play a central role in restoring the rule of law in Haiti.

20-148195/35

S/2020/1092

Annex III
Statement by the Police Commissioner of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan, Unaisi Vuniwaqa
With the outbreak of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) was confronted with an unprecedented
threat to the health of the communities we serve as well as that of our own personnel.
The Mission acted swiftly and decisively to continue implementing its protection
and peacebuilding mandate and protect our staff, while proactively managing
reputational risks by countering misconceptions among the local population about
UNMISS personnel being contagion vectors.
To that end, robust action was taken to mitigate the spread of the virus,
including freezing non-essential travel, prohibiting large gatherings and limiting
interaction outside of bases, as well as requiring physical distancing, mask-wearing
and hand-washing. Balancing the delivery of our mandated responsibilities with the
health and safety of our peacekeepers and vulnerable communities, including the
thousands of displaced families living in protection-of-civilians sites adjacent to
UNMISS bases, was of paramount importance.
Despite the risks and enormous challenges, peacekeepers remained motivated
to continue delivering on their mandated responsibilities. Given the difficulties in
implementing prevention measures for internally displaced persons (IDPs) inside
protection-of-civilians camps and the congested living conditions, conducting
“hands-on” policing at the site posed a considerable risk to not only the United
Nations police (UNPOL) component but the Mission as a whole. UNPOL therefore
reduced its footprint inside the protection-of-civilians sites but maintained the
capacity to respond to emergency security situations if necessary. UNPOL also
maintained patrols around the protection-of-civilians sites, high-visibility patrols
and confidence- and trust-building patrols in towns in the 10 field offices.
All responses to the exceptional security situation, including reports of sexual
and gender-based violence inside the protection-of-civilians sites, were recorded by
UNPOL for the purpose of contact tracing if needed. Notably, at the height of the
COVID outbreak in June, fighting erupted at the Juba protection-of-civilians site 3,
with about 500 involved over a three-day period. Formed police units responded,
equipped with COVID-19 personal protective equipment, and successfully stopped
the fighting with no casualties. As anticipated, formed police unit officers later
tested positive for COVID. However, the swift quarantine of the affected contingent
curtailed the risks of the virus spreading to the entire UNMISS base.
On technical assistance and advice activities, workshops continue to be
conducted, but with strict adherence to social distancing and other COVID-19
prevention protocols, including remote technical assistance and advice sessions and
imposing limits on the number of participants for physical-presence activities. In
addition, the South Sudan National Police Service (SSNPS) was regularly engaged
in the decongestion of holding facilities to avoid any spread of the virus.
Support was provided to IDP communities and our counterpart, the SSNPS,
as well as other law-enforcement agencies through sensitization on COVID-19
awareness, donations of hand sanitizer and personal protective equipment, including
disposable face masks, and the development and dissemination of COVID prevention
guidelines for police and prisons.
Moreover, quick-impact projects to renovate and build selected police stations
were followed through despite the COVID-19 situation, and seven were completed
for handing over to SSNPS in the past fiscal year. That is crucial to enhancing the
6/35

20-14819

S/2020/1092

protection of civilians in anticipation of the colocation of United Nations police with
the SSNPS. We will continue to strengthen the capacity of the SSNPS to ensure a
protective environment for the civilian population.
With the ceasefire and peace deal in South Sudan, political violence has been
markedly reduced over the past two years. The Mission — in close consultation
with the Government, non-governmental organizations, donors and internally
displaced persons themselves — is working to gradually withdraw our peacekeepers
and redesignate the protection-of-civilians sites to conventional IDP camps. The
protection-of-civilians sites in Wau and Bor have already successfully transitioned
to IDP camps. The redesignation enables both the military component and UNPOL
to increase their protection activities outside of the camps, where protection needs
are greater.
With the redesignation of protection-of-civilians sites, the Government of
South Sudan assumes responsibility for protecting the safety and security of IDPs.
UNPOL therefore plays a key role in preparing for the transitions through engagement
with the SSNPS to build their community-oriented policing capabilities. UNPOL is
providing technical and logistical support, as well as co-locating with the SSNPS for
on-site training, mentoring, coaching and monitoring of policing activities. UNPOL
will also continue to support the delivery of humanitarian assistance and to deploy
in emergency situations to protect humanitarian workers who are at risk.
Furthermore, UNPOL is working with the Rule of Law Section to strengthen
the rule of law and access to justice in all locations where transitions of protectionof-civilians sites have taken or will take place. These activities will include support
to the SSNPS, prisons, prosecutions and the courts.
Notwithstanding the challenges from COVID, our commitment to protecting
civilians remains steadfast. We will continue to find innovative ways to implement
our mandate and, together with the SSNPS and other partners, work towards a
creating a protective and peaceful environment for all South Sudanese.

20-148197/35

S/2020/1092

Annex IV
Statement by the Police Commissioner of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic, Pascal Champion
[Original: French]
I have the honour to brief the Council on ways of strengthening the performance
and accountability of the United Nations police.
United Nations police (UNPOL) have demonstrated their strong potential
in peace operations, a potential that can be further expressed, for the benefit of
the populations and of the United Nations, in the context of a renewed collective
engagement in peace operations.
Many avenues have already been identified for UNPOL under the leadership
of the Police Adviser, Luís Carrilho, whom we thank for his ongoing support. I am
thinking in particular of the strong wish to make UNPOL a service provider for the
entire United Nations system and beyond — a generally unobtrusive, unnoticed and
therefore sometimes forgotten provider.
Allow me to cite some examples that illustrate the success achieved by the
police force of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic in discharging our mandate and in terms of the
major strategies of the United Nations.
With respect to political solutions to conflicts, UNPOL was able to
successfully carry out 40 different missions in support of the Political Accord for
Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic. In terms of the protection
of civilians, eight individual police officers were able, without weapons, helmets
or accompaniment, to radically change the situation in one year in PK5, the most
difficult district in Bangui, using community policing.
UNPOL has maintained continuous and flawless cooperation in the Central
African Republic with all human rights actors. It has been able to anticipate, devise,
gain acceptance for and implement an integrated model for securing elections in the
Central African Republic beyond just uniformed experts.
In terms of improving United Nations security, UNPOL has been able to
maintain its activities in the face of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), with
very few cases. UNPOL also ensured the conviction in January of several people
responsible for the killing of peacekeepers in Bangassou in 2018; more of these
instances will follow.
UNPOL has performed very well and handled an increased number of
responsibilities. In terms of its male-to-female ratio, it is several years ahead of
schedule. In addition, UNPOL has a higher percentage of women in positions of
responsibility than the component overall. It is also carrying out more than 10 action
plans on major issues.
Concerning the strengthening of its efforts towards a lasting peace, UNPOL
strikes a balance between security and development in its activities. It has doubled
the number of police and gendarmerie in the Central African Republic in two and a
half years, and women represent 26 per cent of its recruits.
Humanitarians have developed a strong relationship of trust with UNPOL and
are asking for our support, for example in Batangafo, where we are constrained to
maintain a diminished Rwandan formed police unit. Exemplary results have been
achieved and are being strengthened. Indeed, UNPOL has been able over the past
8/35

20-14819

S/2020/1092

three years to eliminate cases of sexual abuse or exploitation. The initiatives it has
developed in the field of the environment are regularly cited as examples.
In terms of improving partnerships, UNPOL works on a daily basis with
the United Nations Development Programme, the European Union, the European
Union Military Training Mission, the European Union Advisory Mission and major
bilateral partners.
These are just a few examples of what the management and command methods
used by UNPOL in the Central African Republic have made it possible to achieve.
Seven factors have made this possible.
First, UNPOL has benefited from enough space, breathing room, autonomy,
visibility, attention and support as well as strong leadership, particularly from
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mankeur Ndiaye, and Police
Adviser Luís Carrilho. They believed in UNPOL’s potential, and UNPOL has paid
them back in spades, benefiting also the people.
Second, UNPOL has been able to integrate the major United Nations strategies.
Third, UNPOL is implementing, to the extent possible, the United Nations
leadership framework of 18 April 2017: a leadership that is respectful of norms and
principles and one that is inclusive, accountable, multidimensional, collaborative,
transformational, lived at first hand and focused on the impact on the ground.
Fourth, UNPOL draws a great deal of inspiration from Peters and Waterman’s
“prize for excellence” theories: taking action, listening to clients, empowering
whenever possible, achieving productivity through staff motivation and being
flexible yet disciplined.
Fifth, UNPOL promotes integration according to McKinsey’s seven keys to
organizing, also supported by Peters and Waterman.
Sixth, UNPOL never hesitates to identify its weaknesses in order to correct
them or to offer warm congratulations for specific and concrete impacts on the
ground that are felt directly by the population.
Seventh, UNPOL maintains a people-centred approach.
In conclusion, in order to further improve the performance and accountability
of the United Nations police, attention, space and breathing room should be given
to UNPOL. By proceeding in that way, as in the peaceful revolution launched in
Bangui PK5 by the local police, the years-ahead level of gender parity, the remarkable
progress made in terms of ensuring election security, the major initiatives in the area
of the environment and the outstanding resilience in the face of COVID, UNPOL
will repay all that it has been given.

20-148199/35

S/2020/1092

Annex V
Statement by the Police Commissioner of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali,
Issoufou Yacouba
[Original: French]
I would like at the outset to thank you, Mr. President, for the great honour
afforded me of addressing the Security Council on the issue of advancing political
solutions through United Nations policing.
The twenty-first century has been marked by the resurgence and multiplication
of increasingly complex conflicts in the world, particularly in the region where
I am working. That is indeed the case in Mali, which is why the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) was set up
to work for the restoration of peace and stability. It is therefore timely to ask about
the contribution of each of its three components — civilian, military and police — to
achieving the strategic objectives defined in resolution 2531 (2020).
In that regard, today’s theme is of particular importance, as it will allow me
to underscore the contribution of the police component, as indicated in resolution
2382 (2017), which, while emphasizing the need to give priority to political solutions
to resolve conflicts, highlighted the role that United Nations police components
can play in facilitating the transition from peacekeeping to development and
peacebuilding and, while recognizing that the strengthening of United Nations
police action can contribute to the success of peacekeeping mission exit strategies,
resolved, in paragraph 2, “to include … policing as an integral part of the mandates
and decision-making structures of United Nations peacekeeping operations and
special political missions”. This recognition of the central and cross-cutting role of
police is reinforced by the Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations, which emphasizes the primacy of politics in conflict
resolution and the supporting role that peacekeeping operations play in that regard.
United Nations police (UNPOL), a continuum force par excellence, operates
at all levels of decision-making across the entire spectrum of the mandate, from the
tactical to the political-strategic and operational levels. Thus, within MINUSMA,
the police component participates in the process of analysing the security context,
planning within an integrated strategic framework and decision-making in the
Mission’s governing bodies, as well as in the statutory and ad hoc thematic groups.
Cooperation with host country partners is essential. Cooperation instruments, such
as the memoranda signed with the Government, the sectoral strategic plans signed
with the heads of each of the security services and the periodic meetings held
with those partners make it possible to provide technical assistance and create the
opportunities needed to take the most appropriate decisions.
In addition, cooperation with other technical partners provides another
framework for harmonizing the conditions for access to aid to the defence and
security forces.
Police contribute to the promotion of peaceful and inclusive societies for
sustainable development through advocacy for inclusive recruitment into the
security forces, with the introduction of a quota system by region, which enables
better representation of the population, including women.
As part of the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
on Mali, in partnership with the United Nations Development Programme and the
Malian Security Sector Reform Commission, we are working on the implementation
10/35

20-14819

S/2020/1092

of community policing and the operationalization of the Security Advisory
Committees, which serve as a framework for consultation among representatives
of the State, the security services and the local population with a view to ensuring
the inclusive management and proper conduct of any local crime prevention and
security strategy.
In order to provide access to justice for all in the framework of a common
approach to the rule of law, UNPOL contributes to capacity-building in the penal
system. Although there is still room for improvement, the important and positive
actions taken by MINUSMA through its various components, including UNPOL,
are a source of hope.
The coronavirus disease pandemic has had a strong impact on the
implementation of our mandate. That situation has been further exacerbated by the
political crisis, which has led to the implementation of a political transition.
Regarding the police, after explaining the importance of UNPOL’s mandates,
resolution 2382 (2017) stresses the need to provide sufficient resources to achieve the
defined objectives. However, it is clear that human, logistical and financial resources
are inadequate to successfully carry out our mandates.
With regard to the authorities of the host country, special emphasis must
be placed on the governance of rule-of-law institutions. The security forces must
enable the conditions and environment conducive to the redeployment of State
representatives, the restoration of State authority and the fight against impunity, all
of which should contribute to social and economic development. Security, peace and
stability depend on it.

20-1481911/35

S/2020/1092

Annex VI
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Belgium to
the United Nations, Karen Van Vlierberge
I would like to thank today’s speakers for their insightful briefings. The
sixtieth anniversary of United Nations police (UNPOL) and the growing importance
of the role of United Nations police within United Nations peacekeeping operations
underscore the usefulness of these regular briefings.
Allow me to seize this opportunity to make three points.
First, Belgium would like to stress UNPOL’s essential role in the context
of the protection of civilians. In the past, UNPOL’s protective role was generally
undervalued and regularly overlooked. Missions have indeed tended to overly rely
on militarized approaches to the protection of civilians.
Although we have come a long way since UNPOL was first deployed in
the Republic of the Congo in the 1960s, today’s briefings clearly demonstrate the
potential for further improving UNPOL’s protection of civilians. On the other hand,
it is also critical to preserve UNPOL’s gains, especially in the context of the current
pandemic, which serves as an additional obstacle to the fulfilment of our objectives.
With regard to the future, we would like to plead for a threefold approach.
First, all UNPOL should be fully involved in the protection of civilians and be given
a voice in decision-making and planning in whole-of-mission efforts to protect
civilians. That is especially so in transition contexts, in which military components
gradually withdraw. Secondly, while partnerships between UNPOL, host States
and other mission components should be enhanced to enable more comprehensive
approaches to the protection of civilians, partnerships with other international
stakeholders that are active in this field should also be taken into account. Thirdly,
more appropriate and flexible capabilities, capacities and tools should be provided
to address existing critical capabilities gaps.
I have two questions regarding the protection of civilians for Police
Commissioner Unaisi Vuniwaqa, of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan.
Taking into account that United Nations protection-of-civilian sites are beginning
to transition into conventional displacement camps, how does she see the role of
UNPOL in future, as it relates to the protection of civilians? And does she have the
ability to fully execute the mandated protection-of-civilian tasks?
Secondly, UNPOL has an essential role to play with regard to the administration
of justice and the rendering of transitional justice. A breakdown in the rule of law
is often a major factor in the decision to deploy a United Nations peace operation.
Accordingly, the rehabilitation of the justice architecture — including the potential
set-up of transitional justice projects — has become a prerequisite for mission
transitions and a cornerstone for their exit strategies. In that regard, allow me to
stress that UNPOL always has an essential role to play in terms of accountability;
evidence has to be gathered and culprits have to be brought to justice.
Moreover, as the successful implementation of peacekeeping mandates has
become contingent on reformed and strengthened police institutions, the role of
UNPOL has become increasingly mission critical. More generally, security sector
reform should not be handled exclusively by the military component. UNPOL also
has an essential role to play in that regard.
In that connection, I have two questions for Police Commissioner Issoufou
Yacouba, of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali. Could he elaborate more on UNPOL’s security sector reform efforts in
12/35

20-14819

S/2020/1092

Mali? And how does coordination with other stakeholders like the European Union
Capacity Building Mission in Mali evolve?
Finally, we welcome UNPOL’s efforts towards gender mainstreaming, as well
as those to increase the participation of uniformed women in peacekeeping. Greater
meaningful participation of uniformed women in UNPOL will enhance community
engagement, particularly in contexts where cultural norms make it difficult for
women to talk to men. Moreover, it can generate more opportunities for empowering
women, as well as for gathering information to enhance situational awareness. In
addition, gender-sensitive training and conflict analysis should be intensified. Fully
fledged gender mainstreaming is and should remain our overall goal.
I also have a question for Police Commissioner Pascal Champion, of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic. As Belgium believes that greater meaningful participation of uniformed
women in United Nations peacekeeping operations contributes to the enhancement
of the performance of such operations, can he give some concrete examples of the
essential role of uniformed women?

20-1481913/35

S/2020/1092

Annex VII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Zhang Jun
[Original: Chinese]
I thank Assistant Secretary-General Zouev and the four Police Commissioners
for their briefings. I wish to take this opportunity to pay high tribute to all the
peacekeeping police officers implementing mandates on the frontline and
their families.
Impacted by the coronavirus disease pandemic, peacekeeping operations
are facing an ever more complex environment and more daunting challenges. Just
now, Assistant Secretary-General Zouev and the four Police Commissioners also
testified to this in their briefings. The Security Council should ponder deeply about
the landscape, tasks and future development of peacekeeping police and explore
ways for enhancement and improvement. I would like to share the following points.
First, the safety and security of police in peacekeeping should be effectively
guaranteed. The working environment of police in peacekeeping is becoming
increasingly complex and dangerous. The United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), the United Nation Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) are examples
of that. Ensuring the safety and security of peacekeeping police is a prerequisite for
the effective performance of duties. Member States and the Secretariat should take
practical measures to fully implement resolution 2518 (2020) and help peacekeeping
police strengthen the capabilities related to situational awareness and improve the
equipment and medical conditions in an effort to minimize safety and security risks.
China supports increasing the meaningful participation of women police officers
in peacekeeping operations. There should also be full assessment of possible risks,
proper safety and security training and thorough preparations before deployment.
Secondly, the capacity-building of peacekeeping police should be strengthened
and performance in peacekeeping improved. The implementation of the SecretaryGeneral’s Action for Peacekeeping initiative hinges on bolstering peacekeeping
capacity-building. Member States and the Secretariat should work with one mind
and in concert to help police-contributing countries, provide targeted training for
peacekeeping police and provide the latter with sufficient resources to perform their
duties. Only when peacekeeping capacity-building and resources are assured can
peacekeeping performance be effectively improved. Police, civilian and military
components of missions should work in synergy and beef up joint contingency
command capabilities to properly respond to complex situations that may arise.
China has always actively pushed for improvement of peacekeeping operations in
honouring the commitment made by President Xi Jinping at the United Nations
Peacekeeping Summit. Since 2015, the Chinese Government has trained more than
1,000 peacekeeping police officers from various countries. We will continue to
contribute to strengthening the capacity-building of police for peacekeeping.
Thirdly, it is imperative to serve the general direction of political settlement
of hotspot issues. When formulating the mandates for police in peacekeeping, the
Security Council should fully listen to the views of the country concerned and the
police contributing countries to work out clear and operable mandates that are in
keeping with the realities. In addition, the Council should act in light of the evolving
situation to adjust in a timely fashion the mandates’ priorities and focus on serving
the central goal of political settlement of hotspot issues. The peacekeeping police of
14/35

20-14819

S/2020/1092

MINUSCA should actively provide, under the Security Council mandate, logistical
and security support for the election process and create an enabling environment
for the peaceful and smooth holding of the general election. China supports the
peacekeeping police of MINUSMA in helping the transitional Government of
Mali advance steadily the transitional process and continue implementing the
peace agreement.
It bears emphasizing that the primary responsibility for civilian protection
should be borne by the Government of the country concerned, and that peacekeeping
police should focus on providing assistance to the country. UNMISS has made
an important contribution to protecting local civilians, but it will be impossible
to maintain its presence permanently in the country. The key lies in helping the
country improve its capabilities for civilian protection. Now that the overall political
situation in South Sudan is improving, the Mission should gradually transfer the
responsibility of protecting civilians to the national Government.
This year marks the twentieth anniversary of China’s initial dispatch of police
to participate in United Nations peacekeeping operations. Over the past 20 years,
China has dispatched altogether more than 2,600 police officers, among whom eight
have sacrificed their precious lives. As we speak, there are still about 30 Chinese
police officers performing peacekeeping tasks in South Sudan and Cyprus. Over the
past 20 years, from Timor-Leste to Bosnia and Herzegovina, from Haiti to South
Sudan, Chinese police have been involved in nine post-conflict countries on four
continents and grown into experience-sharers and plan-contributors. China’s police
are committed to injecting vitality into United Nations peacekeeping operations
and contributing to the development of United Nations peacekeeping police and the
maintenance of international peace and security.

20-1481915/35

S/2020/1092

Annex VIII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Dominican Republic to
the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
We appreciate the information provided today.
The year 2020 has proved challenging. As we commemorate the sixtieth
anniversary and highlight the achievements of United Nations police (UNPOL), we
recognize the need to identify good practices and strengthen those areas that require
critical improvements in order to fulfil the tasks entrusted to us and to effectively
support Member States in new operational environments.
The protection of civilians is a fundamental aspect of UNPOL. We must
remember that this is and must always be its priority, thereby reaffirming the
importance of the rule of law, justice and human security.
We would like to highlight the courageous and tireless work of UNPOL
during the coronavirus disease pandemic. United Nations police have continued their
surveillance functions and immediately adopted guidelines to prevent the spread
of the virus by identifying criminal threats that were likely to increase, such as
domestic and intercommunal violence, the trafficking and smuggling of persons, the
counterfeiting of medicines and medical products, as well as civil unrest in medical
facilities, food outlets and other critical infrastructure.
With respect to Haiti, we appreciate the efforts of the United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti (BINUH) and its police unit to professionalize the Haitian National
Police (HNP), and we note the increase in women recruited. However, we remain
concerned about civil unrest, gang violence and impunity. We understand that the
limited budget of the HNP presents serious difficulties in maintaining its work force,
covering operational costs and acquiring adequate equipment. We are also aware
that in order to control the formation of gangs and gang violence, it is essential that
Haiti continue to expand its police force to comprise at least 25,000 officers, in order
to meet the internationally accepted ratio of 2.2 police per 1,000 inhabitants. In this
regard, we call on the international community to support the mandate of BINUH
to strengthen the operational capacity of the HNP by increasing funds available to
assist it. These efforts must be accompanied by renewed commitments from the
Haitian Government to effectively implementing the HNP strategic development
plan 2017-2021. Only with a collective commitment will Haiti make progress in
developing the capacity of its national police.
When examining its impact in terms of protection, it is clear that the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) plays an important role in that country
by working with communities to reduce tensions and developing activities that
help with the reporting and investigation of crimes, including cases of genderbased violence and human rights violations. For this reason, we congratulate Chief
Inspector Doreen Malambo, UNPOL Gender Adviser at UNMISS, on being awarded
the 2020 United Nations Woman Police Officer of the Year Award, in recognition of
the support she has provided to vulnerable groups.
With regard to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic, we welcome the continuation of the
comprehensive performance assessment system, the development of the results
framework and the use of technological tools to monitor the impact it is having
and improve data collection. We also welcome the fact that the police component

16/35

20-14819

S/2020/1092

will be re-evaluated on a quarterly basis and that plans will be made to improve the
performance of its units, reducing shortfalls and improving operational capacity.
Finally, Mali, which is of key importance to the stability of the entire Sahel
region, continues to face enormous challenges, exacerbated by the recent coup
d’état, persistent violence between communities, terrorism, violent extremism and
asymmetric attacks, in addition to the humanitarian and human rights dimension,
particularly in the centre and north of the country and mainly affecting women
and children. In this respect, UNPOL plays an essential role in filling the gap in
the official Government presence, protecting civilians and strengthening national
capacities to address these scourges.
In conclusion, the Dominican Republic wishes to express its support for
UNPOL, and for all men and women who selflessly put their lives at risk in peace
operations and in post-conflict or other crisis situations.

20-1481917/35

S/2020/1092

Annex IX
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Estonia to the United Nations
I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and the Police
Commissioners of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic and the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti for their
insightful briefings. Today’s meeting has been very helpful in understanding the
progress made in and challenges to United Nations policing, and I would like to take
the rare opportunity afforded by this meeting to recognize the contribution of United
Nations police (UNPOL) to United Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
The deployment of UNPOL carries a positive message of increased security
and return of law and order. As United Nations missions make the transition away
from peacekeeping operations, the contribution of UNPOL becomes most visible.
Its efforts in strengthening the rule of law, building the capacities of people-oriented
national police services and assisting in security sector reform based on human rights
are fundamental in establishing lasting stability in conflict-burdened countries.
We welcome the efforts aimed at enhancing the role of UNPOL in peacekeeping
and continue to support the Action for Peacekeeping (A4P) initiative, together with
the added value United Nations police provide to implementing the Declaration of
Shared Commitments on Peacekeeping Operations. Correspondingly, I would like to
ask Under-Secretary Lacroix about the priorities for United Nations policing under
Phase II of the A4P initiative.
On the subject of performance, Estonia will continue to emphasize the
crucial importance of implementing policies and mechanisms aimed at verifying
and enhancing the performance of peace operations, with particular focus on the
protection of civilians and the promotion of human rights. We also continue to stress
the importance of increasing the effectiveness of policing by better engagement with
communities, in particular with the help of community liaisons and human rights
officers. In this regard, however, one cannot overlook the impact of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19), which has increased both the responsibilities of and risks to
United Nations police. Accordingly, it would be useful to hear from Mr. Lacroix
about the effect COVID-19 has had on the level of vacancies for UNPOL units in
peacekeeping missions.
On a related note, I would like to ask the UNMISS Police Commissioner,
Ms. Unaisi Vuniwaqa, what effect the redesignation of protection-of-civilian sites
has had on United Nations police resources. Has it helped free up some of these
resources? If so, how has she been able to utilize them instead?
Before I finish, I would like to recall the critical function that a more
gender-equal composition of UNPOL components plays in effective policing.
This is particularly true in community policing and in preventing and eliminating
conflict-related sexual and gender-based violence. We will continue to underline
the importance of implementing the women and peace and security agenda and its
priorities, in particular promoting the full, equal and meaningful participation of
women in peace processes and United Nations police.
I would like to conclude by expressing gratitude and strong support to all
United Nations peacekeepers — women and men — whose dedication and sacrifice
bring hope to millions of people and help countries navigate the difficult path from
conflict to peace.

18/35

20-14819

S/2020/1092

Annex X
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of France to
the United Nations, Nathalie Broadhurst Estival
[Original: English and French]
I thank the Under-Secretary-General and the heads of the police components
for their briefings today, which allow us to accurately assess the challenges faced by
United Nations police (UNPOL) and gendarmes in the field. I pay tribute to these
men and women, who are carrying out their missions in demanding conditions with
particularly heavy health-related constraints.
In this difficult context, I would also like to commend the Secretariat —
in particular the Department of Peace Operations and its Police Division — for
their unflagging investment in and optimization of the use of UNPOL. The
mission of the United Nations police is at the heart of partnerships and operational
cooperation between the United Nations and national authorities, making UNPOL
an invaluable asset in peacekeeping and peacebuilding. I would also like to welcome
the Secretariat’s efforts to enable the police components of missions to reconcile
security and performance.
France continues to support the implementation of the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative and currently has 21 gendarmes of all ranks deployed in three missions:
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic and the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. France is and will continue to be a committed,
constructive and reliable partner in enabling United Nations police to fully exercise
their missions.
As the year 2020 marks the sixtieth anniversary of UNPOL, I wish to highlight
two priorities.
First, it is essential that UNPOL support the transition from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding. At the heart of this objective, of course, are the populations served.
Indeed, the establishment or re-establishment of a relationship of trust between the
population, public authorities and institutions is an indispensable condition for the
return to lasting peace. This implies the strengthening of the rule of law, the support
of national internal security forces, the protection of all and respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms. In the context of the coronavirus disease pandemic, this
trust is even more difficult to gain and maintain since every gendarme and police
officer in contact with the population must abide by strict health-related rules in
order not to be perceived as a vector for the spread of the virus.
The second priority I would highlight is that the United Nations police must
pursue their efforts to become more efficient. France is contributing to this by
supporting training actions before and during deployment, as well as increased use
of police experts, support for mastering the language of the host country and genderbalanced contingents. This aspect is also key to strengthening police effectiveness.
France fully supports the objective of increasing the deployment of women in
all positions, including those with responsibilities. The new system for monitoring
the performance of peace operations, set up by the Secretariat, is also very useful for
improving the effectiveness of UNPOL, wherever their units are deployed, to help
scale up local police forces and the protection of populations.
I too would like to end my statement with a few questions.
20-1481919/35

S/2020/1092

I address the first to the Police Commissioner of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
Mr. Yacouba. Several tasks under the MINUSMA mandate are indeed based to a large
extent on its police component, in particular in central Mali, where the priorities are
support for the redeployment of Malian internal security forces and the protection of
civilians. I therefore want to ask Mr. Yacouba if he could tell us about the progress
made in integrating military operations with police operations within the Mission in
order to fulfil these tasks, and what are his recommendations in this area?
I also have a question for the Police Commissioner of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
Mr. Champion. What concrete actions are UNPOL implementing in the Central
African Republic in support of the redeployment of internal security forces
throughout the national territory? With respect to the elections of 27 December,
which will clearly be a critical and capital moment in the consolidation of democracy
in the Central African Republic, how are the United Nations police preparing for this
deadline, in particular within the framework of the integrated security plan that was
adopted in early October?

20/35

20-14819

S/2020/1092

Annex XI
Statement by the State Secretary of the Ministry of the Interior of
Germany, Hans-Georg Engelke
I would like to thank Saint Vincent and the Grenadines for having convened
today’s meeting. I also would like to thank the briefers for their interesting insights
and their work. I want to pay tribute to the police commissioners at today’s meeting
and to all police officers in the line of duty for the United Nations for their dedication,
skills and commitment.
As of today, a total of 8,890 police officers are serving in 12 peacekeeping and
special political missions in different regions of the world. Among them, there are
German police officers in Kosovo, Mali, Somalia and, in future, once again in the
Sudan. Those officers are not the first to serve the United Nations, and it is certain
that they will not be the last.
Germany has been deploying police officers since 1989. Two German
contingents were part of the United Nations Transitional Assistance Group in
Namibia — one formed by officers from the western part of Germany, and the other
by officers from the former East German Democratic Republic. Those officers
witnessed on television and on the radio how thousands of people crossed the inner
German border and danced on the Berlin wall 31 years ago, on 9 November 1989. For
them, the beginning of the reunification took place far away from home, while serving
for the United Nations. There is only one Germany now, and Germany today deploys
police officers from its Federal Police as well as from its State Police Services.
This week, we are commemorating the sixtieth anniversary of the creation
of the United Nations police (UNPOL). The success story of UNPOL started in
1960, when the first police officers were deployed to the United Nations Operation
in the Congo. The importance and the role of the United Nations police have grown
significantly since then. This can be witnessed by looking at the numbers of deployed
officers, namely, from around 1,700 in 1994, to the peak of almost 15,000 officers in
2010, and now, as already mentioned, almost 9,000 officers.
But even more, it can be witnessed by looking at the mandates UNPOL is
implementing in field missions. UNPOL protects civilians, including the groups most
vulnerable in conflict, such as internally displaced persons, women and children;
UNPOL trains police officers of host States, in order for them to be able to deliver
professional policing services to the people; UNPOL advises senior leadership of
host State police services as well as Ministries of Internal Security, in order for
them to build professional police organizations in accordance with internationally
recognized standards; UNPOL advises host States on how to better integrate women
into their organizations and how to tackle crime that mainly affects women as
victims, such as sexual and gender-based violence, with a view to strengthening the
women and peace and security agenda in accordance with resolution 1325 (2000)
and all subsequent resolutions on women, peace and security; and UNPOL provides
policing assistance through its standing capacity to countries where no missions are
deployed in order for them to further professionalize their police.
Sustainable peace can be achieved only when governance is based on the
rule of law and on human rights — and when the rights of all people living in the
country are respected and protected equally. Security and democratic policing are
two of the most important services that a State has to provide. Without security
provided by people-oriented police, other objectives such as education, participation,
development and prosperity are almost impossible to achieve. This is why United
Nations police officers are key to delivering on our joint commitment to sustaining
peace and the Action for Peacekeeping initiative.
20-1481921/35

S/2020/1092

Challenged by the complexity of today’s conflicts and exposed to increasingly
complex mandates, it is essential that United Nations police are resourced, staffed
and trained in accordance with the needs on the ground. This request for resources
goes to multiple partners. First, to the members of the Security Council, whose
responsibility it is to adopt responsive and realistic mandates as well as sufficient
ceilings on police deployments in order to implement those mandates. In our term
on the Council, we have worked very hard to steer mandates in this direction. This
request goes to the members of the Fifth Committee, whose responsibility it is to
provide appropriate resources to missions, including on programmatic funding.
This request goes to police-contributing countries (PCCs), whose responsibility it
is to provide only fully trained and properly vetted police officers, as well as the
necessary equipment. And this request also goes to the Secretariat, including its
field missions, whose responsibility it is to provide the conceptual and strategic
framework for United Nations policing.
Accordingly, the exchange of personnel and knowledge between Member
States and the Secretariat through seconded personnel and constant dialogue
is essential. Policing is subject to permanent changes and new developments.
Strategies, policies and standard operating procedures have to be adapted to those
new realities. In addition, recruitment processes, in particular for professional posts,
are still taking way too long and are not sufficiently transparent for the candidates
and the respective PCCs.
We stand ready to provide our support, with personnel, financial resources
and substantive advice through Member State consultation processes. We support
the reform of the UNPOL training architecture because we believe that more focused
and specialized training is key to better performance by United Nations police. We
stand ready to make trainings by our police-training institutions available to PCCs
and missions utilizing the light coordination mechanism.
On the substantive side, I am asking the Secretariat and the field missions
to include more input on United Nations policing in the reports of the SecretaryGeneral. Unfortunately, very often, there is not much more than just one paragraph
on what UNPOL has been doing during the reporting period. The Security Council
has to be optimally informed about the substantive work of UNPOL in order to make
informed decisions when considering the mandates of field missions.
UNPOL was important for the success of missions in the past; it is important
for success right now; and it will become even more important in the future, including
through an increased role in conflict prevention. We encourage all actors, the PCCs,
the Security Council, the General Assembly, the Secretariat and host States to
support the work of the United Nations police.
In conclusion, allow me to address a question to our briefer on the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
What additional role of support can UNPOL/MINUSMA play in the implementation
of the ambitious transitional charter, especially with regard to security sector reform,
the rule of law and the restoration of State services and authority?
I look forward to a constructive and informative discussion here at the Security
Council. Let us hope that the improvements and the positive developments of recent
years will maintain their momentum and that the United Nations police will be able
to continue to serve the people who need this support the most.

22/35

20-14819

S/2020/1092

Annex XII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Indonesia to the
United Nations, Dian Triansyah Djani
Let me begin by thanking you, Madam President, for convening this annual
briefing on the United Nations police (UNPOL).
I would also like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Alexander Zouev and
the Police Commissioners of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS),
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic (MINUSCA), the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and the United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti for their insightful briefings and for bringing the experience from
the ground.
Indonesia is keen to participate in this debate not only because we have always
put priorities on peacekeeping and peacekeepers, including police peacekeepers, but
also because we would like to hear updates from the ground.
As we mark the sixtieth anniversary of the United Nations police (UNPOL) this
year, I would like to salute all police peacekeepers, men and women, for their service
and dedication in peacekeeping and special political missions around the world.
Let me also take this opportunity to pay tribute to the fallen peacekeepers who
served with honour and made the ultimate sacrifice to advance the cause of peace.
Indonesia takes pride as a longstanding and major contributor of UNPOL.
Since our first participation in the United Nations Transition Assistance Group in
Namibia in 1989, we have deployed more than 2,700 police officers in 17 peacekeeping
and special political missions. Currently, 307 Indonesian police officers serve in
five peacekeeping missions, namely, MINUSCA, MINUSMA, the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and UNMISS.
Allow me now to make general observations on the role of UNPOL, followed
by some questions to the briefers.
My first point is on the increasing role and contribution of UNPOL to
peacekeeping operations. Since its first deployment in the United Nations Operation
in the Congo (Democratic Republic of the Congo) in 1960, the role of UNPOL has
vastly expanded and today includes assisting host countries in maintaining security,
law and order, protecting civilians, combating crime and building the capacity of the
police service.
With the increasing complexity of conflict and challenges faced by peacekeeping
missions, the role of UNPOL will be even more important. That requires better
planning and coordination and a more efficient recruitment and deployment process,
as well as stronger institutional support for UNPOL. The growing tasks and role of
UNPOL must also be supported with adequate and sustainable financial resources.
Furthermore, as peacekeepers are dealing with more dangerous environments,
more efforts should also be made to ensure their safety and security, particularly in
the time of the coronavirus disease. The Secretariat must redouble its efforts to
improve the protection capacity and medical facilities in the missions.
My second point concerns enhancing the performance and the professionalism
of UNPOL. To effectively discharge their mandate, it is vital that police peacekeepers
be well trained and well protected. Indonesia has long been consistent in promoting
training and capacity-building for peacekeepers. Our peacekeepers receive rigorous
20-1481923/35

S/2020/1092

training not only in basic policing skills but also in other skill sets, such as language,
understanding of the local culture and human rights. Such training is crucial not only
to prepare peacekeepers to carry out their tasks professionally, but also to engage
with the local population through effective community-oriented policing.
We in Indonesia also train our police officers with specialized expertise, such
as forensics, investigation, serious and organized crime and sexual and gender-based
violence, as well as public order management. We stand ready to deploy them as part
of specialized police teams in various missions.
My third point is on women’s participation in UNPOL. In line with the recently
adopted resolution 2538 (2020), we need to continue our collective efforts to increase
women’s participation in peacekeeping. We are pleased to note that targets have been
achieved in increasing the number of women personnel, both as individual police
officers and as part of a formed police unit. At the same time, we believe that there is
still plenty of room for improvement in order to ensure better participation of women
in peacekeeping.
To increase women’s participation, Indonesia focuses on investing in training
and capacity-building. For that reason, early next year Indonesia and Norway will
organize training to prepare Indonesian women police for deployment. Indonesia
will also host the annual training conference of the International Association of
Women Police in Yogyakarta in September next year.
Allow me now to put two questions to all the Police Commissioners.
My first question is related to the mandate. Based on the experience of the
Police Commissioners on the ground, what aspect of the mandate related to UNPOL
needs to be strengthened and focused? Are the missions supported with the necessary
and adequate resources to carry out their tasks? What can the Council do to address
this issue?
My second question is about women in peacekeeping. As the Police
Commissioners are aware, resolution 2538 (2020) also calls for the provision of an
enabling, safe and gender-sensitive working environment for women peacekeepers
in missions. Could they share with us the measures that have been taken in their
respective missions to provide an enabling environment for women officers? What
are their recommendations with regard to increasing the participation and the role of
women peacekeepers?
Noting that there are many questions today, I fully support the proposal of the
three African members of the Security Council plus Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
regarding the request for the Secretariat to come up with a report in 2021 on the work
of UNPOL. I would like to add that the report should also reflect the progress on the
implementation of resolution 2538 (2020), on women in peacekeeping operations,
with a particular focus on efforts to increase the numbers and the performance of
women police peacekeepers.
To conclude, let me once again reaffirm our commitment to providing our full
support to police peacekeeping. Rest assured that Indonesia, as the largest troopand police-contributing country in the current membership of the Security Council,
will continue to support the Blue Berets. I would like to personally thank all the
peacekeepers on the ground for their dedicated service to the cause of peace.

24/35

20-14819

S/2020/1092

Annex XIII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Anna Evstigneeva
[Original: Russian]
We thank Assistant Secretary-General Alexander Zouev and the Heads of
the police contingents of the United Nations missions in South Sudan, the Central
African Republic, Mali and Haiti for their assessments. We would also like to thank
all police peacekeepers for their dedicated service and for the discharge of their
assigned tasks in the challenging environment of field missions, which is further
exacerbated by the spread of the coronavirus disease. We commend the work of the
Secretariat in taking preventive measures to combat the pandemic, while ensuring
that peacekeepers can continue to implement their mandates without interruption.
The importance of the police component in United Nations peacekeeping
operations cannot be overestimated. As of today, approximately 9,000 police
peacekeepers are deployed in 16 United Nations peacekeeping and special political
missions, and that figure is steadily increasing.
The recent report of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations of the
General Assembly (A/74/19) also highlights the particular role of police contingents
in United Nations peacekeeping operations. They have an important role to play
in implementing the protection of civilian mandate by patrolling, monitoring and
dealing with violators of public order. They assist in strengthening the national law
enforcement capacity and security sector reform.
Police peacekeepers are increasingly required to deal with organized crime,
drug trafficking, human trafficking and other security threats. Police officers
represent a connecting link among the population, the peacekeeping presence and
host Governments. Their efforts strengthen public trust in State institutions and lay
the foundation for national reconciliation and post-conflict reconstruction.
Blue Berets should continue to act within the framework agreed by Member
States, in line with the Security Council mandate, the Charter of the United Nations
and the basic principles of peacekeeping. At the same time, the main prerequisite
for the effective work of police peacekeepers is establishing constructive relations
with the host country, while respecting its sovereignty and taking its national
circumstances into account.
We agree that police officers can effectively carry out their tasks only when
they have adequate logistical and personnel resources. It is also necessary to improve
planning and management within missions and avoid the duplication of efforts.
We believe that it is counterproductive to assign police officers functions that
are not specific to them, for example, those of a political or human rights nature,
which detract from the mandated tasks and reduce the overall effectiveness of
their activities.
The Russian Federation continues to enhance its contribution to United
Nations police peacekeeping, including under the commitments undertaken at the
United Nations Chiefs of Police summits. Since 1992, more than 600 employees
of Russian internal affairs bodies have become United Nations peacekeepers. The
department has set up a personnel reserve for participants in peacekeeping operations,
which makes it possible to send internal law enforcement officers to United Nations
missions on a regular rotation basis, even in times of a pandemic.

20-1481925/35

S/2020/1092

Today our police officers are deployed in South Sudan, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Colombia and Cyprus, as well as the United Nations Mission
in Kosovo. Currently, the proportion of women is more than 20 per cent.
The United Nations-certified Peacekeeping Training Centre of Russia’s
Ministry of the Interior regularly graduates police peacekeepers, including foreigners,
many of whom are women. Particular attention is paid to language training, taking
into account the specifics of the host country. Since 2000, the Centre has trained
more than 1,750 Russian officers and over 600 foreign police peacekeepers from
more than 50 countries around the world, 150 of whom were women officers from
Russia and a number of African States.
The Russian Interior Ministry’s training centre for peacekeepers has
scheduled the next course for Russian police officers and their counterparts from
African States from 16 November to 25 December, which is expected to culminate in
the international Selection Assistance and Assessment Team qualifying examination
with the participation of United Nations officials.
We are also ready to deploy experts to specialized police teams in United
Nations missions, including jointly with other States. We are committed to actively
recruiting Russian Interior Ministry officers to contract positions in United Nations
field presences and the United Nations Police Division on a competitive basis.

26/35

20-14819

S/2020/1092

Annex XIV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the
United Nations, Tarek Ladeb
I thank you, Madam President, for convening this important annual meeting
on the evolving role of United Nations policing in peace operations, post-conflict
and other crisis situations. I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the
three African States members of the Security Council — namely, the Niger, South
Africa and Tunisia — as well as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (A3+1).
We thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix; Ms. Unaisi
Vuniwaqa, Police Commissioner of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan;
Mr. Pascal Champion, Police Commissioner of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic; Mr. Issoufou
Yacouba, Police Commissioner of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali; and Mr. Serge Therriault, Police Commissioner of
the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti, for their informative presentations
on the evolving role of the United Nations police (UNPOL), especially against the
backdrop of the major challenges faced by peacekeeping operations in the context of
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
As 2020 marks the sixtieth anniversary of the United Nations police, the A3+1
reaffirms its support for UNPOL and values their role in promoting international
peace and security. We commend the contribution of formed police units, individual
police officers and specialized police teams in peacekeeping operations in the
discharge of their respective mandates, as determined by the Security Council.
The police component in peacekeeping is vital. It plays a key role in restoring
stability in conflict areas and contributes significantly to peaceful and long-standing
solutions. While we pay tribute to fallen peacekeepers and praise their sacrifice,
we call on all Member States to collectively commit to enhancing the safety and
security of all peacekeepers — police and military, as well as civilian — in the field,
in particular through the full implementation of resolution 2518 (2020).
UNPOL continues to be deployed in accordance with the principles of
peacekeeping, such as the consent of the parties, impartiality and the non-use of force.
Nevertheless, their contribution to peace and security has undergone a significant
evolution to meet the new challenges. Currently, UNPOL plays a substantial role in
helping national authorities to protect civilians and participates actively in building
the capacity of national law enforcement bodies. UNPOL continues to cooperate
with the host countries to improve their ability to combat transnational organized
crime and international terrorism.
In that context, we stress the importance of providing UNPOL with appropriate
resources to promote the effectiveness and the success of United Nations missions.
It is of paramount importance to provide police officers with adequate and targeted
training and the necessary equipment.
Moreover, we call for strategic, clear, realistic and achievable mandates,
supported by the requisite resources. The A3+1 welcomes the continued efforts of
the United Nations to strengthen its capabilities by developing very specific training
groups and programmes to deal with the new challenges, in accordance with the
Strategic Guidance Framework for International Police Peacekeeping.
In the same vein, we reiterate our support for the Secretary-General’s
Action for Peacekeeping initiative, which remains a road map for better United
Nations policing in peacekeeping missions through the promotion of inclusive
and participatory approaches. Such collaborative approaches, championed by the
20-1481927/35

S/2020/1092

United Nations police, pave the way for the delivery of comprehensive, nationally
led political solutions that facilitate suitable conditions for mission transitions and
successful exit strategies.
The COVID-19 pandemic has a major impact on UNPOL’s actions and
enterprise. We commend the United Nations efforts to successfully mitigate the
effects of the pandemic, drawing on its experience in health crises. Accordingly,
the United Nations immediately paused all troop and police rotations and provided
guidance to ensure the safety of the United Nations police and the local populations.
The United Nations police appropriately suspended training for local partners that
involved physical contact and proximity. We commend our Police Commissioners
and the Police Division in that regard.
At this stage, the A3+1 believes that it is important for the United Nations to
remain vigilant and well prepared to meet the challenges of a likely second wave of
the pandemic.
We acknowledge the increasing importance of the United Nations police
in mission transition and, following the withdrawal of peacekeeping missions,
in the stabilization and recovery efforts of post-conflict countries. However, it is
imperative that the national authorities take the lead in deciding on the assistance
that is required
Women’s contribution to peace and security remains at the heart of the
concerns of the international community. We should continue to mobilize political
will and resources to promote gender parity and the full and equal participation
and leadership of female police officers. In this context, we welcome the
contribution of the United Nations Police to implementing the women and peace and
security agenda.
The A3+1 supports the United Nations Police gender initiative to further
increase the number of women in all peacekeeping missions. In this respect, we
believe that female police officers are a key element in the process of reaching
peace solutions. While women police officers have made significant contributions to
gender equality advocacy, gender-based violence awareness, trust and confidencebuilding among local populations, and have provided an important sense of security
to women and children, they should not be limited in their ability to contribute to
the full range of United Nations policing. Equally, all aspects of United Nations
policing normally associated with women have to be prioritized as critical actions to
be undertaken by all police officers, regardless of gender.
Currently, in peacekeeping operations 15.1 per cent of police are women,
compared to 10.2 per cent in 2015. We urge the full implementation of the recently
adopted resolution 2538 (2020) on women in peacekeeping. In this connection,
the A3+1 reaffirms its support for the zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation
and abuse and emphasizes that all police officers have a role to play in eradicating
this scourge.
The A3+1 recognizes the critical role of United Nations policing in operational
support, the protection of civilians, as well in capacity-building of host State police.
As a lasting impact in sustaining peace, we foresee an increased role of the United
Nations police, including in COVID-19, in the future under the mandate given by the
Security Council.
The A3+1 attaches great importance to the reinforcement of regional
partnerships between the United Nations and relevant international, regional and
subregional organizations, particularly with the African Union. In this regard, we

28/35

20-14819

S/2020/1092

welcome the continued support and collaboration for mutual enrichment, particularly
in these difficult circumstances, to alleviate the impact of COVID-19.
The rehatting of African Union-led peace operations, transitions and eventual
drawdowns require close liaisons to ensure the coherence and harmonization of
peace efforts. In this regard, we are pleased that the Strategic Guidance Framework
for International Police Peacekeeping was developed in consultation with several
organizations, including the African Union.
Finally, the A3+1 requests for the Secretary-General to submit to the Security
Council a report on developments regarding United Nations policing in 2021. We
make this proposal, as the last report on United Nations policing was issued in 2018.
In conclusion, we would like to take advantage of the presence of the Police
Commissioners to ask the following questions. What are their expectations of the
Security Council to help them to fulfil their mandate in better way? What progress is
being made in the further development of the police sector in Haiti, including the use
of technology, given the current situation in the country and the challenges posed
by the COVID-19 pandemic? How is their mission striking a balance in equally
deploying the individual police officers, formed police units and specialized police
teams? We are asking in order to ascertain the importance of each within operations,
noting that the specialized police team approach has been praised as an effective and
efficient tool for providing required policing expertise for the implementation of
United Nations police mandates in field missions.

20-1481929/35

S/2020/1092

Annex XV
Statement by the Acting Deputy Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland of the
United Kingdom to the United Nations, James Roscoe
I thank all of our excellent briefers today for their thoughts and for sharing in
particular their perspectives from the ground.
This is an issue that is of real interest to me. It was actually the first thing that
I ever worked on in our foreign service — international policing and particularly
United Nations policing — and I have seen just how effective United Nations
policing can be from the Balkans to Sierra Leone, so it is very good to have this
discussion today.
I also want to start by offering our thanks, through our Police Commissioners,
to the women and men in United Nations police (UNPOL) components around the
world who work on our behalf to protect and serve vulnerable communities. In
this sixtieth anniversary year of the creation of the United Nations police, we are
reminded again of their enormous dedication, professionalism and courage as they
continue their work against the challenging backdrop of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic.
Now, United Nations policing is a fundamental part of peacekeeping, as we
have heard again and again today. Police play a central role in helping to establish a
protective environment for civilians in restoring security and justice and, critically,
in re-establishing the rule of law in conflict-affected areas. We owe it both to
officers deployed in the field and the people they serve to continue to enhance
the effectiveness of United Nations policing through practical reform. The United
Kingdom was a strong supporter of the 2016 external review of the United Nations
Police Division, and we note that a number of those recommendations from the
review remain outstanding.
But today, I would like to highlight three important areas that we need to
get right in order to ensure that United Nations policing can remain effective. A
sustained focus on these issues will be critical to achieving the vision set out in the
Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping agenda.
The first of these is that policing must be fully integrated into missionplanning processes throughout the life of a mission, from inception to transition.
Police experts need to be at the table and to be supported by relevant intelligence,
reporting and data. Missions must be able to undertake continuous assessment in
order to ensure that policing activity remains appropriate to the needs on the ground.
So we have just got to keep thinking about that.
The second is about the pledges of personnel. These need to be tailored to the
needs of the mission and to contribute to achieving the Secretary-General’s SystemWide Strategy on Gender Parity. Recruitment needs to be fair, timely and meritbased, selecting the right skills, capabilities and expertise that particular missions
need. We welcome the use of tools, such as the Peacekeeping Capability Readiness
System, to help identify capability gaps and to seek pledges to fill them. The full,
equal and meaningful participation of women in United Nations policing is not
only a moral imperative, but a critical operational consideration too. Trust between
UNPOL components and local communities can be more readily established if police
reflect those they are serving.
Our third point is that police performance must be prioritized. When
personnel perform to the high standards we all expect, they are better able to deliver
30/35

20-14819

S/2020/1092

their mandates and ensure their own safety and security. We look forward to the
implementation of the peacekeeping performance and accountability framework in
respect of police, but we also stress the urgent need for the finalization of the policing
strategic guidance framework. This guidance then needs to be operationalized,
leading to the development of the right manuals and training tools to allow police
contributors to understand what standards their personnel need to meet.
Now, I am glad that we are having an interactive meeting because I would
like to turn to a few questions, if I may, and the first is for Assistant SecretaryGeneral Zouev. It is expected that demands on the United Nations Police Division
will continue to grow, spanning both police operations and non-mission settings
in the coming period. It would be very good to hear from him what priorities and
extra resources the Department of Peace Operations is providing for the Division. Is
there enough capacity to undertake the necessary planning for police deployments,
including in relation to transitions? And if I may just come back as well to the
Strategic Guidance Framework for International Police Peacekeeping, it would be
very good to have an update on the status of this framework and to know when we
can expect this to be finalized and published.
Then, if I may, I will pose a couple of questions for our excellent briefers.
The first goes to the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) Police
Commissioner, Ms. Vuniwaqa. I would be very interested to understand what
reflections on the process of capacity-building Commissioner Vuniwaqa has when
it comes to the South Sudan National Police Service (SSNPS). In particular, how is
UNMISS determining when and what kind of policing responsibilities should be
shared with the SSNPS? So how do we get right that balance of transitioning or
passing on of responsibilities?
The second question is to the Police Commissioner of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
Mr. Yacouba. Recent developments with the Malian security forces, and his
coordination with them, have probably changed in the current environment — in
other words, after the coup. I wonder if he could tell us how MINUSMA is managing
any challenges in relation to that? As things stand, does he feel he has the right
resources to plan and conduct supporting activities when it comes to embedding the
rule of law?

20-1481931/35

S/2020/1092

Annex XVI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United States to
the United Nations, Kelly Craft
I thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and the United Nations Police
Commissioners. We appreciate their very important annual briefings.
The United States commends the tremendous progress made throughout the
past 60 years of United Nations policing. Today, United Nations police are deployed
to increasingly more complex, dynamic and multidimensional missions. They play
a critical role in protection, public order management, partnering with host-nation
authorities, and preventing and investigating crime. United Nations police now have
protection of civilians mandates in all of the “big five” missions: the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali, the United Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan
(UNMISS) and the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
These proactive engagements bring new challenges for the United Nations police,
and we are grateful for their efforts.
I would first like to congratulate Chief Inspector Doreen Malambo of Zambia
on receiving the prestigious 2020 United Nations Female Police Officer of the Year
Award yesterday. We praise Doreen for her outstanding work as an officer and her
dedication to her duties as a leader in UNMISS.
The United States strongly supports the Uniformed Gender Parity Strategy,
and we urge police-contributing countries to embrace policies that increase women’s
participation in all levels of policing. We were pleased to see the United Nations police
implement the women and peace and security agenda, already having achieved their
2020 targets for female police personnel at Headquarters, in the field and for both
formed police units and individual police officers. This is important progress, and
we look forward to seeing more women police playing leading roles in rebuilding
communities and in cultivating trust between citizens and the security institutions
that serve them. This is especially true in South Sudan, the Central African Republic
and Mali.
Two years after the unanimous adoption of resolution 2436 (2018), we repeat
our support for the United Nations commitment to implementing an integrated
performance and accountability policy. This policy should be based on clear
standards for all United Nations civilian and uniformed personnel working in and
supporting peacekeeping operations. In this regard, the United States welcomes
the recently launched integrated peacekeeping performance and accountability
framework, which seeks to harmonize the various assessment tools and processes
used for military, police and civilian components of peacekeeping missions.
I thank the Commissioners who provided briefings today for their hard
work on this issue thus far. We must maintain our shared commitment to elevating
peacekeeping performance by ensuring that police have proper training and are held
accountable for meeting United Nations standards.
The United States strongly supports Under-Secretary-General Lacroix’s
initiative to brief the Security Council on peacekeeping performance. We look
forward to hearing candid assessments about performance, including shortfalls,
success stories and how Member States and the Secretariat can better address
performance issues.

32/35

20-14819

S/2020/1092

We do believe there is still some work to be done in reviewing the Policy on
Formed Police Units in United Nations Peacekeeping Operations and in strengthening
the individual police officer assessment and evaluation process. With more and
more complex missions around the world, we need United Nations police to be
professional, successful and accountable. The United States remains committed to
supporting United Nations police and to helping them meet the challenges of today
and tomorrow.
I would like to end my remarks today with three specific questions for
our police commissioners and Under-Secretary-General Lacroix. First, how is
performance data used to decide police-contributing countries’ rotations and
deployments? Secondly, how can we best maintain commitment to the protection
of civilians in peacekeeping transitions? And thirdly, how can we ensure greater
numbers of women in police rotations and deployments?

20-1481933/35

S/2020/1092

Annex XVII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Dang Dinh Quy
Viet Nam welcomes this timely briefing during the fifteenth United Nations
Police Week and thanks Assistant Secretary-General Alexander Zouev and the four
Police Commissioners from the United Nations Mission in the Republic of South
Sudan (UNMISS), the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and the United Nations Integrated Office in
Haiti for their insightful briefings.
Let me start by reaffirming our firm support for United Nations peacekeeping
operations and relevant initiatives aimed at enhancing their effectiveness, including
the Action for Peacekeeping initiative.
On the sixtieth anniversary of the United Nations police, we would like to pay
tribute to the sacrifice and dedication of the women and men in the force, especially
those police officers who have made the ultimate sacrifice. In this unprecedented
time, we especially commend the efforts of United Nations peacekeepers, including
police, in supporting countries in their efforts to achieve peace and combat both
crimes and the coronavirus disease.
Since its inception, the United Nations police has been an important
component of peacekeeping operations and played a more and more significant role
throughout the years. Its mandate has evolved to include, among others, protecting
civilians, supporting training and providing advice to host States. Together with
other peacekeeping activities, the United Nations police therefore contributes to the
maintenance and promotion of sustainable peace, security and development of host
States.
As countries go through stages of peacebuilding, United Nations police work
plays an increasingly important role in support of national efforts to achieve security
and order for national development. To remain relevant and effective, United Nations
peacekeeping, including policing, needs to uphold the basic principles of consent of
the parties, impartiality and the non-use of force except in self-defence and defence
of the mandate.
This year is also the twentieth anniversary of the women and peace and security
agenda. In this regard, we would like to reaffirm our support for the emphasis on
gender-responsive policing and the goal of gender parity in peacekeeping. We note
with much encouragement that United Nations police is leading in achieving targets
set by the Uniformed Gender Parity Strategy. We look forward to seeing more and
more women in formed police units.
Women’s participation offers a unique approach encompassing better
community outreach, greater diversity, more effective trust and confidence-building,
and gender-sensitive protection, which can result in more long-term positive impacts.
Women peacekeepers are also empowering protectors and role models for
women and girls in the host States and communities. The 2020 United Nations
Female Police Officer of the Year Award has been awarded to Chief Inspector Doreen
Malambo, Gender Adviser at UNMISS, in honour of her work supporting vulnerable
groups. There should be more recognition for women peacekeepers’ contributions,
including at the country and mission levels, and much more remains to be done to
employ the full potentials of policewomen.

34/35

20-14819

S/2020/1092

At the same time, we again stress the need for more gender-responsive and
supportive policies for women peacekeepers, including with regard to safety, security
and an enabling environment for their work.
United Nations police work is closely linked to the State and social system being
developed in post-conflict situation. It can draw strengths from the background and
preparation of the police-contributing countries. We are of the view that assistance
should be provided to police-contributing countries, especially developing ones, to
enhance capacity-building, including predeployment training, to ensure effective
performance in missions.
On our part, Viet Nam is actively preparing and training our peacekeeping
personnel, including police officers, in accordance with United Nations requirements.
We hope to be able to soon contribute qualified Vietnamese police officers to join
the United Nations police force from 2021 onwards. In this regard, we thank the
Police Division for its valuable assistance and look forward to cooperating closely
with all partners.

20-1481935/35
