A /67/PV.40

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Offi cial Records

Sixty-seventh session

40th plenary meeting
Monday, 19 November 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jeremić . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Serbia)

The meeting was called to order at 10.30 a.m.
Agenda item 121
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
Report of the Secretary-General (A/67/280)
(a) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union
(b) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Asian-African Legal Consultative
Organization
(c) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(d) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Black Sea Economic Cooperation
Organization
Draft resolution (A/67/L.12)
(e) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Caribbean Community
(f) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Collective Security Treaty Organization
Draft resolution (A/67/L.5)
(g) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries

(h) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Council of Europe
Draft resolution (A/67/L.14)
(i) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Economic Community of Central
African States
(j) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Economic Cooperation Organization
Draft resolution (A/67/L.13)
(k) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Eurasian Economic Community
Draft resolution (A/67/L.9/Rev.1)
(l) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the International Organization of
la Francophonie
(m) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Latin American Economic System
Draft resolution (A/67/L.11)
(n) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the League of Arab States
Draft resolution (A/67/L.10)
(o) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons
Draft resolution (A/67/L.7)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

12-59543 (E)

*1259543*

A/67/PV.40

(p) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe
(q) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization of American States
(r) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(s) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Pacific Islands Forum
(t) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Preparatory Commission for the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
Organization
Draft resolution (A/67/L.8)
(u) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
Draft resolution (A/67/L.15)
(v) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Southern African Development Community
(w) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Central European Initiative
Draft resolution (A/67/L.6)
The President: Before we proceed, I would like to
consult members with regard to our consideration of
sub-item (h) of agenda item 121, entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Council of Europe”.
Members will recall that, pursuant to paragraph 7 of the
annex contained in resolution 55/285, of 7 September
2001, “A joint debate shall be held on the cooperation
item, during which all or some aspects of cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and other
organizations may be addressed”.
I have been informed that a request has been made
that sub-item (h) be taken up separately at a later date
to be announced. May I take it that the Assembly agrees
to take up that sub-item accordingly?
It was so decided.
The President: Before we proceed, I would like to
consult members with regard to our consideration of
sub-item (j) of agenda item 121, entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Economic
Cooperation Organization”. Members will recall that,
pursuant to paragraph 7 of the annex contained in

2

resolution 55/285, of 7 September 2001, “A joint debate
shall be held on the cooperation item, during which
all or some aspects of cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and other organizations may be
addressed”.
I have also been informed that a request has been
made that sub-item (j) be taken up separately at a later
date to be announced. May I take it that the Assembly
agrees to take up that sub-item accordingly?
It was so decided.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Tibor
Tóth, the Executive Secretary of the Preparatory
Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-TestBan Treaty Organization, to present the report of the
Preparatory Commission.
Mr. Tóth (Preparatory Commission for the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization):
This year marks the fifteenth year since the
establishment of the Preparatory Commission for the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization.
As the Executive Secretary of the Commission, I am
here today not to read out my prepared statement, which
has been circulated, but rather to talk more freely about
the past and what is ahead of us. I hope that members
will not only listen but also hear what I will be saying.
In that respect, I am not just reporting on the period
behind us but, from the bottom of my heart, I would like
to thank the 183 States members of our organization,
which is nearly as many as the membership of the
United Nations. I would also like to thank the bodies
and organizations of the United Nations, as well as the
Secretary-General, for their historic support in the past
and, hopefully, unwavering support in the future.
The Member States have not been just good-weather
companions of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty. They have shown themselves to be marathon
runners in the course towards its implementation. From
the early years, when President Nehru of India first
spoke in 1954 of the goal of a comprehensive nucleartest-ban agreement, they have believed in silencing
nuclear explosions and continue to do so. They believed
in the cause in 1958 when there was a three-year
moratorium that provided a window of opportunity.
Unfortunately, that was shattered in 1961 and 1962 by
a frenzy of nuclear tests. There were more explosions
in those 17 months than in the previous 17 years. It is
not surprising that that frenzy of nuclear tests led to the

12-59543

A/67/PV.40

Cuban missile crisis, which is a euphemism because it
was, in fact, a new marathon of global security.

to obligations to be verified and equal in the right to
verify those obligations.

Member States upheld their belief in the cause of
the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty in 1962,
when, on 28 October, the last day of the Cuban missile
crisis, it was acknowledged that such a treaty was
possible. It had not been possible for eight years but
that day it became possible and imperative. Although
we had hoped for more, Member States supported its
start as a partial test-ban treaty.

Member States also turned another aspect of the
grand design of the system into a reality. They set up
a monitoring system of approximately 300 stations,
creating what I call a round-the-globe system owing to
its size, range and seamlessly operating technologies.
They have invested $1 billion and 10,000 scientists to
operate the system and make it happen. It has become
the largest and, for me and many of us, the greatest
joint venture in verification and, I would add, even
beyond verification. It is a one-for-all and all-for-one
verification. Even the smallest nation, one with no
army, can participate in the debate, as was the case
in 2009 with Costa Rica, sitting as a non-permanent
member on the Security Council and contributing to the
discussion of North Korea’s breach of the no-test norm.

Member States believed in the spirit of the Treaty in
1968, when its essence was enshrined in the preamble
of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons. From 1978 onward, they maintained that
belief for the nearly 20 years that the Treaty was being
negotiated, before it became open for signature.
Member States continued to run the course
following the adoption of the Treaty in 1966. They
persevered and prevailed in 1998, when two series
of nuclear tests were carried out, and again in 1999,
when a major Power failed to ratify the Treaty. They
continued to believe in the Treaty in the first half
of 2000, when the organization faced financial and
political challenges and, in 2006 and 2009, when the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea carried out
unnecessary testing of both the norm and the system.
Member States expressed their unshakeable faith, while
proving not blind to the challenges. On the contrary,
notwithstanding the challenges, they continued to
believe in the cause.
What all that perseverance achieved is now
unfolding in front of us. From 1945 onward, each
decade witnessed an average of 500 explosions. The
past 10 years saw only two tests, which, for all of
us, is two too many. However, Member States jointly
succeeded in putting the genie of nuclear explosions
back into the bottle. That genie used to have 2,000 ugly
heads. It must not be let out and can be sealed in by the
ratification of the eight annex 2 countries, which will
bring the Treaty into force.
I would also like to mention that Member States
have turned the grand design into reality. First,
they established the no-test norm. They created a
near-universal membership around that norm, a
membership that is more than the mathematical sum
of all of the countries belonging to the arrangement.
It is a democracy of all, with all equal with regard

12-59543

The system that members established has also
proved itself at tragic moments, such as the dark days
of tsunamis and earthquakes, and in many complex
disasters, providing a return on investment to citizens.
But the international community has created that norm
and that system to be used — to be used to delineate
a clear line between what is peaceful and what is not
peaceful, to be used as a benchmark of behaviour in
non-proliferation and disarmament, to be used as a
catalyst to generate deeper cuts in nuclear arsenals, to
be used as a glue for the non-proliferation regime and
for confidence- and transparency-building measures,
subregionally, regionally or globally, and for the somuch-needed insurance policies in subregions of the
Asia-Pacific or the Middle East. We know that that tool
is missing from the security toolbox. We need more
than a hammer in the toolbox.
The lessons of the Cuban crisis should not be
forgotten today, 50 years later. It will be too late if
we discover one minute — or more precisely, one
second — before midnight on the doomsday clock
that cooperative security is fatally missing from our
toolbox. Today, for nations or subregions, no seconds
would be available to rectify that deficit.
The international community has created innovative
ways to overcome the gravity preventing us from moving
towards entry into force. We know that there are too
many tasks and too few hands. To overcome that, we
have created an open source of growing universalization
and verification, supported by mass collaboration in
science and technology through scientific conferences

3

A/67/PV.40

and joint research and underpinned with unprecedented
mass education — mass, open, online-course
education — whereby this year the organization enrolled
four times more people than the size of the organization
itself. To translate that into United Nations numbers,
that would mean educating half a million people a year.
I am sure that, 15 years after the creation of the
Commission, the international community will pledge
to overcome the last obstacles impeding entry into
force. The one and only force that can remove those
obstacles is statesmanship. Allow me to cite President
Kennedy’s words from his 1962 space effort speech:
“We choose to go to the moon in this decade, and do
the other things, not because they are easy, but because
they are hard.” Those words are as relevant to today as
they were 50 years ago, now at a time when we once
again must overcome through statesmanship what is
holding us back.
The President: I now give the floor to the DirectorGeneral of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons, His Excellency Mr. Ahmet
Üzümcü, to present the report of the Organization.
Mr. Üzümcü (Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons): Please accept, Sir, my
congratulations on your election as President of the
General Assembly at its sixty-seventh session.
The annual report of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) on its
activities and programmes and on the implementation
of the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) in 2010
and the draft report for 2011 have been circulated (see
A/67/209). I will summarize the salient aspects of our
work, which over the years has made the OPCW one of
the most successful examples of multilateralism. I will
also call attention to the need to sustain our collective
efforts to ensure that the organization will adapt so as
to deal effectively with future challenges.
Fifteen years ago a new chapter was opened in the
history of disarmament. The first-ever treaty to establish
a complete ban on an entire category of weapons of
mass destruction under international verification had
come into effect. As a legal document, the Chemical
Weapons Convention was in itself a remarkable
achievement. The complex machinery and mechanics
of verification included in the Convention were then
transformed into an operational regime. With the hard
work of scores of men and women, supported by the
political will consistently shown by States parties, we

4

stand today poised to realize the vision of a world that
is free from the threat of chemical weapons.
This year we commemorated the fifteenth
anniversary of the entry into force of the Convention.
Among the various events organized during the year,
we celebrated that landmark here in New York last
month, at the OPCW high-level meeting. A large
number of States parties participated, in testimony
to their steadfast commitment to the goals of the
Convention. The meeting also underscored the value
that the international community attaches to the
Chemical Weapons Convention as one of the most
successful multilateral instruments in disarmament and
non-proliferation.
I would especially like to express my appreciation
to the Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, for his support of the event. His participation
symbolized the continued support of the United Nations
for the Convention, and it added strength to our mission
to rid the world permanently of the threat of chemical
weapons.
The theme of the OPCW high-level meeting was
“Fifteen years of the Chemical Weapons Convention:
celebrating success, committing to the future”. It
is not often that a project in disarmament elicits
acknowledgments of unqualified success. The members
of the international community represented here at
the top world body deserve full appreciation for their
unfailing support for the implementation of the CWC.
Another strong symbol of that support is the annual
consensus resolution adopted by the General Assembly.
As a result of our collective endeavours, the
aspiration to a world free of chemical weapons is today
closer to realization. In total, nearly 70,000 metric tons
of category 1 chemical weapons have been declared by
the possessor States. Of that amount, as of 31 October,
nearly 55,000 metric tons, or 78 per cent, had been
destroyed under strict verification by the Technical
Secretariat of the OPCW.
Given the large quantity of toxic agents, the high
costs and the human and environmental considerations
involved, in certain cases the destruction of chemical
weapons stockpiles has proved to be very challenging.
The two major possessor States — the Russian
Federation and the United States — continue to
make progress towards completing the destruction of
their respective stockpiles. Libya, which stopped the
destruction of its chemical weapon stocks in 2011, is

12-59543

A/67/PV.40

likely to resume it in 2013. Those States, however, were
not able to meet the final deadline for the destruction of
their chemical weapons.
During the sixteenth session of the Conference of
States Parties, held last year, States parties agreed on
a constructive and forward-looking solution to enable
them to continue their destruction activities under
conditions of increased transparency and enhanced
reporting. In taking that decision, the Conference took
into account the steadfast commitment those States
parties had shown towards the complete destruction of
their declared stockpiles. I have no doubt that they will
also fully respect the spirit of that decision and will
steadily move to complete the task in the shortest time
possible.
The destruction of chemical weapons abandoned
by Japan on the territory of China continued
throughout the year. Both China and Japan reported
that the mobile destruction facility in Nanjing had
completed the destruction of over 35,000 items. China
and Japan continue to work together to facilitate the
redeployment of the mobile destruction facility from
Nanjing to Wuhan and are preparing for test operations
in Shijiazhuang. Preparations are also ongoing for
the start of the excavation and recovery operations in
Haerbaling.
Our verification efforts related to the prevention of
the re-emergence of chemical weapons are continuing
uninterrupted. We have completed more than 2,300
industry inspections, and we aim to gradually increase
the focus, the intensity and the quality of our efforts in
that area.
Over 98 per cent of the world’s chemical industry
is located on the territory of States parties to the
Convention. We recognize and applaud the support
of the world’s chemical industry for the objectives of
the Convention. Such support boosts the Convention’s
confidence-building function.
The negotiators of the Chemical Weapons
Convention provided States parties with a four-pillared
foundation. Beyond the two pillars of disarmament and
non-proliferation, States parties joining the Convention
agree to provide one another with assistance and
protection against chemical weapons and are committed
to promoting the peaceful uses of chemistry under the
umbrella of international cooperation activities.

12-59543

Between the Convention’s entry into force and
the end of 2011, there were 3,800 beneficiaries of
the OPCW’s international cooperation programmes.
In the area of assistance and protection against
chemical weapons, the OPCW Technical Secretariat
organizes courses and workshops to provide training
to Government experts and emergency response units.
The purpose of such programmes is to build and
develop national and regional capacities and emergency
response systems against the use, or threat of use, of
chemical weapons. More than 2,200 participants have
so far benefited from those programmes.
While those are achievements for which our States
parties can rightly take credit, we must also remain
cognizant of the challenges that lie ahead. They are
organizational as well as strategic. Thus far, a major
part of our resources has been dedicated to verifying
the destruction of chemical weapons. The significant
progress already registered in that area implies a
progressive phasing out of that activity. That will impact
our human resource requirements and force internal
changes in the Secretariat. The task ahead of us is to
ensure that we are operationally effective and that our
ability to respond to contingencies is unaffected. Such
contingencies include the responsibility to conduct
challenge inspections at short notice and investigations
of alleged use of chemical weapons when required.
An overarching objective for all States parties is
to ensure that the Convention will remain relevant and
effective in accomplishing all its goals, and responsive
to future challenges. The Convention was negotiated
nearly two decades ago. Since then, science and
technology have seen major advances. It is therefore
crucial that we take stock of the current state of the
science and production technologies that are covered
by the Convention and adapt our industry verification
regime accordingly. The Scientific Advisory Board of
the OPCW is mandated to assess relevant scientific and
technological developments and advise the DirectorGeneral on those subjects. I am confident that it will
play its part in creating the necessary bridge between
science and policy.
Our industry verification regime, together with
data-monitoring of trade in relevant chemicals, is
the backbone of the Convention’s non-proliferation
objectives. Reinforcing the regime is necessary to
maintain confidence in the Convention’s effectiveness
against the re-emergence of chemical weapons.
Continually refining our industry verification efforts

5

A/67/PV.40

and making them more intense, with a focus on
facilities most relevant to the object and purpose of
the Convention, remain a crucial undertaking for
the CWC community. Another important aspect that
requires us to remain focused on industry verification
is the rapid evolution of the global chemical industry.
Developments that must be carefully followed are
increasing overlaps and possible convergence between
the chemical and biological sciences, the integration
of chemical engineering into the life sciences, and the
fusion between them and information technology. New
technologies, such as nanotechnology and the creation
of new chemical manufacturing methodologies, must
be kept under study and review, for therein lies the
potential for abuse.
Together with industry verification, the monitoring
of imports and exports of relevant chemicals forms an
essential plank of the Convention’s non-proliferation
regime. The CWC requires States parties to control and
report annually to the OPCW on all exports and imports
of scheduled chemicals above certain thresholds.
In certain cases, trade is restricted to States that are
not parties to the Convention. With the information
received from States parties, the OPCW implements
a monitoring regime for the exports and imports of
scheduled chemicals around the world. Such monitoring
is an important aspect of the implementation of the
Convention and will remain crucial in coming years.
States parties are expected to reinforce their domestic
rules and procedures as part of an enhanced CWC
enforcement effort.
However, industry verification and trade controls
are not the only means of promoting non-proliferation.
Deterrence against the possible acquisition, development
and misuse of toxic chemicals and their precursors
needs to be firmly and efficiently established within
the domestic jurisdiction of Member States. They have
to ensure that the prohibitions under the Convention
are translated into domestic rules applicable to any
individual or other entities operating within their
jurisdiction or control.
We still have a considerable way to go before we
reach the stage where all States parties will establish the
necessary tools for effective domestic implementation
of the Convention’s prohibitions and provisions. What
is noteworthy, however, is that the institutional support
provided by the OPCW through a variety of support
programmes is having a positive impact on its States
parties. The role of the European Union and other donors

6

in supporting various programmes designed to improve
the implementation of the Convention worldwide has
been crucial in that endeavour.
Another issue that is vital to the CWC’s ultimate
success is universality. With 188 members, the
Convention has come close to but not has yet attained
full universality. A few days ago the SecretaryGeneral and I jointly addressed letters to the heads
of State or Government of the eight countries that are
not yet parties to the Convention. We have stressed
how imperative it is that they join the Convention as
part of the internationally endorsed goal of creating
a chemical-weapon-free world. That shared goal has
motivated every other nation to accept the obligations
enshrined in the Convention. Whether they are States
possessing chemical weapons or those with nothing
to declare, all have expended energy and precious
resources in demonstrating their commitment to
this vision. It is naturally disconcerting to them that
there remain a few who choose not to participate in
this project, which is of great significance in terms of
both security and the noble humanitarian impulse it is
designed to serve.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
It therefore seems natural that concerns should be
raised regarding the possible continued existence of
chemical weapons in certain parts of the world after
the declared possessors have completely destroyed their
known stockpiles. A recent declaration by a country in
the Middle East concerning possession of chemical
weapons flew in face of the universally accepted
international norm that regards any use or threat of use
of chemical weapons as unacceptable.
In the Middle East, three countries are not members
of the Convention. In accordance with an important
decision adopted by the 2010 Review Conference of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, a
conference on establishing a zone free from weapons
of mass destruction in the Middle East was scheduled
for this year. The OPCW has been asked to contribute
to that process. As a first step, we have provided our
written input to the facilitator of that effort. We remain
prepared to contribute further as required. It is my hope
that that endeavour will serve to focus attention on the
issue of the Convention’s universality in that delicate
region. We will also continue our efforts with other
remaining non-members, a task in which we can be

12-59543

A/67/PV.40

considerably helped by those States parties that enjoy
friendly and cooperative relations in the regions to
which the remaining countries belong.
It is expected that in five years 99 per cent of all
declared chemical weapon stockpiles will have been
destroyed. That fact, together with the challenges
I have just enumerated, will require a refocusing
of our resources and efforts in order to ensure that
the Convention will remain a bulwark against the
re-emergence of chemical weapons. At the same
time, we have to be responsive to the expectations of
States parties, which are cognizant of the new security
environment and the challenges it creates. The threat
posed by non-State actors is a major concern. The OPCW
enjoys a number of advantages in its ability to offer
assistance to States parties dealing with such threats.
The discipline of a comprehensive and well-functioning
regime against chemical weapons is accompanied by
knowledge and expertise that is either available with us
or is accessible. Our work with States parties and their
national authorities creates channels of communication
and networks that can facilitate national efforts in the
larger context of anti-terrorism efforts or the specific
one of chemical safety and security issues — an area in
which the number of our programmes is progressively
increasing.
Security in the face of the wider notion of a chemical
threat is also an area where OPCW’s cooperation with
the United Nations manifests itself in concrete terms,
including our support for United Nations efforts to
implement Security Council resolution 1540 (2004) and
for the work of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force, to name just two important areas. The
OPCW also recently concluded with the United Nations
a Supplementary Arrangement to its Relationship
Agreement. The Arrangement establishes the necessary
modalities for conducting an investigation of alleged
use of chemical weapons in a State not party to the
Convention, if requested by the Secretary-General.
The third Review Conference of the Chemical
Weapons Convention, which will be held in April of
next year, will provide the OPCW with an important
opportunity to continue to refine its priorities, goals
and objectives and to chart a course for the mid- to
long-term future. Given the transition that awaits
the organization, the Review Conference obviously
assumes critical importance.

12-59543

I am confident that the General Assembly, where
most OPCW States parties are represented, will
continue to extend its full support to our continuing
efforts to ensure that the Convention will forever
remain a solid barrier against the re-emergence or use
of chemical weapons anywhere in the world.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Kazakhstan to introduce draft
resolution A/67/L.5.
Mrs. Aitimova (Kazakhstan) (spoke in Russian):
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the States
members of the Collective Security Treaty Organization
(CSTO), namely, the Republic of Armenia, the Republic
of Belarus, the Republic of Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz
Republic, the Russian Federation and the Republic of
Tajikistan.
The CSTO member States support the adoption
of draft resolution A/67/L.5, entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Collective Security
Treaty Organization”. Its adoption will contribute to
further strengthening and developing cooperation
between our two organizations for the benefit of peace
and stability.
We believe that the United Nations is the basic
multilateral structure for promoting international
relations and equitable international cooperation. It
has the universal legitimacy and necessary powers to
adequately respond to the diversity of contemporary
challenges and threats. An integral feature of the
current evolving stage of international relations is
the growing influence of regional organizations. We
are convinced that in the modern world the effective
work of regional structures is an important component
in creating a new global architecture. Affiliated
associations and organizations, including the CSTO,
make a significant contribution to those processes
within the Commonwealth of Independent States.
The Collective Security Treaty Organization plays
a fundamental role in ensuring peace and stability in the
areas of its responsibilities. Having been established as
a political and legal foundation for mutual assistance
to address external aggression, the CSTO for the
past 20 years has qualitatively changed and become a
critical factor in the formation of the collective security
system in Europe and Asia. Today, the CSTO is a
multifunctional structure with the potential to respond
adequately to a wide range of threats and challenges in
the modern world.

7

A/67/PV.40

The CSTO makes a significant contribution to
combating terrorism, illicit drug trafficking, organized
crime and irregular migration, including with a view
to consolidating security and stability in Central
Asia. Those activities, undertaken within the CSTO
framework by member States, are in accordance with
the purposes and principles of the United Nations.
We note with satisfaction the progressive
development of cooperation between the United Nations
and the Collective Security Treaty Organization. In
December 2004, the CSTO was granted observer
status in the General Assembly. The importance
of cooperation between the United Nations and the
CSTO was underscored in resolution 64/256, adopted
in March 2010, on cooperation between the United
Nations and the CSTO, and was again expressed in the
signing of the joint declaration on cooperation between
our organizations.
In 2011 there was a systematic series of meetings
between the Secretary-General of the United Nations
and the Secretary-General of the CSTO. The close joint
efforts of the CSTO with the United Nations Regional
Centre for Preventive Diplomacy, the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime point to further
mutual support and progress. The CSTO has also been
involved in implementing the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
The signing of the memorandum of understanding
between the CSTO secretariat and the United Nations
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, in September
2010, is another major contribution to increasing
solidarity between the United Nations and the Collective
Security Treaty Organization. That document provides
an opportunity for practical cooperation in promoting
peace.
We are grateful to all the Member States
that participated in drafting and supporting draft
resolution A/67/L.5. Adopting it by consensus will
provide an important impetus to further enhancing
the comprehensive cooperation between the two
Organizations.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine to introduce draft resolution
A/67/L.6.
Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): On behalf of my
colleagues, the representatives of the 18 member States

8

of the Central European Initiative (CEI), and on behalf
of sponsors of the draft resolution — Albania, the
Czech Republic, Italy, the Republic of Moldova and
Montenegro — I have the honour to introduce draft
resolution A/67/L.6, entitled “Cooperation between the
United Nations and the Central European Initiative”.
I would like to thank representatives for their
input and to welcome the personal contribution of the
Secretary-General of the Central European Initiative,
Ambassador Gerhard Pfanzelter, as well as the Central
European Initiative secretariat for their valuable
assistance in the drafting of this document.
The year 2012 coincides with the Ukrainian
presidency of the Central European Initiative. We
consider the draft resolution to be a further step
after our organization was granted observer status by
resolution 66/111, of 9 December 2011.
Ukraine and the CEI member States attach high
importance to promoting regional cooperation within
the framework of the CEI and in all the fields of its
operations, and we underline its importance for
cooperation with the greater Baltic, Danube, Adriatic
and Black Sea regions. The rationale behind the
provisions of the draft resolution is that CEI endeavours
to cooperate with all major international organizations
and institutions. At present, we have working ties with
more than 15 international and regional organizations.
The Initiative cooperates with the United Nations,
its special entities and other relevant international
organizations. The Initiative acknowledges its
commitment in contributing to a wide spectrum of
United Nations specialized programmes and initiatives,
as well as the attainment of the Millennium Development
Goals at the regional and global levels. The Initiative
intends to maintain its current momentum and to
intensify further its communication and collaborative
action with the United Nations on issues of common
interest.
On behalf of the CEI member States, I would like
to convey to the General Assembly our joint plea to
support by consensus at its sixty-seventh session the
draft resolution on cooperation between the United
Nations and the Central European Initiative.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands to introduce draft
resolution A/67/L.7.

12-59543

A/67/PV.40

Mr. Dorhout (Netherlands): I have the honour to
take the floor to introduce draft resolution A/67/L.7,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons”. The Netherlands, which is host country
to the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW), does so on behalf of approximately
32 sponsors. The aim of this biennial draft resolution is
to highlight the importance of continued cooperation
between the United Nations and the OPCW.
The OPCW contributes to international peace
and security by verifying the destruction of chemical
weapons stockpiles, works to prevent the re-emergence
of chemical weapons through industry inspections, and
promotes the peaceful use of chemistry for activities
not prohibited by the Chemical Weapons Convention,
through, inter alia, international cooperation and
assistance.
At present, 188 States are party to the Chemical
Weapons Convention, and thus are members of the
OPCW. There is good hope that further steps towards
universalization will be taken in the near future. This
year, the OPCW celebrated its fifteenth anniversary,
with both a commemoration in The Hague and a highlevel meeting here at the United Nations on 1 October.
In April next year, the third Review Conference of the
Chemical Weapons Convention will be convened in
The Hague. The draft resolution makes reference to
those events, in addition to taking note of the annual
report of the Organization.
I express the hope that, as on previous occasions,
the draft resolution will be adopted by consensus.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Costa Rica to introduce draft
resolution A/67/L.8.
Mr. Ulibarri (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): It
is an honour for Costa Rica, as current Chair of the
Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization (CTBTO),
to introduce draft resolution A/67/L.8, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization“. The aim of the
draft resolution is to ensure that this important item
remains on the agenda of the General Assembly, given
the leading role that the Comprehensive Nuclear-TestBan Treaty (CTBT) verification regime has played in
nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation.

12-59543

The CTBT has promoted a significant increase in
international peace and security by prohibiting nuclear
testing and the development of nuclear weapons. In
the 15 years since the CTBT was opened for signature
and ratification, 183 States have signed and 157 have
ratified it. That degree of support can be considered a
true success in comparison to the majority of treaties.
However, the CTBT has still not entered into force, as
eight annex 2 States have not yet ratified it. We hope
that, in the near future, the international community
will be able to attain the much-desired goal of its
entry into force and that the Treaty’s legally binding
provisions will become reality. We have a duty to make
all necessary efforts to achieve that end. In that context,
cooperation between the United Nations and the
Preparatory Commission for the CTBTO is essential.
Disarmament and non-proliferation are essential
priorities of Costa Rica’s foreign policy. We therefore
welcome the development of the near-operational CTBT
verification regime. We would like to acknowledge the
intensive work and the achievements attained by the
Provisional Technical Secretariat of the Preparatory
Commission and the leadership of Tibor Tóth, Executive
Secretary for the past seven and a half years. Mr. Tóth
will be stepping down in July next year, but we are
certain that both his legacy and the memory of his
tireless efforts will be upheld. We wish every success
to his successor, Mr. Lassina Zerbo of Burkina Faso.
Costa Rica thanks delegations for their support in
co-sponsoring the draft resolution. We hope it will be
adopted by consensus as a clear sign of the commitment
of the Member States to the CTBT and its objectives.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Russian Federation to introduce
draft resolution A/67/L.9/Rev.1.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the States members of the Eurasian Economic
Community — the Republic of Belarus, the Republic
of Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz Republic, the Republic of
Tajikistan and the Russian Federation — to introduce
draft resolution A/67/L.9/Rev.1, entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Eurasian Economic
Community”. The draft resolution is based on the
relevant resolutions of the sixty-third and sixty-fifth
sessions of the General Assembly and reflects the
progress made in developing integrative processes
within the Eurasian space.

9

A/67/PV.40

Since 1 July 2011, there has been a fully operational
customs union for Russia, Belarus and Kazakhstan, and
on 1 January 2012, 17 agreements entered into force
establishing the single economic space. Its main task
is to ensure the free movement of services, capital and
the work force.
On 1 February 2012, the Eurasian Economic
Commission began its work as the single permanent
regulatory body of the customs union and of the single
economic space. The significant step was the adoption
by Russia, Belarus and Kazakhstan, on 18 November
2011, of the Declaration on Eurasian Economic
Integration, a kind of road map for further integration
and cooperation in the form of a customs union and a
single economic space. That lays down the long-term
goals for Eurasian economic integration, including
the declaration on establishing the Eurasian Economic
Union by 1 January 2015.
Having gained status as an observer in the General
Assembly in 2003, the Eurasian Economic Community
cooperates closely with the United Nations system
on most of its mandates and areas of activity. In that
regard, the draft resolution notes the progress made by
the Eurasian Economic Community in cooperating with
the Eurasian Economic Commission, the Economic
and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, the
United Nations Development Programme, the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization, the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, the International Atomic Energy Agency
and the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development.
The States members of the Eurasian Economic
Community attach great importance to regional
economic integration based on the rules and principles
of the World Trade Organization, and support further
efforts to strengthen mutually beneficial and supportive
cooperation with the United Nations in order to address
key issues being dealt with by our community.
We would like to thank all delegations that
participated in the work on the draft resolution, and we
invite Member States to co-sponsor it. We look forward
to the adoption of the draft resolution by consensus.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Sudan to introduce draft resolution
A/67/L.10.
Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): As Chair of
the Group of Arab States for the month of November,
10

it is my honour to introduce draft resolution A/67/L.10,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations
and the League of Arab States”, on behalf of the
following countries: Algeria, Bahrain, the Comoros,
Djibouti, Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya,
Mauritania, Morocco, Oman, Palestine, Qatar, the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, Somalia, the Sudan, Tunisia,
the United Arab Emirates and Yemen.
The draft resolution before the General Assembly
emphasizes the importance of strengthening
cooperation between the United Nations system and
its specialized agencies, on the one hand, and the
League of Arab States, on the other, aimed at realizing
the shared goals and objectives of both organizations.
Similarly, the draft resolution states that the General
Assembly welcomes the Security Council’s convening
of a high-level meeting on 26 September (see S/PV.6841)
that emphasized the value of activities consistent
with Chapter VIII of the Charter; it also welcomes
the presidential statement (S/PRST/2012/20) that
the Council issued on that occasion in support of the
intention of the United Nations and the League of Arab
States to strengthen their cooperation across a broad
agenda of multilateral concerns.
The draft resolution also contains a request by
the Assembly that the United Nations and the League
of Arab States review their existing cooperation
mechanisms and put forward recommendations and
proposals for the purpose of strengthening and updating
those mechanisms. I call on the General Assembly to
adopt draft resolution A/67/L.10 without a vote and
unanimously.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belize to introduce draft resolution
A/67/L.11.
Mrs. Coye-Felson (Belize): Speaking for Belize in
its capacity as Chair of the Latin American Council of
the Latin American and Caribbean Economic System
(SELA), I have the honour to introduce draft resolution
A/67/L.11, entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Latin American and Caribbean
Economic System”.
I wish, first of all, to make an oral correction to the
draft resolution. The reference in the second preambular
paragraph to “the Latin American Economic System”
should read “the Latin American and Caribbean
Economic System”. Since the submission of the draft
resolution, the Bahamas, Barbados, Bolivia, Brazil,

12-59543

A/67/PV.40

Colombia, the Dominican Republic, Georgia,
Guatemala, Jamaica and Nicaragua have joined its list
of sponsors.

and appreciates the support of the General Assembly
for the further intensification and strengthening of its
relationship with the United Nations.

The Latin American and Caribbean Economic
System enjoys a membership of 28 Latin American
and Caribbean countries, and provides a forum for
those countries to consult and coordinate with a view
to aligning their positions and strategies on economic
issues in international bodies or with third countries, as
well as to consult on cooperation and integration among
the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean.

In conclusion, my delegation thanks all Member
States for supporting this draft resolution so as to
enable its adoption without a vote.

SELA has counted on cooperation with the United
Nations as a means to deliver on its regional agenda. In
that regard, SELA has benefited, since its inception in
1975, from collaboration with multiple United Nations
entities, including the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO),
the Economic Commission for Latin America and the
Caribbean, UNESCO and, recently, the International
Strategy for Disaster Reduction. Formalizing the
relationship with the United Nations and its agencies
has enabled SELA and its member States to create a
dynamic and productive cooperation framework.
The draft resolution before us reflects the
implementation status of the cooperation agreement
between the United Nations and SELA for the period
2008 through 2012. The types of cooperation that have
taken place between SELA and the United Nations
system range from participation by representatives of
various United Nations entities as speakers or guests at
SELA’s meetings and assemblies to joint sponsorship
and development of regional programmes, including the
UNDP-UNCTAD-SELA Joint Regional Programme
for Trade, Investment and Development Issues in Latin
America and the Caribbean for the biennium 2010-2012.
Over the past four years, United Nations agencies
have participated in 78 regional meetings organized by
SELA on issues such as health, regional integration,
trade, development cooperation, responses to natural
disaster, small and medium-sized enterprises, publicprivate partnerships, cyberlegislation and information
technologies. The most recent of those meetings, one on
regional cooperation in the area of food security, which
was held last month in Belize, included the participation
of the FAO together with the Pérez-Guerrero Trust
Fund of the Group of 77. SELA looks forward to
continued cooperation with the United Nations system
12-59543

The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey to introduce draft resolutions
A/67/L.12 and A/67/L.13.
Mr. Eler (Turkey): Turkey would like to introduce
two draft resolutions on regional cooperation, namely,
draft resolution A/67/L.12, entitled, “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Black Sea Economic
Cooperation Organization”, and draft resolution
A/67/L.13, entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Economic Cooperation Organization”.
Turkey strongly believes that strengthening cooperation
between the United Nations and those two organizations
will further contribute to addressing regional
challenges and achieving sustainable development,
while enhancing peace, stability and security.
The Black Sea Economic Cooperation Organization
(BSEC) was launched 20 years ago as a regional
initiative, with a vision of promoting peace, stability,
dialogue and prosperity in the Black Sea region by
means of economic cooperation. It represents a region
of 350 million people with a foreign trade capacity of
more than $300 billion annually. The greater Black
Sea area is the second-largest source of oil and natural
gas in the world and has rich proven reserves of
minerals. There are ample opportunities for increasing
cooperation between BSEC and the United Nations,
notably in the main priority areas for Turkey, the current
Chair, such as transport, sustainable energy, trade and
investment, education, science and technology, as well
as in combating organized crime, terrorism, illegal
migration and trafficking in human beings, drugs and
weapons.
The Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO)
is an intergovernmental organization involving seven
Asian and three Eurasian nations. Over the past two
decades, it has worked to accelerate the pace of regional
development by using existing infrastructure and
business links. ECO aims to make full use of available
resources in addressing institutional and infrastructure
deficits in the region. ECO member States pursue
United Nations goals by, among other things, removing
trade barriers, promoting intra-regional trade, making

11

A/67/PV.40

effective use of their regional agricultural and
industrial potential, and cooperating in combating
narcotics. ECO member States are generally pleased
with United Nations efforts to extend technical and
financial assistance to it and to encourage continued
support for it in priority areas, including energy, trade,
transportation and drug control.
Finally, we would like to thank the sponsors and
other Member States for their constructive engagement
and cooperation during the informal consultations on
the two draft resolutions. We hope that they will be
adopted by consensus.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Kyrgyzstan to introduce draft
resolution A/67/L.15.
Mr. Kydyrov (Kyrgyzstan): At the outset, I would
like to express our gratitude to the Secretary-General
for his report entitled “Cooperation between the
United Nations and regional and other organizations”
(A/67/280), which gives us good insights into recent
developments in the area of cooperation between
the United Nations and international organizations,
including the Shanghai Cooperation Organization.
On behalf of the sponsors representing the member
States of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
(SCO) — China, Kazakhstan, the Russian Federation,
Tajikistan, Uzbekistan and my own country,
Kyrgyzstan — I have the honour to introduce draft
resolution A/67/L.15, entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization”. The draft resolution is based on the
previous General Assembly resolution 65/124, but
contains several new elements reflecting the recent
activities of the organization as well as the development
of its cooperation with the United Nations.
The new elements in the preambular part, among
others, highlight the following efforts and aspirations of
the member States of the SCO: to build the SCO region
into a region of lasting peace, friendship, prosperity
and harmony; to promote stability and security and to
contribute to the maintenance of international peace
and security; to support the building of a world free
of nuclear weapons, including in Central Asia; to
promote cooperation in counter-terrorism, including
through the Regional Anti-Terrorist Structure of the
SCO; to continue to support the Afghan people in their
construction of Afghanistan; to address international

12

information security and to promote cooperation with
other regional organizations.
The new provisions also welcome the memorandum
of understanding between the Secretariat of the SCO
and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC), which seeks to effectively address the
production, trade and trafficking of drugs originating
in Afghanistan and the protocol on cooperation
between UNODC and the SCO Regional Anti-Terrorist
Structure. It recognizes the importance of the
implementation of the 2011-2016 Anti-Drug Strategy
and Action Plan of the SCO as an effective mechanism
for regional cooperation in combating drugs.
The updated paragraph 1 of the draft resolution
acknowledges the important role of the SCO in securing
peace and sustainable development, advancing regional
cooperation and strengthening good-neighbourliness
and mutual trust and takes note of the relevant activities
of the SCO.
The draft resolution is the result of several rounds
of informal consultations conducted by Kyrgyzstan in
its capacity as the current Chair of the organization.
We would like to take this opportunity to thank all
delegations for their active participation and valuable
contributions to the text.
In conclusion, let me express the sincere hope of
the sponsors that the draft resolution will once again be
adopted unanimously, as was the case of the resolutions
of 2009 and 2010.
Mr. Gumende (Mozambique) (spoke in Portuguese;
English text provided by the delegation): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP), whose member
States are Angola, Brazil, Cape Verde, Guinea-Bissau,
Portugal, Sao Tomé and Principe, Timor-Leste and my
own country, Mozambique. I wish to remind members of
the General Assembly of the relevance of the Portuguese
language in international affairs, unifying 240 million
people in eight countries and four continents, and to
highlight CPLP’s political commitment to promote
the use of Portuguese in international and regional
organizations, including the United Nations and its
agencies, funds and programmes.
We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
on the cooperation between the United Nations and the
CPLP (see A/67/280), reflecting the positive effects
of joint actions that have materialized over the course

12-59543

A/67/PV.40

of the past two years. Resolution 65/139 adopted by
the Assembly at its sixty-fifth session in 2010, noted
with appreciation that that dynamism also reflects the
strengthened partnerships among the member States of
the Community and the United Nations, including its
agencies.
The United Nations system continued to be an
important partner, actively pursuing its cooperative
ties with our community through concerted political
and diplomatic actions. Similarly, that cooperation is
expressly visible in several vital areas that contribute
greatly to the development of our countries, particularly
in the sectors of health, education, agriculture, public
administration, and science and technology, among
others.
As part of its political coordination, the
Community and its member States are deeply involved
in coordinating efforts with the United Nations and
other international partners aimed at restoring respect
for human rights, democratic institutions and the rule
of law in Guinea-Bissau. In that regard, we recall
Security Council resolution 2048 (2012) and the need
to harmonize, under the auspices of the United Nations,
the positions of the relevant regional and international
partners in order to promote Guinea-Bissau’s return
to constitutional order through an inclusive political
process, to which the CPLP remains fully committed.
Bearing in mind the challenges facing the world
today and taking into consideration the guidelines
established by the United Nations with regard to
poverty eradication and the achievement of sustainable
development, the CPLP member States have undertaken
important initiatives aimed at improving the lives
of their citizens. It was in that context that the ninth
Conference of Heads of State and Government of the
CPLP, which was held in Maputo on 20 July on the
theme “The CPLP and the challenges of food security
and nutrition,” reaffirmed the commitment of the
Community to the implementation of the human right
to adequate food.
Another important development was the
agreement of principles for the establishment of the
International Centre for Research in Climate Change
for Portuguese-Speaking Countries and Africa, signed
in Bragança, Portugal, on 19 November 2010, whose
main objective is the promotion of applied research in
environmental geosciences within the Community. It
was decided that the headquarters of the Centre would

12-59543

be in Cape Verde. Those are very important actions
in which CPLP member States would like to seek the
involvement of the United Nations system.
Allow me to take the opportunity to mention
that the CPLP member States will, in the near future,
submit to the current session a draft resolution on the
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
CPLP”, for which we humbly ask the support of all
States Members of the United Nations.
I would like to conclude my remarks by reiterating
the determination of the CPLP to strengthen its
partnership with the United Nations in the pursuit of
common objectives, including the achievement of
the Millennium Development Goals, as well as our
commitment to continue to play a positive role in
shaping the post-2015 development agenda of the United
Nations under the framework reached at the United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): I have the honour
of speaking on behalf of the members of the Pacific
Islands Forum (PIF) and to join others in thanking
the President for convening today’s debate and the
Secretary-General for his report (A/67/280).
The two years since our last debate on this agenda
item have been significant for relations between the
members of the Pacific Islands Forum and the United
Nations. In 2011, the Pacific Islands Forum celebrated
its fortieth anniversary at its annual Forum Leaders
meeting in Auckland, New Zealand. Over the past four
decades, the Forum has made a profound contribution
to regional integration and cooperation and has helped
develop a common vision and coordinated action
towards achieving sustainable development, poverty
alleviation and the maintenance of peace and security
in the Pacific.
The United Nations has been an important partner
in those endeavours, and it is fitting that the fortieth
anniversary meeting was also marked by a historic visit
to the Forum by the Secretary-General of the United
Nations – the first-ever such visit, after four decades
of invitations. Forum Leaders are profoundly grateful
to the Secretary-General for making the long journey
to our region and equally grateful that he also took
the time to also visit several other Forum members,
including two of the smallest and most vulnerable
members of our regional family.

13

A/67/PV.40

To those who have not experienced it at first hand,
it is impossible to adequately convey the reality of
the challenges of size and isolation and the profound
vulnerability faced by the small island developing
States in our region. Similarly, it is difficult to explain
to those who have not witnessed it the grave and
imminent threat already posed by climate change to the
livelihoods, the security and indeed the very existence
of many Pacific communities. We thank the SecretaryGeneral for taking the time to bear personal witness
to those realities and for bringing those experiences
back to New York and to the broader United Nations
membership.
The Secretary-General’s visit was also the setting
for the first-ever joint statement between a SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations and Forum Leaders. That
statement clearly set out key priorities for Forum States
at the United Nations, identified areas for enhanced
cooperation and provided a framework for more regular
and meaningful high-level engagement between Forum
members and the United Nations.
In September of this year we witnessed
another historic first for United Nations-PIF
relations — the first-ever summit between PIF leaders
and the Secretary-General of the United Nations in
New York. That meeting also included participation by
a number of Under-Secretaries-General and the heads
of several United Nations agencies active in our region.
It concluded with another joint statement, which set out
in even greater detail areas in which Forum members
would like to deepen our engagement with the United
Nations.
Many of the issues identified in those discussions
in terms of ensuring effective United Nations
engagement in our region will be familiar to small
States everywhere, not least the challenge of ensuring
an adequate and effective United Nations presence on
the ground and of promoting coordinated action across
the whole United Nations system in a way that is fully
aligned with national and regional needs and priorities.
Among the other issues identified in those discussions
were the difficulties that small States face in trying
to meet onerous international reporting obligations
and the importance for all Member States, regardless
of size, of adequate data and statistics collection as
indicators to guide national development efforts.
In the coming months, we look forward to working
with our United Nations system partners to take those

14

discussions forward and to scheduling another meeting
with the Secretary-General to review progress at the
earliest opportunity. The challenges faced by Pacific
island developing States are severe, but significant
strides have been made in recent years in ensuring
that a Pacific voice is heard loud and clear on issues
of vital importance to Forum members. In addition to
our cooperation through the Pacific Islands Forum,
many Forum members have worked through groupings
such as Pacific small island developing States and the
Alliance of Small Island States to ensure that our region,
regarded by many as being at the edge of the world but
by us as home, maintains a voice in global discussions
that have a profound impact on our collective fate. We
will ensure that the voice of the Pacific continues to be
heard loud and clear.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I thank the President for
convening today’s important debate on the cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and other
organizations. In my capacity as the representative of
Ethiopia and speaking on behalf of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), I would also like to
extend my gratitude to the Secretary-General for his
informative report on this agenda item (A/67/280).
In recent years, we have witnessed an encouraging
development in the increased cooperation between
United Nations and regional organizations. Cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union
at both the strategic and the operational levels are an
important part of that emerging trend. We are indeed
pleased to note the positive evolution in the relations
between the United Nations, on the one hand, and
the African Union (AU) and African subregional
organizations, such as IGAD, on the other.
Ethiopia welcomes the intention to consider
further steps to promote closer cooperation. We
note with appreciation that, in the last few years,
significant strides have been made in joint preventive
diplomacy and peacemaking activities. That welcome
development has been ongoing since 2010, when the
Joint Task Force on Peace and Security was launched
by the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission. Although more needs to
be done in all areas, particularly in Somalia, much has
been accomplished through cooperation between the
two organizations in Somalia, the Sudan, South Sudan
and in other situations.

12-59543

A/67/PV.40

It is clear, for instance, that the AU relies deeply
on its close working relationship with subregional
organizations, such as IGAD. It is critical, therefore,
that, in the process of enhancing cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations, close
attention be paid to the principle of subsidiarity and
the flexible application of the underlying principles
governing the cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations. That is critical, particularly
in the area of the prevention and resolution of conflicts
and in the area of mounting peace support missions.
We are indeed pleased with the much-improved
dialogue between the Peace and Security Council of
the AU and the Security Council of the United Nations.
The latest developments have been encouraging.
However, for there to be a truly productive cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union and
its subregional organizations, including with respect to
the broader issues of development, it is critical that the
United Nations Office to the African Union, which was
established in 2010, be more effective. That Office has
already proved that its creation has added value to the
cooperation between the two organizations, but much
remains to be done in that area.
Let me conclude by underscoring one critical
point relating to where Africa is at present in its
efforts to make progress in eradicating poverty, one
of the overarching objectives of the international
community, as was reiterated yet again at the United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development. The
cooperation between the United Nations and the AU
should make a difference in that regard, particularly
focusing on the least developed countries, the majority
of which are in Africa. Closer cooperation among the
United Nations, the AU and subregional organizations
should be strengthened in those areas as well.
The Acting President: In accordance with
resolution 54/5 of 8 October 1999, I now call on the
Secretary-General of the Organization of the Black Sea
Economic Cooperation.
Mr. Tvircun (Organization of the Black Sea
Economic Cooperation): Allow me to point to some
of the important developments in the Organization of
the Black Sea Economic Cooperation (BSEC) since the
adoption of resolution 65/128 on 13 December 2010. The
Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation
celebrated its twentieth anniversary in June. At the
twentieth anniversary summit of the Organization

12-59543

in Istanbul, the Heads of State and Government of
the member States of the Organization adopted a
declaration reiterating their conviction that multilateral
economic cooperation contributes to enhancing peace,
stability and security to the benefit of the Black Sea
region.
In today’s globalized world, BSEC needs to be
responsive to the challenges of the evolving international
environment. The threats and challenges differ from
those of the past, when the concept of security meant
the prevention of conflict and war between States.
Today the international community is faced with new
security threats and challenges, which not only threaten
the security of States but also human security, and
therefore they require urgent action.
BSEC is viewed by the international community
as an anchor of cooperation in the Black Sea area. In
addition to 12 member States, we have 17 observers,
16 sectoral dialogue partners and a number of other
partners in the region and beyond. Over the course
of 20 years, BSEC has become the most inclusive and
comprehensive organization in the wider Black Sea area
and a forum for discussion and cooperation in a wide
range of areas. Much has been done and is currently
under way in those spheres. Agreements and common
action plans on key issues have been elaborated. That
fosters a spirit of dialogue and cooperation in our
region.
The BSEC summit also endorsed the new Black
Sea Economic Agenda Towards an Enhanced BSEC
Partnership, a strategic document by which member
States reiterated their commitment to enhance the
economic missions of BSEC and to implement the
economic agenda, in accordance with their guidelines
and priorities.
BSEC has been a driving force in elaborating and
realizing giant concrete regional projects, particularly
in the field of transport, which will contribute to the
development of Euro-Asian transport links. Within that
framework, the memorandum of understanding for the
coordination and development of the Black Sea Ring
Highway and the memorandum of understanding on the
development of the Motorways of the Sea of the Black
Sea region have been concluded, and they entered into
force in late 2008. In addition, a project to facilitate the
transport of raw materials in the Black Sea region was
launched in 2010.

15

A/67/PV.40

BSEC is committed to promoting fruitful
cooperation with the United Nations and its specialized
agencies, in particular to the development of practical
and results-oriented projects in areas of common
interest. It continues to contribute to the attainment
of the Millennium Development Goals on the
national, regional and global levels by implementing
sustainable development strategies based on a balanced
and harmonious relationship between social needs,
economic activities and environmental protection,
as indicated in documents adopted at various United
Nations platforms, such as the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development in 2012.
The
continued
implementation
of
the
Black Sea Trade and Investment Promotion
Programme — the first partnership project between
BSEC and the United Nations Development Programme,
launched in 2006 — represents a good example of
concrete cooperation between the two organizations.
The fruitful cooperation between BSEC and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) is the
result of the elaboration and adoption in 2008 of the
BSEC Regional Action Plan for Strengthening the
Criminal Justice Response to Trafficking in Persons in
the Black Sea Region within the framework of the joint
BSEC-UNODC project.
BSEC became a member of the Group of Friends of
the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations in 2009 in
order to contribute to the fulfilment of the objectives of
the Alliance by promoting projects aimed at building
bridges among diverse cultures and communities and
fostering cross-cultural exchange and cooperation. In
the context of enhancing relations with the Alliance, we
expect that the BSEC secretariat and the Alliance will
sign a memorandum of understanding on cooperation
in the near future. Their established partnership and
the synergies created by BSEC and other regional
organizations represent added value and strength to
global cooperation, stability and prosperity.
Last but not least, I would like to re-emphasize
the importance of the intensified cooperation between
the Black Sea Economic Cooperation Organization
and the European Union and to pledge our readiness
to take concrete steps for the development of a
mutually beneficial partnership. I would also like to
invite specialized agencies and other organizations
and programmes of the United Nations system to
strengthen cooperation with the Organization of the
Black Sea Economic Cooperation in order to continue

16

programmes and create synergies with a view to
preparing and implementing joint projects.
Before I conclude, I would like to pay a welldeserved tribute to the Republic of Turkey for its efforts
as Chair-in-Office of BSEC during the past six months
and for preparing the draft resolution (A/67/L.12),
which I hope the Assembly will adopt by consensus.
I also wish to express my gratitude to the Black Sea
member States and other States Members of the United
Nations that have supported the draft resolution.
The Acting President: In accordance with
resolution 66/111 of 9 December 2011, I now call on the
Secretary-General of the Central European Initiative.
Mr. Pfanzelter (Central European Initiative): As
Secretary-General of the Central European Initiative
(CEI), I am delighted to have this very special privilege
of addressing the General Assembly for the first time
on the topic of cooperation between the United Nations
and the Central European Initiative.
As the Assembly knows, the Central European
Initiative cherishes its relationship with the United
Nations, and we are proud to be an observer in the
General Assembly. That status was attained last year
through resolution 66/111, of 9 December 2011. We
strongly believe that regional organizations need to be
in tune with the global agenda, and we know that we all
benefit from a close partnership with the United Nations.
We are convinced that the successful work of regional
organizations contributes to the overall success of the
global agenda and the United Nations. This was also
the conclusion of the first global meeting of regional
organizations, organized by the World Economic Forum
and the Government of the United Arab Emirates in
Dubai just a week ago, on 12 and 13 November. There
was a strong consensus that regional organizations
can serve as powerful catalysts for advancing global
cooperation and the global agenda.
The Central European Initiative is the oldest
forum of intergovernmental cooperation in our region,
established in November 1989 by Italy, Austria, Hungary
and Yugoslavia. It has now become the largest regional
initiative, comprising 18 member States of Central,
Eastern and South-Eastern Europe. Our membership
includes nine European Union (EU) and nine non-EU
countries and therefore puts our organization in a
privileged position to act as a champion of regional
cooperation for European integration. We also serve
as a bridge between the Baltic, the Danube, the Black

12-59543

A/67/PV.40

Sea and the Adriatic. It goes without saying that we
share the values of the European Union and the United
Nations.
Due to a unique blend of multilateral diplomacy and
project orientation, we have become a unique player and
partner in the region. The CEI designs and implements
projects in partnership with the European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development, the European Union
and United Nations agencies in such fields as energy,
transport, science and research, regional cooperation
and culture.
As the CEI develops those projects and programmes,
it also seeks to strengthen its ties to the United Nations.
Our record of cooperation with the United Nations
is quite impressive. Our cooperation with the United
Nations specialized agencies over the past years has
been substantive and manifold. For example, the CEI
cooperates with the Economic Commission for Europe
in the area of enterprise development, particularly
small and medium-sized enterprises, and with the
United Nations Environment Programme in the area
of the environment. It cooperates with the United
Nations World Tourism Organization and the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
and with the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization and the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization in the area of
science and technology.
But the CEI also has close ties with the most
important European organizations and institutions,
such as the European Union, the European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development, the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development, the Council
of Europe and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe.
Last but not least, we work closely with all major
regional organizations and forums operating within
and beyond the Initiative’s region, such as the Adriatic
and Ionian Initiative, the Organization of the Black Sea
Economic Cooperation — which was so eloquently
represented by the speaker preceding me — the Council
of the Baltic Sea States, the Regional Cooperation
Council and the South-East European Cooperation
Process.
We firmly believe that we should explore ways to
enhance cooperation among regional organizations and
in partnership with the United Nations. Our discussion
today represents a unique opportunity to forge a

12-59543

strategic partnership between regional organizations
and the United Nations in pursuit of peace, security,
development and the rule of law. Therefore, the creation
of a global network under the umbrella of the United
Nations might make sense. Such a global network would
facilitate exchanges of know-how and best practices
and would allow us to share experiences in projects and
programmes in the various areas of activity.
We are convinced that each regional organization
has a comparative advantage to contribute to the global
agenda, and I am also convinced that each one of us is
contributing to the implementation of the Millennium
Development Goals.
In conclusion, I would like to express our sincere
gratitude to the Permanent Representative of the
Ukraine, Ambassador Yuriy Sergeyev, for all his efforts
and those of the Ukrainian Mission to promote draft
resolution A/67/L.6, which is before the Assembly. Our
thanks also go, of course, to the sponsors and to all
Member States that support this draft resolution.
The Acting President: In accordance with
resolution 477 (V) of 1 November 1950, I now call on
the Permanent Observer of the League of Arab States.
Mr. Fathalla (League of Arab States) (spoke
in Arabic): I have the honour, in my capacity as the
Permanent Observer of the League of Arab States, to
congratulate, on behalf of the League, Mr. Vuk Jeremić
on his appointment to lead the Assembly at its sixtyseventh session. He can count on the full support of the
League of Arab States in his efforts. I would also like
to welcome the Secretary-General’s efforts in guiding
our Organization to ensure that it can fully discharge
its responsibilities.
It goes without saying that devoting an entire
chapter — that is, Chapter VIII — of the Charter of
the United Nations to regional organizations was a
significant gesture, and one that has proved effective
when it comes to cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations, especially in the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Arab League began in 1950, when the General
Assembly, at its fifth session, adopted resolution 477
(V) on 1 November of 1950, calling upon the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations to ask the SecretaryGeneral of the League of Arab States to participate in the
General Assembly sessions as an observer. Since then,

17

A/67/PV.40

relations between the two organizations have developed
progressively and positively. Assembly resolution 36/24
of 1981 reflects the progress that this cooperation has
achieved over the past 30 years. The Assembly has
reiterated the resolve of the United Nations to cooperate
with the League of Arab States in order to achieve
the desired goals. It calls on the Secretary-General
to continue his efforts to further enhance political,
economic, cultural and administrative cooperation
between the United Nations and the League, pursuant
to the relevant Assembly resolutions.
That cooperation was enshrined in the agreement
signed between the League of Arab States and the
United Nations in 1989. Since then our cooperation has
taken a variety of forms through various mechanisms
in the light of the circumstances that we have faced.
Our organizations now seek to cooperate on the basis of
new developments and events in the Middle East since
2010.
A number of events have shaped the strengthening
of that cooperation, such as the general meeting on
cooperation between the secretariats of the United
Nations and the League of Arab States and their
specialized organizations, held in Vienna in July of
this year, and the many biennial meetings held to build
on gains and to assess that cooperation. Twenty-eight
organizations and specialized agencies of the United
Nations, together with specialized Arab organizations,
participated in that meeting in order to identify areas
for Arab and international cooperation. The League of
Arab States established contact with a number of focal
points and held a number of coordination meetings
with specialized agencies and institutions of the United
Nations.
On 26 September, on the sidelines of the general
debate of the General Assembly, the Security Council
held a high-level meeting on the situation in the Middle
East (see S/PV.6841). At its conclusion, a presidential
statement reflecting the goal of enhanced cooperation
between the two organizations was adopted. The
statement recalls that cooperation with regional
organizations in order to ensure the maintenance of
international peace and security could further enhance
collective security. It establishes the following:
“The Security Council recognizes and further
encourages the efforts by the League of Arab
States to contribute to collective endeavours to
settle conflicts in the Middle East peacefully as

18

well as to promoting international responses to the
transformations experienced in the region...
“The Security Council welcomes the
intensifying cooperation between the United
Nations and the League of Arab States in the
wake of these transformations which reflect the
legitimate aspirations of all peoples in the region
for freedom, political participation and economic
and social well-being in a pluralistic society.”
(S/PRST/2012/20, p. 1)
The statement further establishes:
“The Security Council recognizes the
importance of strengthening cooperation on
capacity-building with the League of Arab States
in the maintenance of international peace and
security.
“The Security Council expresses its
determination to take effective steps to further
enhance cooperation between the United Nations
and the League of Arab States, in accordance with
Chapter VIII of the Charter.” (ibid., p. 3)
Despite the clear position of the United Nations on
the Palestinian question set out in its resolutions and
the positive statements of the Secretary-General, which
recall the importance of the principle of resolving
the Israel-Palestinian conflict, as well as the right of
the Palestinian people to self-determination and to
establish their State on the basis of the 1967 borders,
including East Jerusalem, the peace process has
reached a stalemate. A comprehensive settlement that
includes all stages of the Middle East peace process
must be found. That stalemate is the result of Israel’s
insistence on continued actions to further colonize the
occupied Palestinian territory and its active aggression
of the past week against Gaza, further exacerbating the
socioeconomic and environmental situation and the
destruction of properties and dwellings.
Although the Security Council convened rapidly
the day that the aggression began, to date we have seen
no measure adopted on the ground. The Council has
been unable to adopt any resolution or presidential
statement that reflects its earnest resolve to maintain
international peace and security, which is its primary
responsibility.
At its emergency meeting on 17 November, the
Council of Ministers of the Arab League was therefore
compelled to condemn the Security Council for its

12-59543

A/67/PV.40

failure to adopt measures to put an end to Israel’s
aggression against Gaza. The Council of Ministers
called on the Security Council to fully discharge its
responsibilities for the maintenance of international
peace and security, as stipulated in the Charter, and to
adopt the measures necessary to end Israel’s continued
onslaught. The presidential statement adopted at
the high-level meeting of the Security Council of
26 September must be implemented.
We hope that the Council will act rapidly in order
to meet Arab demands and to ensure cooperation
between our two organizations. The Palestinian people
hope to see concrete measures being adopted on the
ground to enable them to fully exercise their inalienable
right to self-determination, as a result of the common
responsibility of the United Nations and the League of
Arab States.
The Arab League has sought to cooperate with the
United Nations in order to try to resolve the Syrian
crisis. The international community must also strive to
put an end to the bloodshed and to launch a transitional
phase that gives rise to a democratic system, in line
with the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people. A
political solution to which all parties can commit must
be found by building on the efforts of Mr. Brahimi,
Joint Special Representative of the United Nations and
the League of Arab States for Syria.
The Security Council must provide a positive
response to the decisions taken by the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of the European Union and of the
League of Arab States through the adoption of the
Cairo declaration at a meeting on 3 November.
The United Nations and the League of Arab States
have agreed to continue their intensive efforts to support
Yemen in the transitional phase of its reconstruction.
We seek to promote political, socioeconomic and
legal reform in that country and to provide it with the
necessary technical expertise to train personnel in
various areas.
The League of Arab States is following the
developments on the ground in Libya with great concern.
In that connection, the international community must
shoulder its responsibilities in a positive manner. It
must work effectively with the Libyan Government
to address the challenges that Libya faces by fully
supporting the Libyan people in the reconstruction
process and by providing the necessary technical
expertise to help train personnel and to build capacity

12-59543

in all areas. Moreover, there must be further support
for building capacity in the army and the police and
for efforts to ensure disarmament and the retrieval of
weapons throughout Libya.
Given their geographical location and their ethnic
and social composition, the Sudan and South Sudan
are of particular importance in the Arab and African
world and therefore must cooperate. They must avoid
conflict and must refrain from acts of aggression. The
Arab world does not wish to see our Sudanese brothers
fall back into a conflict situation, and that is why the
United Nations, the League of Arab States and the
African Union must cooperate in order to help them
find the necessary solutions that are acceptable to all
and to address all pending matters so that the country’s
national interests are given top priority.
The League of Arab States has proposed and
supported the humanitarian initiative in the Blue Nile
and Southern Kordofan States, and the African Union
and United Nations have followed suit. We therefore
call for further cooperation and coordination between
those three organizations in order to implement that
initiative.
The cooperation between the African Union, the
United Nations, the League of Arab States and IGAD
has made it possible to conclude the transitional phase
in Somalia. The international community must now
provide Somalia with all forms of support, whether
political, financial or technical, in particular following
the successful conclusion of the transitional phase.
The current priority issues for the Arab world, and
in particular for the League of Arab States, are common
issues of concern to the League and the United Nations
in the light of the current circumstances in our region,
namely the global financial and economic crises, the
food crisis, the energy crisis and climate change. That
is why the first Arab Economic and Social Development
Summit, held in 2009, and the second Summit, held in
2011, highlighted those goals. The same applies to the
third Summit, to be held in 2013, which the SecretaryGeneral of the League of Arab States is currently
preparing for by calling upon the United Nations to
participate in it.
Finally, the League of Arab States cooperates
with the United Nations in many areas, including in
combating narcotics, human trafficking, organized
crime, terrorism, corruption and modernizing our
criminal justice systems. We would like to deepen

19

A/67/PV.40

our cooperation with the United Nations in the legal
sphere in order to strengthen our coordination in those
areas. We must further strengthen technical support to
national efforts for the ratification of legal instruments
pertaining to the fight against terrorism, corruption
and trafficking in persons, and strengthen the legal
implementation of those instruments. The necessary
training must be provided in the area of criminal justice
by enhancing the mechanisms for technical assistance.
In conclusion, I would like to thank the
representative of the Sudan, who introduced draft
resolution A/67/L.10 on the topic. We are very pleased
with it, and we call upon the General Assembly to adopt
it by consensus.
The Acting President: In accordance with
resolution 35/2 of 13 October 1980, I now give the
floor to the observer for the Asian-African Legal
Consultative Organization.
Mr. Lee (Asian-African Legal Consultative
Organization): On behalf of the Asian-African Legal
Consultative Organization (AALCO), I am very
pleased to have this opportunity to report to the General
Assembly on the cooperative activities undertaken by
AALCO in the past two years.
The Asian-African Legal Consultative Organization
is the institutional outcome of the historic Bandung
Conference, held in 1955. It comprises 47 African and
Asian members across the two continents. Its principal
role is to serve as a catalyst to promote the development
and application of international law.
AALCO has been a permanent observer to the
United Nations since 1980, when the Assembly
recognized the importance of AALCO’s work in the
field of the development of the law of the sea. Since
its establishment in 1956, AALCO has been constantly
working towards the progressive development and
codification of international law and the strengthening
of the rule of law in international affairs. As an advisory
body to the 47 member States, it ensures interregional
cooperation and exchanges of information and views
on matters of common concern in international legal
matters. In those areas, AALCO closely follows
and promotes the work of the General Assembly, the
International Law Commission (ILC), the United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law and
other relevant agencies. I would like to highlight a few
topics and activities undertaken by AALCO in the past
two years.

20

First, I turn to the work of the International Law
Commission. AALCO analyses the work of the ILC
and subsequently forwards the views of the member
States to the Commission. That has helped to foster a
closer relationship between the two bodies. It has also
become customary for both bodies to be represented at
each other’s sessions. At its fiftieth session, AALCO
requested its Secretary-General to devote more time
to the work of the ILC, and an intersessional meeting
was therefore held to discuss some of the topics being
considered by the ILC. They include the protection
of persons in the event of disaster, the immunity of
State officials from foreign criminal jurisdiction and
the proposed new topics of the ILC. Those topics were
again considered at the Abuja session this year.
Alongside the legal advice meeting in October
2011, a joint meeting of AALCO and the ILC was
held to discuss some of the topics being examined by
the ILC, which included the expulsion of aliens, the
responsibilities of international organizations and the
protection of persons in the event of disasters. Many
governmental legal advisers from outside Africa and
Asia also attended the meeting.
Now I turn to the area of the law of the sea. The law of
the sea constitutes an important part of AALCO’s work.
Its contribution to the negotiations on and the drafting
of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
is well-known. AALCO championed, for example, the
concept of exclusive economic zones and helped to have
that concept codified in the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea. In commemoration of the thirtieth
anniversary of the signing of the Convention, AALCO
organized a workshop on the mapping of maritime
baselines by satellite or other means in May 2012. In
order to stimulate innovative thinking on combating
piracy and to identify countermeasures against piracy,
AALCO organized a meeting to discuss the adequacy
of international legal responses to piracy in the Gulf
of Guinea and off the West African coast. The United
Nations work on drug control was also considered in
that connection.
I now turn to the issue of international terrorism,
which has been considered an important subject in
the programme of work of AALCO. We held a special
meeting to discuss the subject, and the issues discussed
included the difficulties in reaching a definition of
the term “terrorism” and an emphasis on the need for
international legal cooperation in criminal matters
to combat terrorism. The problem of countering

12-59543

A/67/PV.40

the financing of international terrorism was also
considered.
I now turn to the issues of the trafficking in persons
and the smuggling of migrants. Those are important
issues, as they involve serious aspects of organized
crime that affect many countries. Human trafficking
affects national security and human rights and fosters
illicit transnational migration. Coordinated efforts to
combat that menace are required. Therefore, in 2011,
AALCO convened a meeting to consider the adequacy
of the legal framework for combating human trafficking
and the exploitation and abuse of migrants. The work of
UNICEF in protecting children was also considered in
that context.
Arbitration has in recent years become a preferred
method of alternative dispute resolution in international
commercial transactions in Asia and in Africa. AALCO
has therefore established regional arbitration centres to
facilitate that process. A meeting was held to discuss
recent developments in the United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law’s work in that area, as well
as the revitalization process of AALCO’s regional
arbitration centres. Participants also exchanged
experiences and compared difficulties encountered in
that context.
International criminal jurisdiction is a subject
to which AALCO attaches high importance. Legal
experts convened in July 2011 to consider the
following important issues: the preconditions for
exercising International Criminal Court jurisdiction;
the interpretation of article 98 of the Rome Statute
in relation to bilateral immunity agreements; the
principle of complementarity and its application; the
criteria for the selection of situations and the opening
of investigations; and, finally, the relationship between
peace and justice.
AALCO has also organized training programmes
in international trade and humanitarian law. The main
objective of the training programmes has been to
provide practical and theoretical knowledge on selected
topics of international trade law and international
humanitarian law through interactive discussion. To
facilitate wider dissemination of international law,
AALCO publishes both a yearbook and a journal of
international law.
All of the aforementioned activities and
programmes are intended to strengthen AALCO’s
relationship with the United Nations, particularly in the

12-59543

field of the progressive development and codification
of international law. AALCO is determined to continue
its close cooperation with the United Nations. It pays
tribute to the work of the General Assembly and strongly
supports the Assembly in all aspects of its work.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on agenda item 121 and its
sub-items (a) to (w).
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolutions
A/67/L.5, A/67/L.6, A/67/L.7, A/67/L.8, A/67/L.9/Rev.1,
A/67/L.10, A/67/L.11, A/67/L.12, A/67/L.13 and
A/67/L.15. Explanations of vote after the voting will be
made after the adoption of the draft resolutions.
Draft resolution A/67/L.5 is entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Collective Security
Treaty Organization”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/67/L.5?
Draft resolution A/67/L.5 was adopted (resolution
67/6).
The Acting President: Draft resolution A/67/L.6 is
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Central European Initiative”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I would like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, the
following delegations have also become sponsors of
A/67/L.6: Austria, Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Croatia, the Czech Republic, Georgia, Hungary, Italy,
Montenegro, Poland, Romania, Serbia, Slovakia and
Slovenia.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/67/L.6?
Draft resolution A/67/L.6 was adopted (resolution
67/7).
The Acting President: Draft resolution A/67/L.7
is entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.

21

A/67/PV.40

Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I would like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and
in addition to those listed in document A/67/L.7, the
following delegations have also become sponsors of
A/67/L.7: Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Cambodia, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, the
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, France, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Lithuania, Malta, Mexico, Montenegro, Norway,
Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea, the Republic
of Moldova, Romania, the Russian Federation, San
Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Turkey and the United States of America.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/67/L.7?
Draft resolution A/67/L.7 was adopted (resolution
67/8).
The Acting President: Draft resolution A/67/L.8 is
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I would like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and
in addition to those listed in document A/67/L.8, the
following delegations have also become sponsors of
A/67/L.8: Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, Congo, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lesotho, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro,
the Netherlands, Nigeria, Norway, Paraguay, Peru, the
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Moldova,
Romania, the Russian Federation, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
the United Republic of Tanzania, the United States of
America and Uruguay.

22

The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/67/L.8?
Draft resolution A/67/L.8 was adopted (resolution
67/9).
The
Acting
President:
Draft
resolution
A/67/L.9/Rev.1 is entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the Eurasian Economic
Community”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
Armenia has become a sponsor of draft resolution
A.67/L.9/Rev.1.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/67/L.9/Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/67/L.9/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 67/10).
The Acting President: Draft resolution A/67/L.10
is entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations
and the League of Arab States”. May I take it that the
General Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/67/L.10?
Draft resolution A/67/L.10 was adopted (resolution
67/11 ).
The Acting President: Draft resolution A/67/L.11,
as orally corrected, is entitled “Cooperation between the
United Nations and the Latin American and Caribbean
Economic System”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and in
addition to those delegations listed in the document and
during the introduction of the draft resolution, Haiti
and Jamaica have become sponsors of draft resolution
A.67/L.11.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/67/L.11, as orally corrected?
12-59543

A/67/PV.40

Draft resolution A/67/L.11, as orally corrected,
was adopted (resolution 67/12).
The Acting President: Draft resolution A/67/L.12
is entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Black Sea Economic Cooperation Organization”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of
draft resolution A.67/L.12: Armenia, France, Israel,
Montenegro, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Serbia,
Slovenia and Spain.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/67/L.12?
Draft resolution A/67/L.12 was adopted (resolution
67/13).
The Acting President: Draft resolution A/67/L.13
is entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Economic Cooperation Organization”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
Turkmenistan has become a sponsor of draft resolution
A.67/L.13.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/67/L.13?
Draft resolution A/67/L.13 was adopted (resolution
67/14).
The Acting President: Draft resolution A/67/L.15
is entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization”. May I
take it that the General Assembly decides to adopt draft
resolution A/67/L.15?
Draft resolution A/67/L.15 was adopted (resolution
67/15).

12-59543

The Acting President: Before giving the floor
to speakers in explanation of vote, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Emiliou (Cyprus): With regard to resolution
67/14, “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Economic Cooperation Organization”, which has
just been adopted, my delegation wishes to state for
the record that Cyprus has disassociated itself from the
consensus on that resolution for the following reasons.
First, in paragraph 2, the resolution takes note of the
Baku Declaration, issued at the twelfth summit meeting
of the heads of State and Government of member States
of the Economic Cooperation Organization, held on
16 October 2012 in Azerbaijan. The Baku Declaration
endorses the report by the Council of Ministers at its
twentieth meeting and instructs the Secretary General
of the Economic Cooperation Organization to ensure
the full implementation of that report.
We have been informed that that report recommends
that a so-called Turkish Cypriot State be given the status
of observer to the Economic Cooperation Organization.
The Baku Declaration is, in effect, calling on the
Secretary General of that organization to act against
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions
regarding Cyprus. I recall in that connection, in
particular, Security Council resolutions 541 (1983)
and 550 (1984), which state that the declaration of a
purported secession of part of the Republic of Cyprus
is legally invalid and call for its withdrawal. In those
resolutions, the Security Council condemned all such
secessionist acts and called on all States to respect
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of the Republic of Cyprus and not to recognize any
Cypriot State other than the Republic of Cyprus. It also
called on all States not to facilitate or in any way assist
the secessionist entity.
I also recall General Assembly resolutions on
Cyprus, specifically resolutions 3212 (XXIX), of 1974,
and 37/253, of 1983, also calling upon all States to
respect the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of the Republic of Cyprus.
My delegation reiterates those calls by the main
bodies of the United Nations to all member States
of the Economic Cooperation Organization. We
strongly urge them and the Secretary General of
the Economic Cooperation Organization not to act

23

A/67/PV.40

against United Nations resolutions by implementing
the recommendation to accord observer status to a
secessionist entity.
We have decided not to break the consensus on
that cooperation resolution, based on the good faith
and spirit of cooperation demonstrated by its sponsors
during the informal negotiations on the text. We hope
that that same spirit will be demonstrated in response
to our call on ECO and its member States to re-evaluate
their position on the issue we have raised and, in view
of their cooperation with the United Nations, to act in
compliance with its Charter.
Mr. Cenzer (United States of America): The
United States welcomes cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations such as the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization. We also support
international engagement in developing consensus on
appropriate cyberspace behaviour, based on existing
principles of international law. States must unite
around the common goal of preserving and enhancing
the benefits of information technologies by ensuring
their security and integrity, while also maintaining
an environment that promotes efficiency, innovation,
economic prosperity, free trade and respect for human
rights. In its current form, resolution 67/15 does not
meet those criteria. The United States has therefore
dissociated itself from the consensus on that resolution.
Mr. Genest (Canada): Canada agreed to join the
consensus on the resolution on cooperation between
the United Nations and the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (resolution 67/15). We would, however,
like to reiterate our concerns about the introduction
of contentious language into what is supposed to be
a procedural resolution reaffirming the importance
of cooperation between the United Nations and the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization. We regret that
development and, in that regard, Canada would like
to formally dissociate itself from the language in the
sixteenth preambular paragraph regarding the efforts
of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization to address
international information security, a concept that we
oppose and that does not belong in a General Assembly
resolution of that nature.
The Acting President: I call on the representative
of the Syrian Arab Republic, who wishes to speak
in exercise of the right of reply. I remind him that
statements made in exercise of the right of reply are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations
from their seats.

24

Mr. Hallak (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The League of Arab States has made itself part
of the problem, not part of the solution, owing to its
early attempts to internationalize the Syrian crisis by
calling for external intervention aimed at destroying
Syria as a country and as a people. That is something
that runs contrary to the most basic principles of the
Charter of the League of Arab States and flagrantly
contravenes the obligations of Arab countries and the
Arab League secretariat to comply with the Arab Joint
Defence Agreement.
The League of Arab States has not respected the
conclusions drawn by the group of Arab observers
led by General Al-Dabi, and withdrew the Arab
observers in order to undermine the Arab solution.
The Arab League is not authorized either by the Syrian
Government or by the Syrian Arab people to speak
about the future of Syria on their behalf. It is shameful
that the League continues to insist through its appeals
to the so-called international community to guarantee
peace, security and stability in Syria, at a time when
the efforts of the League — if there really is a League
of Arab States — should be focused on mobilizing that
same international community to protect the Palestinian
people from Israeli aggression.
Since the emergency meeting of Arab foreign
affairs ministers from all the members of the League
of Arab States two days ago, the Lebanese Foreign
Minister has called for a halt to the normalization of
relations with Israel and for the severing of diplomatic
relations with that country. Of course, we have seen no
implementation of that call on the part of those Arab
States that have relations with Israel. We have also not
seen the representative of the League of Arab States
here at the United Nations talk about the importance of
implementing those two calls.
It seems that the League of Arab States is suffering
from colour blindness; it can no longer distinguish
between friends, enemies and brothers. From this
rostrum, we call on the League and its representatives to
refrain from interfering in the internal affairs of Syria,
since they no longer consider Syria to be part of the
League of Arab States, and not to incite the so-called
international community against Syria’s Government
and people at a time when the international community
should be focusing on dealing with Israel’s aggression
against the Palestinian people.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its

12-59543

A/67/PV.40

consideration of sub-items (d), (f), (j), (k), (m), (n), (o),
(t), (u) and (w) of agenda item 121?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: I would like to appeal
to those Member States intending to submit draft
resolutions on the remaining sub-items to do so as soon
as possible
Agenda item 111
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(a) Appointment of members of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/67/559)
The Acting President: In paragraph 7 of its report,
the Fifth Committee recommends that the General
Assembly appoint the following persons as members
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions for a three-year term of office
beginning on 1 January 2013: Ms. Jasminka Dinić
(Croatia), Mr. Conrod Hunte (Antigua and Barbuda),
Mr. Mohanad Ali Omran (Iraq), Mr. Babou Sene
(Senegal) and Mr. Tesfa Alem Seyoum (Eritrea).
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to appoint Ms. Jasminka Dinić, Mr. Conrod
Hunte, Mr. Mohanad Ali Omran, Mr. Babou Sene and
Mr. Tesfa Alem Seyoum as members of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
for a three-year term of office beginning on 1 January
2013?
It was so decided.
(b) Appointment of members of the Committee
on Contributions
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/67/560)
The Acting President: In paragraph 4 of its report,
the Fifth Committee recommends that the General
Assembly appoint the following persons as members of
the Committee on Contributions for a three-year term
of office beginning on 1 January 2013: Mr. Andrzej
Abraszewski (Poland), Mr. Syed Yawar Ali (Pakistan),
Mr. Ihor Humennyi (Ukraine), Ms. Susan McLurg
(United States of America), Mr. Josiel Motumisi Tawana
(South Africa) and Mr. Kazuo Watanabe (Japan).

12-59543

May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to appoint Mr. Andrzej Abraszewski, Mr. Syed Yawar
Ali, Mr. Ihor Humennyi, Ms. Susan McLurg, Mr. Josiel
Motumisi Tawana and Mr. Kazuo Watanabe as members
of the Committee on Contributions for a three-year
term of office beginning on 1 January 2013?
It was so decided.
(c) Confirmation of the appointment of members of
the Investments Committee
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/67/561)
The Acting President: The Fifth Committee
recommends in paragraph 5 of the report that the
General Assembly confirm the reappointment by the
Secretary-General of Ms. Linah Mohohlo (Botswana)
as a regular member of the Investments Committee for
a three-year term of office beginning on 1 January 2013
and confirm the reappointment of Mr. Emilio Cárdenas
(Argentina) as a regular member of the Committee for
a one-year term of office beginning on 1 January 2013.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to confirm the reappointment by the SecretaryGeneral of Ms. Linah Mohohlo as a regular member
of the Investments Committee for a three-year term
of office beginning on 1 January 2013 and to confirm
the reappointment of Mr. Emilio Cárdenas as a regular
member of the Committee for a one-year term of office
beginning on 1 January 2013?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: In paragraph 6 of the
same report, the Fifth Committee also recommends
that the General Assembly reappoint Mr. Ivan Pictet
(Switzerland) and appoint Mr. Gumersindo Oliveros
(Spain) and Ms. Cecilia Reyes (Philippines) as ad hoc
members of the Investments Committee for a one-year
term of office beginning on 1 January 2013.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to
confirm the reappointment of Mr. Ivan Pictet as well
as the appointment of Mr. Gumersindo Oliveros and
Ms. Cecilia Reyes as ad hoc members of the Investments
Committee for a one-year term of office beginning on
1 January 2013?
It was so decided.

25

A/67/PV.40

(d) Appointment of members of the International
Civil Service Commission
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/67/562)
The Acting President: In paragraph 4 of the report,
the Fifth Committee recommends that the General
Assembly appoint the following persons as members
of the International Civil Service Commission for
a four-year term of office beginning on 1 January
2013: Mr. Fatih Bouayad-Agha (Algeria); Mr. Sergei
Garmonin (Russian Federation); Mr. Mohamed Mijarul
Quayes (Bangladesh); Mr. Wang Xiaochu (China); and
Mr. El Hassane Zahid (Morocco).
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to
appoint Mr. Fatih Bouayad-Agha, Mr. Sergei Garmonin,
Mr. Mohamed Mijarul Quayes, Mr. Wang Xiaochu and
Mr. El Hassane Zahid as members of the International
Civil Service Commission for a four-year term of office
beginning on 1 January 2013?
It was so decided.
(e) Appointment of members and alternate
members of the United Nations Staff
Pension Committee
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/67/563)
The Acting President: In paragraph 4 of its
report, the Fifth Committee recommends that the

26

General Assembly appoint the following as members
or alternate members of the United Nations Staff
Pension Committee for a four-year term of office
beginning on 1 January 2013: Mr. Dmitry Chumakov
(Russian Federation); Ms. Valeria María González
Posse (Argentina); Mr. Hitoshi Kozaki (Japan);
Mr. Gerhard Küntzle (Germany); Mr. Lovemore
Mazemo (Zimbabwe); Mr. Philip Richard Okanda
Owade (Kenya); Mr. Mustafizur Rahman (Bangladesh);
and Mr. Thomas Repasch, Jr. (United States of America).
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to appoint Mr. Dmitry Chumakov, Ms. Valeria María
González Posse, Mr. Hitoshi Kozaki, Mr. Gerhard
Küntzle, Mr. Lovemore Mazemo, Mr. Philip Richard
Okanda Owade, Mr. Mustafizur Rahman and
Mr. Thomas Repasch, Jr., as members or alternate
members of the United Nations Staff Pension
Committee for a four-year term of office beginning on
1 January 2013?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-items (a) to (e) of agenda item 111?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

12-59543
