A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/51/157
30 January 1997

Fifty-first session
Agenda item 145
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/51/625)]
51/157.

United Nations Decade of International Law

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 44/23 of 17 November 1989, by which it declared
the period 1990-1999 the United Nations Decade of International Law,
Recalling also that the main purposes of the Decade, according to
resolution 44/23, should be, inter alia:
(a)
To promote acceptance of and respect for the principles of
international law;
(b)
To promote means and methods for the peaceful settlement of
disputes between States, including resort to and full respect for the
International Court of Justice;
(c)
To encourage the progressive development of international law and
its codification;
(d)
To encourage the teaching, study, dissemination and wider
appreciation of international law,
Recalling further its resolution 49/50 of 9 December 1994, to which was
annexed the programme for the activities for the third term (1995-1996) of the
Decade,
Expressing its appreciation to the Secretary-General for his report
submitted pursuant to resolution 50/44 of 11 December 1995,1
Having considered the above-mentioned report,

1

A/51/278 and Add.1.

97-76327

/...

A/RES/51/157
Page 2

Recalling that at the forty-fifth session of the General Assembly the
Sixth Committee established the Working Group on the United Nations Decade of
International Law with a view to preparing generally acceptable
recommendations on the programme of activities for the Decade,
Noting that at the fifty-first session the Sixth Committee reconvened
the Working Group to continue its work in accordance with resolution 50/44 and
all previous resolutions on the question,
Having considered the oral report presented by the Chairman of the
Working Group to the Sixth Committee,2
1.
Expresses its appreciation to the Sixth Committee for the
elaboration, within the framework of its Working Group on the United Nations
Decade of International Law, of the programme for the activities for the final
term (1997-1999) of the Decade, and requests the Working Group to continue its
work at the fifty-second session in accordance with its mandate and methods of
work;
2.
Also expresses its appreciation to States and international
organizations and institutions that have undertaken activities, including
sponsoring conferences on various subjects of international law, in
implementation of the programme for the third term (1995-1996) of the Decade;
3.
Adopts the programme for the activities for the final term (19971999) of the Decade contained in the annex to the present resolution;
4.
Recalls, with appreciation to the Secretary-General, the
successful organization of the United Nations Congress on Public International
Law, held from 13 to 17 March 1995, which focused on the four main purposes of
the Decade, as well as on new challenges and expectations for the twenty-first
century, and welcomes the publication of the proceedings of the Congress;
5.
Welcomes the establishment of the International Tribunal for the
Law of the Sea under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea3 as a
new means of settlement of disputes;
6.
Encourages the Office of Legal Affairs of the Secretariat to
continue in its efforts to bring up to date the publication of the United
Nations Juridical Yearbook;
7.
Invites all States and international organizations and
institutions referred to in the programme to undertake the relevant activities
outlined therein and to provide information in this respect to the SecretaryGeneral for transmission to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session;
8.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly
at its fifty-fourth session, on the basis of the information mentioned in
paragraph 7 above and new information on the activities of the United Nations
relevant to the progressive development of international law and its
codification, a final report on the implementation of the programme;

2
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-first Session,
Sixth Committee, 48th meeting (A/C.6/51/SR.48), and corrigendum.
3
Official Records of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of
the Sea, vol. XVII (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.84.V.3), document
A/CONF.62/122.

/...

A/RES/51/157
Page 3

9.
Encourages States to disseminate at the national level, as
appropriate, information contained in the report of the Secretary-General;
10.
Appeals to States, international organizations and
non-governmental organizations working in the field of international law and
to the private sector to make financial contributions or contributions in kind
for the purpose of facilitating the implementation of the programme;
11.
Once again requests the Secretary-General to bring to the
attention of States and international organizations and institutions working
in the field of international law the programme annexed to the present
resolution;
12.
Notes with appreciation the activities undertaken by the
International Committee of the Red Cross in the field of international
humanitarian law, including with regard to the protection of the environment
in times of armed conflict;
13.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-second
session the item entitled "United Nations Decade of International Law".
85th plenary meeting
16 December 1996
ANNEX
Programme for the activities for the final term (1997-1999)
of the United Nations Decade of International Law
I.

PROMOTION OF THE ACCEPTANCE OF AND RESPECT
FOR THE PRINCIPLES OF INTERNATIONAL LAW

1.
The General Assembly, bearing in mind that maintenance of
international peace and security is the underlying condition for the success
of the implementation of the programme for the United Nations Decade of
International Law, calls upon States to act in accordance with international
law, and in particular the Charter of the United Nations, and encourages
States and international organizations to promote the acceptance of and
respect for the principles of international law.
2.
States are invited to consider, if they have not yet done so,
becoming parties to existing multilateral treaties, in particular those
relevant to the progressive development of international law and its
codification. International organizations under whose auspices such treaties
are concluded are invited to indicate whether they publish periodic reports on
the status of ratifications of and accessions to multilateral treaties and, if
they do not, to indicate whether in their view such a process would be useful.
Consideration should be given to the question of treaties that have not
achieved wider participation or entered into force after a considerable lapse
of time and the circumstances causing the situation.
3.
States and international organizations are encouraged to provide
assistance and technical advice to States, in particular to developing
countries, to facilitate their participation in the process of multilateral
treaty-making, including their adherence to and implementation of multilateral
treaties, in accordance with their national legal systems.
4.
States are encouraged to report to the Secretary-General on ways
and means provided for in the multilateral treaties to which they are parties,
/...

A/RES/51/157
Page 4

regarding the implementation of such treaties. International organizations
are similarly encouraged to report to the Secretary-General on ways and means
provided for by the multilateral treaties concluded under their auspices
regarding the implementation of such treaties. The Secretary-General is
requested to prepare a report on the basis of this information and to submit
it to the General Assembly.
5.
The General Assembly, recognizing the importance of the protection
of cultural property in the event of armed conflict, takes note of the efforts
under way to facilitate the implementation of existing international
instruments in this field.
II.

PROMOTION OF MEANS AND METHODS FOR THE PEACEFUL SETTLEMENT
OF DISPUTES BETWEEN STATES, INCLUDING RESORT TO AND FULL
RESPECT FOR THE INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE

6.
States, the United Nations system of organizations and regional
organizations, including the Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee, as
well as the International Law Association, the Institute of International Law,
the Hispano-Luso-American Institute of International Law and other
international institutions working in the field of international law, and
national societies of international law, are invited to study the means and
methods for the peaceful settlement of disputes between States, including
resort to and full respect for the International Court of Justice, and to
present suggestions for the promotion thereof to the Sixth Committee.
7.
Noting the establishment of the International Tribunal for the Law
of the Sea in October 1996 in accordance with the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea,3 States and other entities referred to in article 20 of
annex VI of the Convention are encouraged to consider making use of the
Tribunal for the peaceful settlement of disputes in accordance with article 21
of annex VI of the Convention.
8.
Taking into account the suggestions mentioned in paragraph 6 of
the present section and with due regard to the recommendations contained in
the report of the Secretary-General entitled "An Agenda for Peace",4 the Sixth
Committee should consider, where appropriate, on the basis of a report of the
Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on the
Strengthening of the Role of the Organization, or of the Working Group on the
United Nations Decade of International Law, the following questions:
(a)
Strengthening the use of means and methods for the peaceful
settlement of disputes, with particular attention to the role to be played by
the United Nations, as well as methods for early identification and prevention
of disputes and their containment;
(b)
Procedures for the peaceful settlement of disputes arising in
specific areas of international law;
(c)
Ways and means of encouraging greater recognition of the role of
the International Court of Justice and its wider use in the peaceful
settlement of disputes;
(d)
Enhancement of cooperation of regional organizations with the
United Nations system of organizations in respect of the peaceful settlement
of disputes;

4

A/47/277-S/24111; see Official Records of the Security Council, Fortyseventh Year, Supplement for April, May and June 1992, document S/24111.
/...

A/RES/51/157
Page 5

(e)

Wider use of the Permanent Court of Arbitration.
III.

ENCOURAGEMENT OF THE PROGRESSIVE DEVELOPMENT
OF INTERNATIONAL LAW AND ITS CODIFICATION

9.
International organizations, including the United Nations system
of organizations and regional organizations, are invited to submit to the
Secretary-General of the United Nations summary information regarding the
programme and results of their work relevant to the progressive development of
international law and its codification, including their suggestions for future
work in their specialized field, with an indication of the appropriate forum
to undertake such work. Similarly, the Secretary-General is requested to
prepare a report on the relevant activities of the United Nations, including
those of the International Law Commission. Such information should be
presented in a final report by the Secretary-General to the Sixth Committee.
10.
On the basis of the information mentioned in paragraph 9 above,
States are invited to submit suggestions for consideration by the Sixth
Committee and, as appropriate, recommendations. In particular, efforts should
be made to identify areas of international law that might be ripe for
progressive development or codification.
11.
The Sixth Committee should study, taking into account General
Assembly resolution 684 (VII) of 6 November 1952,5 its coordinating role with
respect to, inter alia, the drafting of provisions of a legal nature and the
consistent use of legal terminology in international instruments adopted by
the General Assembly. States are invited to present proposals in this regard
to the Sixth Committee.
12.
The Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on
the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization should continue to study
possible measures to strengthen the United Nations system for the maintenance
of international peace and security. In that context, the Special Committee
should bear in mind the debate within the United Nations, in particular in the
General Assembly, on the report of the Secretary-General entitled "An Agenda
for Peace".
IV.

ENCOURAGEMENT OF THE TEACHING, STUDY, DISSEMINATION
AND WIDER APPRECIATION OF INTERNATIONAL LAW

13.
Within the context of considering appropriate activities to mark
the final term of the Decade's programme, States, the United Nations system of
organizations and regional organizations and institutions referred to in the
programme should encourage:
(a)
The publication of essays on subjects of international law written
by legal advisers of States and international organizations, scholars and
other legal practitioners providing a useful perspective on international law
as viewed from their standpoint;
(b)
The organization at the national, regional and international level
of symposia, conferences, seminars, lectures and meetings on selected topics
or themes of international law during the remaining years of the Decade to
celebrate the end of it. Topics for consideration could include, without
limiting other suggestions, the contribution of the United Nations to

5

See annex II to the rules of procedure of the General Assembly
(A/520/Rev.15).
/...

A/RES/51/157
Page 6

international law; more effective means of implementing the rules of
international law; merits or otherwise of treaties and other forms of
instruments such as resolutions, declarations and so on; future topics for the
International Law Commission; and the role of the International Court of
Justice in the settlement of disputes and advisory opinions.
14.
The Advisory Committee on the United Nations Programme of
Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of
International Law should, in the context of the Decade, continue to formulate,
as appropriate and in a timely manner, relevant guidelines for the Programme's
activities and report to the Sixth Committee on the activities carried out
under the Programme in accordance with such guidelines. Special emphasis
should be given to supporting academic and professional institutions already
carrying out research and education in international law, as well as to
encouraging the establishment of such institutions where they might not exist,
in particular in the developing countries. States and other public or private
bodies are encouraged to contribute to the strengthening of the Programme.
15.
States and law faculties of higher educational institutions are
encouraged to include international law as a core subject in their curricula.
They are also encouraged to introduce courses in international law for
students studying law, political science, social sciences and other relevant
disciplines; they should study the possibility of introducing topics of
international law in the curricula of schools at the primary and secondary
levels. They should also consider introducing public international law
courses geared towards career training and the establishment of clinical
programmes in various areas of international law. Cooperation between
institutions at the university level among developing countries, on the one
hand, and their cooperation with those of developed countries, on the other,
should be encouraged.
16.
States should consider convening conferences of experts at the
national and regional levels in order to study the question of preparing model
curricula and materials for courses in international law, training of teachers
in international law, preparation of textbooks on international law and the
use of modern technology to facilitate the teaching of and research in
international law.
17.
States, international organizations and professional and academic
institutions should consider making available materials to the United Nations
audio-visual library on international law proposed by the Advisory Committee
on the United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study,
Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law.
18.
States are encouraged to organize special training in
international law for legal professionals, including judges, and personnel of
ministries of foreign affairs and other relevant ministries as well as
military personnel. The United Nations Institute for Training and Research,
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the
Hague Academy of International Law, the International Institute of
Humanitarian Law, regional organizations and the International Committee of
the Red Cross are invited to continue cooperating with States in this respect.
19.
In connection with training of military personnel, States are
encouraged to foster the teaching and dissemination of the principles
governing the protection of the environment in times of armed conflict and
should consider the possibility of making use of the guidelines for military

/...

A/RES/51/157
Page 7

manuals and instructions prepared by the International Committee of the Red
Cross.6
20.
Cooperation among developing countries, as well as between
developed and developing countries, in particular among those persons who are
involved in the practice of international law, for exchanging experience and
for mutual assistance in the field of international law, including assistance
in providing textbooks and manuals of international law, is encouraged.
21.
In order to make better known the practice of international law,
States and international and regional organizations should endeavour to
publish, if they have not yet done so, summaries, repertories or yearbooks of
their practice. They should also endeavour to place this material on computer
networks for wider and instant distribution. The Office of Legal Affairs of
the Secretariat is encouraged to continue its efforts in this regard,
including through its participation in the Global Legal Information Network
project.
22.
The Secretary-General, in cooperation with the Registry of the
International Court of Justice, is encouraged to publish, to the extent
feasible and in a timely manner, the publication updating the Summaries of the
Judgments, Advisory Opinions and Orders of the International Court of Justice
(1948-1991),7 at present under preparation, in all official languages of the
Organization.
23.
Other international courts and tribunals, including the European
Court of Human Rights and the Inter-American Court of Human Rights, are
invited to disseminate more widely their judgements and advisory opinions and
to consider preparing thematic or analytical summaries thereof.
24.
International organizations are encouraged to publish treaties
concluded under their auspices, if they have not yet done so. Timely
publication of the United Nations Juridical Yearbook is also encouraged.
V.

PROCEDURES AND ORGANIZATIONAL ASPECTS

25.
The Sixth Committee, working primarily through its Working Group
on the United Nations Decade of International Law and with the assistance of
the Secretariat, will be the coordinating body of the programme for the
Decade. The question of the use of an intra-sessional, inter-sessional or
existing body to carry out specific activities of the programme may be
considered by the General Assembly.
26.
States are encouraged to establish, as necessary, national,
subregional and regional committees, which may assist in the implementation of
the programme for the Decade. Non-governmental organizations are encouraged
to promote the purposes of the Decade within their fields of activity, as
appropriate.
27.
Voluntary contributions from Governments, international
organizations and other sources, including the private sector, would be useful
and are strongly encouraged in order to implement the programme for the
Decade. To that end, the establishment of a trust fund to be administered by
the Secretary-General might be considered by the General Assembly.

6

A/49/323, annex.

7

United Nations publication, Sales No. E.92.V.5.
