S/PV.7789

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7789

th meeting
Tuesday, 11 October 2016, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Iliichev . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Moustafa
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Bessho
Mrs. Adnin
Mrs. Schwalger
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The question concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (S/2016/753)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-31783 (E)
*1631783*

S/PV.7789

The question concerning Haiti

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.

(spoke in English)
We are in solidarity, together with the people and
the Government of Haiti, as the country again faces
loss of life and destruction caused by natural disaster.
I am deeply saddened by the deaths and the suffering
among Haitian families and the overall physical toll on
the country inflicted by Hurricane Matthew.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The question concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(S/2016/753)

(spoke in French)

The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Argentina,
Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Haiti, Mexico and
Peru to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Sandra
Honoré, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti, to participate in this meeting.
Ms. Honoré is joining us via video-teleconference
from Port-au-Prince.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Her Excellency
Ms. Joanne Adamson, Deputy Head of the Delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2016/753, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti.
I now give the floor to Ms. Honoré.
Ms. Honoré: I would like to express my gratitude
to the Russian Federation, in its capacity as President
of the Security Council, for convening today’s meeting
on Haiti and the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
(spoke in French)
I take this opportunity also to welcome the presence
of the Permanent Representative of the Republic
of Haiti.
2/29

11/10/2016

Before briefing the Council on the impact of
Hurricane Matthew and the immediate measures
already taken by the United Nations in Haiti, I should
like to convey my deepest condolences to the people
and the Government of Haiti.
(spoke in English)
The category 4 hurricane made landfall on 4 October
in south-western Haiti, causing death, widespread
damage, flooding and displacement, resulting in the
largest humanitarian crisis in Haiti since the 2010
earthquake. The Government of Haiti estimates that
more than 2.1 million persons have been affected, with
more than 1 4 million in need of urgent humanitarian
assistance. The Ministry of the Interior has confirmed
372 deaths — a figure that is likely to rise — while
more than 60,000 people have been evacuated and
remain in temporary shelters.
Hurricane Matthew impacted the entire south of the
country, with the departments of Grande Anse, Nippes,
Sud and Sud-Est bearing the brunt of the destruction.
In the affected area, where small-scale farming is the
main source of income, the livelihoods of hundreds
of thousands of people have been lost as up to 80 per
cent of crops and livestock vanished. The hurricane
inflicted major damage on Haiti’s public infrastructure,
washing away roads and bridges, blowing away tin
roofs, flooding schools — many identified to serve as
voting centres — and leaving whole towns submerged
and inaccessible for several days. A critical bridge
connecting the southern peninsula to the capital, Portau-Prince, collapsed, cutting off essential supply lines
and disrupting commercial food supply chains, which
has further impeded access to the affected areas, which
also lost telephone communication.
Although the Government is still assessing the full
extent of the physical damage, as access to the affected
areas is gradually expanded, there can be no doubt that
this is a humanitarian tragedy and an acute emergency
situation, with 1.4 million persons in need of immediate
16-31783

11/10/2016

The question concerning Haiti

assistance from the Haitian Government, with support
from its international partners. During two visits to the
southern peninsula, I myself witnessed how desperately
that assistance is needed. And it is needed quickly, as
health conditions deteriorate and basic supplies are
running out.
The health impact of this disaster cannot be
overestimated. Water and sanitation infrastructure,
already fragile, have been severely damaged. The
absence of drinking water and the contamination by
sewage of other water sources is causing a very high
level of infections from diarrhoeal disease, including,
but not exclusively, cholera. In response, we are
providing water-purification systems and medicine to
hard-to-reach areas. There are hundreds of suspected
cholera cases, and we are already seeing the first
deaths. Protecting vulnerable populations from cholera
and ensuring that the restoration and, in some cases, the
installation of water and sanitation systems has to be
one of the priorities for humanitarian action.
To address those needs and to provide other
life-saving assistance to 750,000 persons for the next
three months, the United Nations and humanitarian
agencies yesterday launched a flash appeal for
$120 million. I express my sincere thanks to all
countries for the prompt support they have provided
and continue to provide, and I call on all Member States
to contribute urgently to the appeal, in support of the
response being led by the Government of Haiti. In that
context, I wish to commend the Government for the
leadership that it has so far demonstrated in setting the
priorities and coordinating the immediate response. I
encourage all partners to align with that leadership and
further strengthen the capacities of the Civil Protection
Directorate and the ministries concerned. Dealing with
recovery and reconstruction in the aftermath of the
hurricane will require, more than ever, a coordinated
approach behind an agenda defined by the Government.
The United Nations, along with other governmental
and non-governmental and international and local
partners, started supporting the Haitian authorities
in addressing the immediate needs of the affected
population in shelter, water, sanitation and food
assistance during this emergency response phase, and
even before, by pre-positioning stocks of life-saving
food and non-food items. MINUSTAH civilian and
uniformed personnel and capacities are being put to full
use in support of the humanitarian efforts — by opening
up access to roads, providing airlift and supporting the

S/PV.7789

Haitian National Police (HNP) in securing humanitarian
workers and stocks, among other tasks.
Not only did Hurricane Matthew bring destruction
to Haiti, it has also affected the country’s political
outlook, rendering impossible the holding on 9 October
of the presidential elections, repeated from last year, as
well as the partial senatorial elections and legislative
re-runs. That is despite the resolve shown by the Haitian
Government, the Provisional Electoral Council and the
Haitian National Police in preparing for the elections
and working to create a conducive environment.
In the light of the considerable humanitarian
challenges and the damage to critical infrastructure
caused by the hurricane, the Provisional Electoral
Council postponed the elections pending the completion
of an assessment of the impact of the hurricane on the
electoral process, including of the Provisional Electoral
Council’s capacities in the departments. Preliminary
reports by the Council indicate that at least 70 per
cent of voting centres may have been affected in Sud
department, and even more in Grand’Anse, where many
areas are still inaccessible.
Prior to the disruption caused by the hurricane,
technical preparations had largely been on track for
the holding of the elections. Most political actors were
committed to renewing the country’s key democratic
institutions through elections as a crucial first step
towards Haiti’s return to constitutional order following
the extended period of transitional governance. No
political party boycotted the process, and the large
number of registered candidates and parties reflected
broad participation by actors across the political
spectrum, setting the stage for an inclusive electoral
process.
(spoke in French)
The commitment shown by the Haitian authorities
with regard to ownership of all aspects of the electoral
process, including financial and operational aspects,
is promising, especially in the context of the eventual
drawdown of MINUSTAH. While the Provisional
Electoral Council is preparing to announce a new
electoral calendar, it is important to find the right
balance to maintain the momentum generated for
elections and to take into account the technical and
political considerations, while facing the largest
humanitarian crisis that Haiti has known since 2010.

16-317833/29

S/PV.7789

The question concerning Haiti

(spoke in English)
In the light of the simultaneous challenges of
addressing the impact of the hurricane and preparing
for the holding of the much-anticipated elections, the
Provisional Electoral Council and the Haitian National
Police will need vigorous support from the Government
and its international partners to build on the
pre-hurricane preparations and to ensure the credibility
and the integrity of the process. Furthermore, now more
than ever, all the necessary measures must be taken to
ensure that the political process is managed in a manner
that generates the consensus needed among the national
actors to overcome the political and humanitarian
challenges facing the country. I therefore call on all
national actors to place the needs of the Haitian people
above all and unite behind this goal, including with a
view to preserving the relative stability that marked
the security situation prior to the passing of Hurricane
Matthew and throughout the electoral campaign. In
that context, I condemn the random attacks on vehicles
transporting food and other life-saving supplies, and
I urge the country’s authorities to take the necessary
measures to prevent such attacks from happening.
Despite the imperative need for all actors,
including MINUSTAH, to focus on the emergency
response, we cannot lose sight of the longer-term
challenges and priorities. In addition to facilitating and
supporting a coordinated Government-led recovery
and reconstruction agenda, no effort can be spared to
continue strengthening the rule-of-law institutions,
most notably the Haitian National Police. Despite
progress in both strength and performance since my
previous briefing, the Haitian National Police is yet
to become operationally independent and continues
to require support from both the Government of Haiti
and international partners to fully provide for security
throughout the country.
Less than three months before the end of the
2012-2016 HNP development plan, work on the HNP
strategic plan for the period 2017-2021 is reaching
its final stages, including determining objectives
with respect to the required police-to-population
ratio and identifying areas in which continuous
specialized support is needed for further institutional
and operational improvement of the Haitian National
Police. The new five-year strategy will also provide
an additional impetus for MINUSTAH’s security
transitioning planning, thereby informing the strategic
4/29

11/10/2016

assessment that is expected to be conducted prior to the
expiration of the Mission’s mandate.
The impact of Hurricane Matthew on the political
process and on stability in the country can only serve
to reconfirm the recommendation of the SecretaryGeneral for a six-month extension, at the current force
and police strength, until 15 April 2017. That will
allow MINUSTAH to support the Haitian authorities
in their efforts to return to full constitutional order
in the wake of the humanitarian crisis created by
Hurricane Matthew.
I thank all my colleagues in MINUSTAH and the
United Nations country team for their dedication and
commitment during this challenging period for Haiti,
and express my sincere respect to all the humanitarian
and civil protection workers, who are making tireless
efforts under severe conditions. I call on all of Haiti’s
international partners to continue to lend their support
to the country in order to rapidly overcome the new
challenges occasioned by the hurricane so that everyone
can refocus on strengthening the country’s economic,
physical and institutional infrastructure.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Ms. Honoré for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): We
thank Special Representative Honoré for her briefing
today. First and foremost, I want to convey our deepest
condolences to the Government and the people of
Haiti for the devastation and loss of life that Hurricane
Matthew inflicted last week. Against that backdrop, I
am going to speak today about both the importance of
disaster relief efforts, including what the United States
is doing to help, and the political situation in Haiti,
while recognizing that the storm does not change the
fact that we are at a critical moment in Haiti’s political
life and for the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH).
When Hurricane Matthew swept through Haiti
and the region last week, it claimed hundreds of lives,
levelled homes and businesses and dealt a severe
blow to the country’s infrastructure and agriculture,
especially on the southern coast. The images coming
from Haiti are simply searing and heartbreaking. We,
the international community, must do all that we can
to help Haiti at this time. To our Haitian brothers and
16-31783

11/10/2016

The question concerning Haiti

sisters, please know that the people of the United
States of America stand with them. The United States
Agency for International Development (USAID), with
support from the Department of Defence, as well as
other key United States partners, including the Centers
for Disease Control, is leading our response. Through
USAID, we have so far made available $1.3 million
in humanitarian assistance for communities in Haiti
affected by the hurricane. As of 11 October, our
Department of Defence-led task force has delivered
more than 186,000 pounds of relief commodities, aid
and supplies to areas devastated by Hurricane Matthew.
We know that much more remains to be done as the
full extent of Hurricane Matthew’s damage becomes
known. But in the immediate term, yesterday, the
United Nations, as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General just mentioned, issued a flash
appeal calling for an additional $120 million to meet
immediate lifesaving needs. Haiti needs assistance as
soon as possible, and it is incumbent upon all of us to
step up and contribute.
The fresh humanitarian challenges facing Haiti
are grave and can be met only by fully functioning
institutions. That is why, even with the devastation
brought about by the hurricane, we strongly urge the
Government of Haiti to continue to move towards
holding elections as soon as possible. The Haitian
people need elected representatives at all levels of
Government who can address the aftermath of the
crisis and start promoting policies that will build a
strong and prosperous Haiti. That means improving the
business and investment climate and building a model
for economic growth. It means fighting corruption
and helping to create an independent and transparent
judicial system so that all feel that they will get fair
treatment under the law.
As damaging as the hurricane was, we must not
allow it to undo the impressive gains that the Haitian
Government and the electoral officials have made
towards the elections. The decision of Haitian officials
to repeat the first round of presidential elections has
presented Haiti with an opportunity to improve on the
2015 process. While the United States did not believe
that a repeat was warranted, we are encouraged by steps
that Haiti’s electoral authority has taken to address
the shortcomings identified in the previous elections,
including requiring all participants to identify their
voting location in advance of election day. We therefore
look forward to the final round of elections on 8 January

S/PV.7789

2017 and to welcoming the seating of a new President
on 7 February 2017. We call on the Government of Haiti
at all levels to remain politically neutral throughout the
electoral process and not support any one candidate or
party. And we call on all actors, especially candidates
and political parties, to engage peacefully in the
political process.
The United States Government is among the
donors providing funding for an international observer
mission from the Organization of American States
and local Haitian observers in an effort to strengthen
transparency and bolster voter confidence. We strongly
urge all Haitians to go to the polls and exercise their
right to choose Haiti’s next leader, confident that the
outcome will reflect their voice.
Turning to the future of MINUSTAH, we look
forward to a strategic assessment mission to be
deployed during this mandate period, which will
make recommendations on the possible withdrawal
of MINUSTAH and on a future presence and role of
the United Nations in Haiti in a manner that is fit for
purpose.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s new efforts
to better address cholera in Haiti for both treatment
and prevention and to develop a proposal on material
assistance and support to those most directly affected
by the awful cholera epidemic. We look forward to
hearing more details about that new approach, and
welcome collaboration between the United Nations and
Haiti, with the support of the Member States, to devise
an appropriate response to the crisis.
As always, we thank the men and women of
MINUSTAH, the troop and police contributors and the
Group of Friends for Haiti for their tireless efforts to
promote stabilization and development, especially at
this critical time.
I would like to conclude by reaffirming the close
ties between the United States of America and Haiti.
We are not only neighbours, but also partners and
friends. The United States looks forward to deepening
that partnership further by working together with an
elected Haitian President who can address key issues,
such as electoral and judicial reform, anti-corruption
efforts and economic growth. We are eager to work
together with that new President in our shared goal of
ensuring that the future will be strong and bright and
benefit the people of Haiti.

16-317835/29

S/PV.7789

The question concerning Haiti

Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I would like to thank
Special Representative Honoré for her useful briefing.
While Ukraine aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union, I would
like to make a few comments in my national capacity.
Unfortunately, as we deliberate in this Chamber,
Haiti is suffering the consequences of the devastating
hurricane. In that regard, I would like to convey our
sincere condolences to the people of Haiti on the loss
of hundreds of lives and the destruction of thousands of
homes. Ukraine stands in solidarity with this nation in
the face of such a challenge. Yet even before the latest
natural disaster struck Haiti, it was going through a
critical humanitarian and socioeconomic situation.
According to the latest report (S/2016/753) of the
Secretary-General report, an estimated 3.6 million
people, or one third of Haiti’s population, face food
insecurity after three years of severe drought. Over
61,000 individuals remain internally displaced since
the 2010 earthquake. It is during such natural disasters
as Hurricane Matthew and the 2010 earthquake that the
weakness of Haiti’s State governance becomes most
visible. On numerous occasions, the Security Council
appealed to the political parties in Haiti to urgently
resolve the political deadlock. A lack of progress on this
track and the inability of players to reach compromises
and to adopt long-overdue decisions keep the country’s
State machinery on the perpetual verge of collapse. The
people of Haiti deserve better than that.
After a long period of political uncertainty and
delay, the country was getting ready for elections
last Sunday. Yet those plans were disrupted by the
hurricane. In that context, we hope that a new electoral
calendar will be announced soon. Ukraine reaffirms its
support for credible, transparent, inclusive and secure
elections that will reflect the will of the Haitian people.
The international community needs the Government of
Haiti as a reliable partner in advancing development,
democracy, human rights and other vital objectives.
Ukraine welcomes the Secretary-General’s
recommendations concerning the mandate of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
We support the idea of extending it for six months until
15 April 2017, and of deploying a strategic assessment
mission by the end of that period. We share the opinion
that it would be preferable to conduct the strategic
assessment mission after a President has been elected
and inaugurated. However, considering the troubling
6/29

11/10/2016

trends in the country’s political development, we do not
think the assessment mission should be contingent on
the inauguration timetable.
Ukraine commends the important role that
MINUSTAH continues to play in ensuring stability and
security in Haiti. Its contribution to strengthening the
capacity of the Haitian National Police is particularly
important. It is encouraging that we have seen some
progress in that area, but according to the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2016/753), the police are currently
present in only 261 of the country’s 570 communal
sections. It will therefore be extremely important to try
to achieve the goal of 15,000 fully operational serving
police officers by the end of 2017.
Finally, we would like to underline the necessity
of ensuring that the United Nations, other multilateral
agencies, international and regional partners and
Member States continue their efforts to support Haiti’s
critical needs, and in that regard to highlight the flash
appeal launched by the United Nations yesterday.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I am grateful to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
her briefing.
Our thoughts are with the people of Haiti and the
region affected by Hurricane Matthew. Along with
many partners in Haiti, the United Kingdom is working
to establish the extent of the damage and the most
pressing humanitarian needs. We are stepping up to
support those affected. We have already sent experts
and relief suppliers to the region and have allocated
£5 million to Haiti. We would like to express our
solidarity with those hit by the devastating hurricane.
The people of Haiti are unfortunately no strangers to
the destructive effects of natural disasters. They have
shown their resilience as a country time and again, and
I hope that the months and years ahead will see homes
rebuilt and livelihoods restored.
Democracy is an essential part of Haiti’s path
forward, but speedy elections cannot come at the
expense of those who desperately need to rebuild.
As a result of the hurricane, the decision to postpone
the elections is unfortunate but understandable in
the highly unusual circumstances. Considering the
loss of life, displacement of people and significant
disruption of infrastructure, we support the decision,
which will ensure that the authorities can focus fully
on the recovery effort. We urge the Haitian authorities
to ensure that as soon as it is feasible for voters in all
16-31783

11/10/2016

The question concerning Haiti

S/PV.7789

parts of the country to be able to participate they move
towards rescheduling the elections.

institutional improvements that will make Haiti more
resilient over the long term.

The recent events highlight the continued relevance
of the full range of the work of the United Nations in
Haiti, and the importance of deciding the role that we the
Council should play in it. I join the Secretary-General
in thanking everyone involved in the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti and the United Nations
country team for their ongoing commitment to Haiti.
With hundreds of lives lost and images of yet another
round of devastation dealt to Haiti, it would be easy
to lose sight of the achievements that the country has
made in recent years. The security situation, although
fragile, remains stable, and the performance of the
Haitian National Police continues to improve. We must
now ensure that progress is consolidated and continues
to evolve. Getting the Haitian National Police to a
stage where they can stand on their own feet, without
assistance, is paramount.

I would like to take a moment to mention the
devastation caused by Hurricane Matthew. Japan would
like to express its deep sorrow and affirm its continued
solidarity with the Haitian people, and we thank
MINUSTAH and donor countries and institutions for
their important emergency support. Japan is also joining
the humanitarian effort by supplying emergency relief
goods and providing support via the Japanese food
assistance programme.

Haiti is at a turning point on the path towards the
consolidation of stability and democracy, and although
significant challenges remain, we must ensure that the
presence and future role of the United Nations in Haiti is
adapted to best suit the conditions there. Recent events
have demonstrated Haiti’s vulnerability to natural
disasters and the fragility of gains. Its significant
needs are clear — long-term development assistance,
resilient infrastructure, support in establishing durable
and diverse livelihoods and ongoing backing for the
creation of a professional and effective police force.
The United Kingdom stands ready to help on
those fronts, but we do not believe that a peacekeeping
mission is the best vehicle any longer for responding to
those needs. We therefore look forward to the results
of the forthcoming strategic assessment mission, and
welcome the continuing preparatory work on a joint
transition plan aimed at consolidating Haiti’s success.
We must ensure that the Mission quickly hands over
responsibilities where other actors on the ground,
including the United Nations country team, have a
comparative advantage in conducting them.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to express my
gratitude to Ms. Sandra Honoré, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for her thorough briefing.
Japan commends the Special Representative and
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) for their continued support to Haiti’s
reconstruction, stability and security, including the

In the light of the severe damage caused by the
hurricane, we understand that postponing the elections
scheduled for 9 October was unavoidable. We look
forward to the announcement of a new electoral calendar
by 12 October. Much progress was made on electoral
preparations prior to the hurricane, and we have high
hopes for a fair, transparent and smooth election once
the situation subsides. Let me be direct — public and
international trust depends on it.
Beyond the disaster response, the fruits of
MINUSTAH’s efforts are visible across Haitian society
today. We see them in the Special Representative’s
use of her good offices in support of elections and
the restoration of constitutional order. We see them
in community violence reduction programmes,
improved criminal justice procedure and the response
to criminal gangs. And we see them in security-sector
support to the Haitian National Police on patrols, the
rule of law, community policing and the development
of the 2017-2021 strategic plan. We are pleased that
the Haitian National Police’s capacity has been
enhanced and believe that a professional and nationally
owned security sector will enable Haiti to better
stand on its own. In that regard, we look forward to
recommendations from the Secretary-General on the
future of the United Nations role in Haiti, based on a
strategic assessment over the course of the six-month
extension of MINUSTAH’s mandate.
I would also like to touch on the issue of cholera,
which has plagued Haiti for too long and is likely to
worsen, owing to the hurricane. We believe that in
the long term, the best measures for fighting maladies
such as cholera are poverty reduction and improved
infrastructure, with a focus on water, sanitation
and hygiene. Japan has been supporting Haiti’s
reconstruction, especially improving cholera prevention

16-317837/29

S/PV.7789

The question concerning Haiti

via international institutions, and will continue to make
the greatest possible effort in that regard.
Over the long term, our partnership with Haiti is
based on national ownership of State-building processes,
including elections. The hurricane has brought new
challenges, but we are confident that the Haitian
people will overcome them. Ultimately, nationally led
development and strengthened institutions will enable
the country to weather any storm. Japan will be there to
help along the way.
Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I wish to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Honoré for
her comprehensive briefing. I join Council members in
expressing my deepest condolences and in conveying
my heartfelt sympathy on behalf of the Government
and people of Malaysia to the Government and people
of Haiti in the tragic aftermath of Hurricane Matthew.
Our thoughts and prayers and solidarity are with the
people of Haiti during this difficult time.
The onset of Hurricane Matthew has undoubtedly
dealt a severe blow to the ongoing national and
international efforts in support of Haiti’s political
security transition and socioeconomic development to
say the least. Even so, we take to heart the courage and
resilience demonstrated by the Haitian people in the
aftermath of the 2010 earthquake and we are convinced
that they will be able to rise to the present challenges
as well.
Malaysia remains committed to and will spare
no effort in helping to galvanize and mobilize the
necessary support, aid and assistance for Haiti. We take
good note of Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Honoré’s comprehensive and sobering briefing
and wish to place on record our great appreciation to
her and the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH), the United Nations country team
and other agencies on the ground for their unstinting
efforts to address the immediate humanitarian needs
of the population. In this connection, we welcome the
launch of the flash aid appeal by the Secretary-General
yesterday. It is critical that the request for assistance be
met and that it be met soon.
I wish to also place on record Malaysia’s
appreciation to the Secretary-General for recognizing
the United Nations contributory role to the spread of
cholera in Haiti in the wake of the 2010 earthquake.
More importantly, we commend the SecretaryGeneral’s recent announcement during the General
8/29

11/10/2016

Assembly’s high-level week on a proposed new package
of measures, including intensifying efforts to build
some water sanitation and health systems.
To say that Hurricane Matthew has had a severe
negative impact on Haiti and its people would be a gross
understatement. The cost of rebuilding the civilian
infrastructure, transport and communications network
is immense. With regard to short-term and immediate
assistance by United Nations actors and agencies. We
are of the view that it would be helpful to quickly
identify possible quick-impact projects with a view
to stabilizing the socioeconomic situation of Haitians
in light of the devastation of crops and food stocks
towards ensuring food security for the most vulnerable
segments of the population.
But for Hurricane Mathew, this past weekend
would have seen Haitians going to the polls to elect a
new president. As such, while we understand the need
for postponement, we hope that any rescheduling of
the presidential and legislative elections can take place
as soon as possible. This is crucial to ensuring that
Haiti can continue on the path towards full restoration
and constitutional order. To this end, we call upon
all Haitian political parties and players to cooperate
with the interim Administration and the Provisional
Electoral Council so that credible, smooth, transparent
and inclusive elections could be held as soon as possible.
The results of the municipal level elections released
last July set a good example, and we are pleased to note
that in all 139 municipal councils, at least one in three
members is a woman, in line with the constitutional
provision of a 30 per cent quota for women in public
positions. In this regard, we urge Special Representative
Honoré to continue her good office’s work in building
consensus in paving the way forward for the presidential
and legislative elections.
On a related note, we welcome the efforts towards a
steady strengthening of rule of law institutions in Haiti,
especially the strides made by the Haitian National Police
(HNP). We are encouraged by the close cooperation
and collaboration between HNP and MINUSTAH in
terms of operational planning and training, as well as
on joint operations and patrols in combatting crime, as
well as election-related violence. No doubt, the current
situation is extremely challenging for the interim
administrations, including the security forces who are
now faced with increased demands by the population.
We hope that the safety, security and welfare of the
16-31783

11/10/2016

The question concerning Haiti

S/PV.7789

civilian population, especially of women and children,
the disabled and the elderly will be prioritized. We
welcome the ongoing implementation of the HNP’s
2012-2016 strategic plan and note that the drafting of
the 2017-2021 strategic plan has also commenced. We
see these as crucial steps towards assessing needs and
identifying areas to further strengthen the HNP so that
it may fully assume its responsibilities, particularly
after the drawdown or exit of MINUSTAH.

In the face of these challenges, the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) — to
which Egypt has contributed a police contingent — has
played an important role in ensuring that humanitarian
aid has reached the Haitian people. The Mission took
part in the relief and rescue operations following the
hurricane. Those efforts must continue so that Haiti
does not again face a humanitarian crisis similar to that
which followed the 2010 earthquake.

In this regard, we could support the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation to extend MINUSTAH’s
mandate by six months. At the same time, we are of
the view that the Secretariat could undertake initial
preparatory work on the future presence and role of the
United Nations in Haiti soon on the understanding that
a full strategic assessment would take place after the
inauguration of the new president.

Before the MINUSTAH mandate is renewed, Egypt
calls for the issue to be reviewed in an open-minded
manner, given the current suffering of the Haitian
people and the number of challenges that the country is
facing. It is therefore necessary to undertake a strategic
assessment of the United Nations presence in Haiti,
while taking into account all current challenges and
the way in which MINUSTAH is addressing them. It
is vital that such an assessment include real solutions
to address the underlying causes of the country’s
instability.

In conclusion, I wish to once again express
my delegation’s utmost appreciation to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Honoré, the
entire MINUSTAH team, as well as the United Nations
country team for their tirelessness and diligence in
spearheading the international community’s relief
and assistance effort in Haiti. They have our utmost
gratitude and respect.
Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, allow me to echo previous speakers by
expressing my sincere condolences to the people and
the Government of Haiti following Hurricane Matthew.
I can assure Haiti of Egypt’s support. I would like
to thank Ms. Sandra Honoré for her comprehensive
briefing and express our support for the efforts that she
and her team are making in Haiti.
Haiti is at a turning point in its history. It is
encountering enormous challenges in different areas,
including the disastrous humanitarian situation and
ongoing political, security and economic challenges.
The joint support of the international community
to Haiti is therefore absolutely vital now. Hurricane
Matthew has provoked a dire humanitarian situation,
as Ms. Honoré said a moment ago. Basic infrastructure
has been destroyed, in particular infrastructure that
the Haitian authorities were going to use as ballot
stations. There is also a cholera epidemic and an acute
food crisis. For that reason, I urge the international
community to step up its efforts in supporting Haiti
during this humanitarian crisis.

The country’s political process, which should have
led to presidential elections on 9 October, has been
impacted by the hurricane. The Haitian authorities have
found themselves obliged to postpone the elections,
without fixing a new date for them, in the light of the
fact that the hurricane destroyed numerous polling
stations. The national authorities were counting on their
own resources to conduct the elections, which clearly
demonstrates their determination to establish political
stability in the country. We are firmly convinced that
the Haitian authorities understand the importance of the
election taking place on the date set in order to avoid
another political crisis that would impact the country’s
security, economy and society as a whole.
When the Council begins its consideration of
extending the mandate of MINUSTAH, it should take
account of the fact that, despite a relative drop in crime
over recent months, the number of demonstrations and
protests has been increasing since April, exposing
the fragility of the security situation, particularly
in the current humanitarian crisis. I must therefore
congratulate MINUSTAH on its efforts. The Mission
has indeed played a lead role in bolstering national
institutions and in institutional capacity-building,
particularly of the country’s security and judicial
institutions.
I appeal to Member States and all troop-contributing
countries to continue to support the country’s national

16-317839/29

S/PV.7789

The question concerning Haiti

authorities and to step up efforts to finish building
national security institutions. In that regard, we call for
a genuine partnership with the Economic and Social
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission in order to
deliver comprehensive international aid to Haiti during
the current transition phase, in which the country is
seeking to move beyond its decades-long instability.
In conclusion, I would like to express our full
support for the people and the Government of Haiti. We
are convinced that they will succeed in overcoming this
very delicate and complex period.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): We are grateful to Ms. Honoré
for her briefing on the situation in Haiti and the
activities of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH). We welcome the Permanent
Representative of Haiti to this meeting and through
him, the Republic of Angola conveys its heartfelt
condolences to the families of the Haitians killed by
Hurricane Matthew, and to the Government of Haiti,
which is confronted with a humanitarian crisis of
catastrophic proportions at a time when Haiti is still
struggling to recover from the 2010 earthquake. The
images of disruption and overall destruction are indeed
heartbreaking.

11/10/2016

ongoing partnership between MINUSTAH and the
Haitian National Police and other institutions tasked
with ensuring the rule of law. Those are encouraging
developments that we hope will secure an environment
conducive to the holding of presidential elections.
We were encouraged by the fact that the Government
of Haiti has fulfilled its commitment to providing the
necessary funding for the elections and by the signing
of the integrated security plan for the elections by
the Director General of the Haitian National Police
and MINUSTAH’s Police Commissioner and Force
Commander, in order to deploy a robust police and
military force throughout the country to ensure security
during the electoral period. The cooperation established
between the Government of Haiti, MINUSTAH,
the United Nations Development Programme, the
United Nations Office for Project Services and other
international partners in support of the electoral process
and in providing technical and logistical support,
training electoral staff in vote tabulation, outreach
campaigns and civic education will certainly positively
impact the electoral process once it resumes.

We deeply regret the consequences of this disaster,
which has led to the postponement of the much-anticipated
presidential, senatorial and legislative elections. We
hope that new dates will be announced soon. The
political gains that took place in the reporting period
and that were subsequently washed away by Hurricane
Matthew were possible thanks to the outstanding
work of the country’s Government, MINUSTAH the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, which led a
security and political assessment mission to Haiti and
urged Haitian interlocutors to find solutions to the
protracted crisis of Governance and to ensure the swift
completion of the electoral process.

We
support
the
Secretary-General’s
recommendation to extend the mandate of MINUSTAH
for a further six months with the current authorized
personnel. The catastrophe that has struck Haiti will
certainly change the Mission’s future plans. We
await the strategic assessment on the future work of
MINUSTAH, hoping it will take into account that,
if Haitians are to take full control of the destiny of
their country, proper conditions must be effectively in
place. Therefore, we urge all national actors to pursue
the political and electoral process, engage decisively
and with rigour in the country’s reconstruction, and
continue strengthening the rule of law by ensuring
justice and respect for the human rights of all Haitians.

In spite of the reported situation of relative calm
prior to the hurricane, the country’s fragility, caused by
prevailing political uncertainty, is a cause for concern.
The increase in politically motivated violence has
generated anxiety, prompting public protests that have
resulted in the destruction of property and clashes with
the police, worsening Haiti’s fragile security situation.
Robust joint security patrols and operations led by the
Haitian National Police and MINUSTAH have resulted
in a drop in criminal activities and stronger management
of public protests by the National Police. We praise the

Finally, we commend the prompt response
by MINUSTAH and the United Nations Disaster
Assessment and Coordination Team in evacuating a
great number of vulnerable communities affected by
Hurricane Matthew and in providing humanitarian
assistance to those in need. It is our hope that once
the current humanitarian crisis is overcome, Haiti will
swiftly resume its electoral process, which was on
track before Hurricane Matthew struck, that life starts
normalizing for Haitian people and that sustainable
peace is restored.

10/29

16-31783

11/10/2016

The question concerning Haiti

Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela): At the outset, I would like to thank you, Sir,
for the timely convening of this debate on the situation
in the Republic of Haiti. We commend the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2016/753), which was introduced
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH), Ms. Sandra Honoré. We
welcome her and recognize the unflagging work being
done by her, the men and women of the Mission and
other humanitarian workers who tend tirelessly to the
Haitian people every day to safeguard their security
and stability.
We align ourselves with the statement to be made
by the Ambassador of Peru on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela reiterates
its commitment to the present and the future of the
people of Haiti. Our countries are linked by historical,
political and cultural links. We profoundly mourn
the loss of human lives and the material losses due
to Hurricane Matthew. We offer our condolences
and solidarity with the brother nation of Haiti and its
Government. In that regard, in the light of the state of
emergency experienced by Haiti because of the damage
caused by the natural disaster, and at the request of
its Government, on 6 October my country initiated
an airlift of humanitarian aid and a rapid-assistance
team — bringing more than 600 tons of supplies,
including food, clothes, drinking water, blankets,
disposable materials and medical tents — to help the
Haitian people affected by the hurricane.
We encourage the international community to
continue and step up its cooperation with the Haitian
people. We will continue to support our brother nation
in the Caribbean in strengthening its democratic
institutions. We lament the unfortunate coincidence
that the hurricane took place just a few days before the
Haitian people were to once again take part in the first
round of presidential and partial legislative elections.
Once they have overcome the effects of the Hurricane,
the completion of the electoral process will be of
particular importance.
In pursuing the objectives of establishing the
political institutions of Haiti, it is absolutely vital that
all political actors in the country engage in dialogue
and demonstrate their will and determination to
complete the electoral cycle beyond their own personal

S/PV.7789

interests. In that regard, the Haitian authorities should
continue to encourage their citizens to participate in the
electoral process and respect the decision of the people
in the election. The political tensions of recent months
reflect one of the chronic problems facing that brother
nation — namely, the fragile nature of its institutions.
Since its birth as an independent republic, the
people of Haiti have suffered not only onslaughts
of nature but also the pillaging of its resources and
encroachment on its independence, which have
undermined its development. The colonial heritage
has had a heavy cost on its independence. Throughout
the nineteenth century, the Haitian people suffered
blockades, penalties and debt collected by the former
colonial Power, which undermined and eroded its own
development. Throughout the twentieth century and
up through the twenty-first century, Haiti has been
the victim of invasions and military interventions and
has suffered the scourge of the worst dictators of the
subcontinent. All of that undoubtedly has had a negative
effect on its stability.
Combating poverty and injustice in Haiti,
the poorest country in the Americas, requires the
extraordinary efforts of the countries of the region and
the international community. It is necessary to enhance
the direct support of stable assistance mechanisms to
support the people of Haiti alognside the efforts of the
country’s authorities. In that regard, and as was done
after the ruinous 2010 earthquake, we must enhance the
capacities of the United Nations through MINUSTAH
and achieve the stability and development of our brother
nation.
Given the current context, we remain concerned by
the increased number of cholera cases and the deaths
caused by the virus. Hundreds of new cases have been
reported every week since 2010. To date, according to
United Nations figures, more than 9,000 Haitians have
died and more than 750,000 have been infected. In the
first six months of 2016, there were 23,072 new cases of
cholera and 211 deaths, representing a general increase
from the same period in 2015. That highlights the need
to strengthen national health institutions in Haiti and
their capacity to respond this public health issue in
order to prevent cholera from becoming endemic. We
commend the efforts of the United Nations to mitigate
this grave public health problem by acknowledging its
moral responsibility to the victims of the outbreak of
the epidemic that started in 2010.

16-3178311/29

S/PV.7789

The question concerning Haiti

We welcome the initiative of the Secretary-General
to direct an emergency response to the cholera epidemic
in Haiti and the new focus adopted by the United Nations
in its campaign against its spread. We consider it vital
to approve additional resources to enhance the national
cholera reduction plan, including the mobilization of
a package of assistance that would provide material
assistance and support to the Haitians directly affected
by the epidemic. Moreover, in the humanitarian sphere,
we are concerned over the food and security situation
arising as a result of climate change in the Caribbean,
which has been impacted further by Hurricane Matthew,
which is believed to have destroyed almost all harvests.
In the first half of 2016, more than 3.6 million Haitians
were affected by those climate factors.
We believe that in the current context of political
and institutional uncertainty, which has been
exacerbated by natural phenomena, we must maintain
our assistance and support to the Haitian people.
We therefore believe that the presence of the United
Nations and MINUSTAH remains necessary in order
to assist the Haitian authorities in strengthening the
response capacities of their institutions. We attach
particular importance to ongoing improvements to and
the professionalization of the Haitian National Police,
which will enhance the presence and authority of the
State. It is crucial that we continue to allocate resources
to rapid-impact projects that promote the rule of law,
improve health services and the provision of drinking
water, and increase the security of citizens through the
installation of street lights.
Given the pressing challenges facing Haiti, any
decision regarding the future of MINUSTAH should
be based on security and stability conditions in the
country in the framework of the process of building
institutional capacities and in coordination with the
elected authorities starting February 2017. We commend
the prudent recommendation of the Secretary-General
in his report to extend the presence of MINUSTAH for
an additional six months and to undertake a strategic
assesment mission after 7 February 2017 — once
the newly elected President has taken office and
a new Government is in place — in order to submit
recommendations to the Security Council in April
next year regarding the future presence of the United
Nations, which would include an accurate assessment
of the effects of recent political events and the natural
disaster of Hurricane Matthew.
12/29

11/10/2016

Venezuela is in favour of a politically and socially
stable, sovereign and free Haiti. Our cooperation with
Haiti expanded in an extraordinary manner under
the presidency of Commandante Hugo Chávez Frías
and continues with the same determination today.
Venezuela and the countries of the Bolivarian Alliance
for the Peoples of Our America worked with Haiti
long before the 2010 earthquake. That cooperation
will continue to strengthen in the future. Furthermore,
in the context of the Petrocaribe energy cooperation
programme, since 2005 we have provided 100 per cent
of Haiti’s fuel needs and 20 per cent of of its electricity,
and undertaken various initiatives prioritized by the
Haitian Government, which have had a positive impact
over the past 11 years on efforts to reconstruct Port-auPrince and on the economic and social development of
that brotherly country.
Haiti occupies a special place in the hearts of
Venezuelan men and women. The Haitian revolution
provided inspiration to the patriots in the nineteenth
century and the liberator Simón Bolivar, who was
supported 200 years ago by Haitian President Pétion
during the Venezuelan War of Independence. A deep
feeling of appreciation and solidarity has motivated
Venezuela’s assistance to Haiti.
Finally, my country joins the efforts of the
region and the international community to assist that
fraternal country in overcoming the socioeconomic
problems that have affected it for decades. Today
more than ever, such cooperation must ensure that the
necessary socioeconomic conditions are created to
enable the eradication of poverty and extreme poverty
in the country so that it can achieve political stability
and strengthen its institutions. Those preconditions
are indispensable to efforts to assist Haiti in its
reconstruction and development.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Sandra Honoré, for her
comprehensive briefing. I again wish to assure her
of the full support of France for the activities on the
ground under the particularly difficult conditions in
Haiti during the past few days. She has our full support.
I would also like, through her, to express our support
for all staff of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
16-31783

11/10/2016

The question concerning Haiti

I endorse the statements to be delivered by the
observer of the European Union and the representative
of Peru on behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti.
At a time when Haiti continues to assess the
terrible human and property toll of the recent passing
of Hurricane Matthew, we would like to express our
condolences to all Haitians for the recent victims.
At this difficult time, France stands with Haiti. My
country decided to respond immediately to the call of
the Haitian authorities for humanitarian assistance.
The President of the Republic stated that all available
resources would be mobilized to implement emergency
assistance as quickly as possible in coordination
with our European partners and the international
community. That mobilization has already begun. On
5 October, at the request of the Haitian authorities, a
French military aircraft flew reconnaissance flights
to assess the damage done to the infrastructure and
to determine what was needed to be delivered by way
of humanitarian assistance. With 60 French military/
civilian security personnel and 90 tons of equipment,
including 2 water purification plants, 6 sanitation units,
medical kits and humanitarian first aid, are currently
being transported or are about to be routed locally.
Moreover, the French food-aid credits to Haiti have
been refilled.
Finally, two helicopters have been made available
by the Airbus Foundation for the purposes of medical
transport and first-aid delivery to the most isolated
areas. Of course, all of that is being carried out within
the framework set by the Haitian Government and its
representatives in the regions impacted by the disaster.
Furthermore, France, together with the international
community, calls for heeding the urgent appeal launched
by the United Nations in the aftermath of the disaster.
This terrible tragedy reminds us once again of the
scope of the humanitarian challenges facing Haiti and
its people. We are particularly concerned, in the current
context, by the resurgence of cholera cases. France
fully supports the efforts undertaken by the Haitian
authorities with the support of the United Nations.
We have contributed to several quick-impact projects
on the ground since 2010. We have relayed the call of
the Secretary-General to bolster that mobilization and
will carefully examine the proposals to be made to the
General Assembly to intensify efforts to combat cholera
in Haiti, as well as to provide assistance and financial
support to the Haitians most directly affected by the

S/PV.7789

disease. More needs to be done by the international
community to finally eradicate cholera in Haiti.
France hopes that the electoral process under way
will be concluded as quickly as possible so that Haiti can
finally put an end to the uncertainties surrounding that
issue. More than ever, Haiti needs stable institutions
with democratic legitimacy that will enable it to
tackle the various economic, social and humanitarian
challenges that the country faces.
France has taken note of the revised electoral
timetable announced by the Provisional Electoral
Council and the postponement of the elections, originally
scheduled for 9 October, because of the consequences
of the passing of Hurricane Matthew. We urge all
Haitian political stakeholders, including the provisional
President, to do their utmost to ensure that the elections
are held in the near future and that constitutional order
is established as quickly as possible. Each individual
must show responsibility and restraint in that regard.
It is important that the forthcoming elections be led by
the Haitians themselves and conducted in a transparent,
open, inclusive and credible manner. France will
contribute to that goal by participating in the electoral
monitoring mission, established by the Organization of
American States.
More than 12 years after the deployment of
MINUSTAH, the conditions on the ground have
profoundly changed, as have the country’s needs. We
have gradually moved from a peacekeeping situation to a
context where the United Nations is called upon to assist
in development and the construction of a State under a
robust rule of law. Attending to that changing reality
will help us to provide the most effective assistance to
the Haitian people. The security and stabilization of
Haiti in the long term depend first and foremost on the
Haitian authorities shouldering their responsibility, as
well as on the sustainable development of the island.
France is pleased to see that the security situation
is generally stable. While it remains tenuous,
owing to political tensions related to the successive
postponements of the electoral cycle, it has nonetheless
been competently managed by the Haitian security
forces. In that regard, we welcome the growing
authority of the Haitian National Police, demonstrated
by its increasing ability to act largely independently.
It is now important that the ongoing discussions on
the future of MINUSTAH be conducted as speedily as
possible. France fully supports the recommendations

16-3178313/29

S/PV.7789

The question concerning Haiti

contained in the Secretary-General’s latest report
(S/2016/753), particularly with regard to the limitation
of the extension of the next mandate to only six
months, as well as the implementation, at the end of
the current six-month mandate, of a strategic review
that will allow us to consider whether the context is
ripe for the drawdown of MINUSTAH and for its
replacement by a new form of United Nations presence.
Indeed, we believe it important that the relaunch of the
Mission’s reconfiguration not be indefinitely delayed
on account of the political stalemate, as there is a risk of
jeopardizing the United Nations capacity to best meet
the needs of the Haitian population.
The situation in Haiti concerns us all even more
today. The support of the international community and
the engagement of the United Nations remain even more
necessary than ever, but our responsibility in the Council
is to do all we can to ensure that that engagement is as
appropriate and as effective as possible. The challenges
facing Haiti and the expectations of its people commit
us to taking the decisions necessary. Haitian political
stakeholders today must be fully aware of that.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s
meeting. China listened carefully to the briefing
by Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Honoré.
Recently, Hurricane Matthew caused severe
damage to Haiti, leaving hundreds of people dead
or injured. China would like to express its sympathy
and condolences to the Government and the people
of Haiti. We call on the international community to
actively provide Haiti with humanitarian assistance,
with a focus on health care, sanitation and the supply
of drinking water in the disaster-affected areas so as
to prevent the renewed outbreak of cholera and other
epidemics. We hope that Haiti will overcome the
effects of the hurricane as soon as possible, rebuild the
damaged houses at an early date, gradually complete the
political transition and embark on the road to stability
and development.
Development is the fundamental way to enhance
Haiti’s disaster resilience and recovery capacity. It is
also the master key to the settlement of the question
of Haiti. We hope that the Haitian Government will
strengthen planning, formulate development strategies
aimed at addressing conditions in the country, accelerate
the building of infrastructure, advance agriculture,
14/29

11/10/2016

tourism and other important sectors, promote the rule
of law, improve the humanitarian situation and ensure
that the interests of vulnerable groups are guaranteed.
The international community should promptly
honour its assistance commitment, enhance targeted
assistance and help the Haitian Government in
enhancing its governance capacity so that Haiti will be
able to stand on its own and achieve development at
an early date. The United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH), under the leadership of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Honoré, has
played an important role in advancing the electoral
process and maintaining security and stability in Haiti.
China expresses its appreciation in that regard.
China has always maintained that United Nations
peacekeeping operations should be adjusted in the
light of developments in the host countries, with the
ultimate purpose of withdrawing. In view of the fact
that the overall security situation in Haiti is improving
and that the Haitian National Police has been growing,
MINUSTAH should consider withdrawal at the
appropriate time and not remain endlessly in Haiti.
The Haitian Government should take upon itself the
responsibility for maintaining its national security and
stability. It is China’s hope that the Secretariat and the
Haitian Government will strengthen communication
and assess the situation in Haiti in a timely manner,
while ensuring stability in Haiti and the smooth
functioning of the new Government. Appropriate
arrangements should be made regarding the future
presence of the United Nations in Haiti.
Mrs. Schwalger (New Zealand): We too have
been following with heavy hearts the reports of the
devastation wrought by Hurricane Matthew in the
Republic of Haiti. We extend our deepest sympathy to
those who have lost loved ones, suffered injury, had
property damaged and their livelihoods disrupted.
There is no doubt that the hurricane has greatly
exacerbated Haiti’s humanitarian situation, which was
already challenged by severe drought and the cholera
epidemic. Food, shelter and medical care are required
urgently. Longer term, Haiti will need support in
rebuilding damaged infrastructure and in containing
the spread of disease. Our thoughts are with the people
of Haiti in these difficult days.
It is unfortunate that Haiti was forced to postpone
last week’s first round of elections in the wake of the
16-31783

11/10/2016

The question concerning Haiti

hurricane. That is yet another setback for a country
that is in dire need of political certainty and stability
following the failure of the electoral process earlier this
year. The latest Secretary-General’s report (S/2016/753)
makes clear the impact that the political uncertainty
in Haiti continues to have on its development towards
a stable and prosperous future. Progress towards
consolidating the rule of law has been slow. We urge all
Haitian political actors to do everything in their power
to ensure that the electoral process commences as soon
as is feasible, in stable conditions and without violence.
We also call on all relevant actors to spare no effort
to ensure that the elections are free, fair, inclusive
and transparent.
The capacity of the Haitian National Police continues
to improve, and we commend its determination to
provide for the safety and security of the Haitian
people. But there is still work to be done before it will
be operationally independent. Progress in that area is
vital for the eventual reconfiguration of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
Against that background, MINUSTAH continues
to play an important role. New Zealand appreciates the
work of the Special Representative and of MINUSTAHcontributing countries in the aftermath of Hurricane
Matthew and in supporting Haiti more generally. We
welcome the renewal of MINUSTAH’s mandate for six
months. However, we all recognize that MINUSTAH
cannot stay forever and that it needs to evolve as the
situation on the ground allows. It is important that we
lay the foundation now for that to happen smoothly
and responsibly. We are reassured that MINUSTAH
and the United Nations country team are continuing
preparations for the Mission’s transition by developing a
transition plan. We also support the Secretary-General’s
call for a strategic assessment mission to be undertaken
by the end of MINUSTAH’s next mandate period.
For MINUSTAH’s transition to be successful, it must
have genuine national ownership. Its implementation
will be the responsibility of the Government that
emerges from the forthcoming electoral process. We
therefore hope that the strategic assessment will be
completed after a new Government is in place and
that it will adequately reflect the Government’s views
and priorities. That adds further urgency to the need
to ensure that a duly elected and legitimate President
is inaugurated early in 2017. In any event, we urge
the United Nations to do all it can to engage relevant

S/PV.7789

Haitian stakeholders when assessing its future presence
in Haiti.
We regret the impact that cholera continues to
have on the people of Haiti. The United Nations has
a responsibility to help address and end the outbreak
and to provide appropriate support to the victims of
cholera. We thank the Secretary-General for his efforts
to improve the United Nations response to the cholera
crisis and look forward to the new United Nations
approach having a direct and positive impact.
Haiti is once again at a critical point on its path to
restoring an inclusive and representative democracy. We
hope that in the coming months Haiti will recover from
Hurricane Matthew and complete a peaceful political
transition. We also hope that the Council will remain
united in supporting Haiti through this critical period.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Sandra Honoré, for her introduction of the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2016/753).
We align ourselves with the statement to be made
by the representative of Peru on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti.
My country conveys its solidarity and condolences
to the people and the Government of Haiti for the lives
lost and material damage caused by the passing of
Hurricane Matthew. As noted by Mr. Stephen O’Brien,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,
the hurricane has caused the worst humanitarian crisis
in Haiti since the 2010 earthquake. We are pleased to
see that international assistance is already arriving in
the country and that the United Nations and the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
continue to play an important role on the ground. We
are also pleased to hear of a new focus, on the part
of the Secretary-General, in confronting the cholera
epidemic on two levels. The first seeks to organize
support and response efforts in the fight against cholera
and the other will supply material assistance to those
most affected by the cholera epidemic.
We welcome the ongoing progress made by the
Haitian National Police and encourage further efforts
to make it better able to provide security to the people.
We are pleased to see that, even in these difficult
circumstances, the executive branch is committed to
working jointly with the Provisional Electoral Council
to organize elections as soon as possible so as to ensure

16-3178315/29

S/PV.7789

The question concerning Haiti

11/10/2016

the handover of power to a democratically elected
President on 7 February 2017.

underscore this — the main beneficiary of Spanish
official development assistance in the world.

We await with interest the new elections timetable.
According to what we have heard, it should be
provided tomorrow. Despite that, we remain convinced
that the strategic assessment should be carried out
independently and irrespectively of the electoral
timetable. That necessary strategic assessment will
allow us to determine which type of United Nations
presence is really required in Haiti.

The tragic situation in Haiti following Hurricane
Matthew means that we must reflect on the
country’s urgent need for a Government elected
through democratic, inclusive, free and transparent
elections — one that can provide a strong institutional
basis to promote the development and capacity of the
country to confront the major challenges that lie ahead.
It is therefore vital for the Government to establish, as
soon as possible, a new date for the elections that were
planned for 9 October, thereby reactivating the electoral
process already under way. The country’s return to
constitutional order is more of a priority than ever.

Uruguay in particular has been on the ground in
Haiti since MINUSTAH began, in 2004, and is there
still today. With the same commitment that has driven
us from the outset, today we understand that the
gradual drawdown of MINUSTAH is a direction we
must duly follow. Therefore a responsible transition
process must be initiated, leading to the consolidation
of the country’s insititutions in order to achieve the
development and well-being of its people.
Allow me to conclude by once again expressing
my country’s recognition of the men and women
working as part of MINUSTAH for their dedication
and commitment to recovery and stability in Haiti. In
many cases these people have given up their lives in
the fulfilment of their duties, including Uruguayan
members of the Mission, whom I acknowledge in
remembrance now.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to begin by thanking the Secretary-General
for his latest report (S/2016/753), as well by expressing
my gratitude for the briefing provided by Special
Representative Sandra Honoré.
As a consequence of Hurricane Matthew, Haiti is
once again suffering a new humanitarian crisis, the
most devastating since the 2010 earthquake. We deeply
regret this new blow dealt by nature. From the start,
Spain has been in contact with the Haitian authorities
and, in coordination with the international community,
and has rapidly mobilized emergency assistance. I
shall not dwell upon the details; I simply refer to the
more than half a million dollars worth of aid, with two
consignments sent on 10 and 11 October, respectively.
The important thing is the immediacy of the Spanish
response, which reflects the traditional solidarity of all
the people of Spain with the friendly country of Haiti.
Spain maintains and will maintain its commitment
to Haiti, which continues to be — and I want to
16/29

Spain believes that the role of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) continues
to be fundamental in order to ensure the necessary
security conditions for the country. In the current
circumstances, its contribution to security in the
electoral process is even more relevant. Spain therefore
supports the renewal of the MINUSTAH mandate until
April 2017.
As the Secretary-General recommends, we should
maintain the current authorized troop level, which
we believe to be essential for the mission to fulfil
its mandate. Moreover, Spain considers it timely to
deploy a strategic assessment mission, circumstances
permitting, in order to evaluate what form the role and
presence of the United Nations in Haiti should take
once the MINUSTAH mandate expires.
Spain has always maintained in its statements
before the Council that decisions on MINUSTAH must
be adopted in a flexible manner, depending on foresight
and analyses of the short- and medium-term, as well as
the changing political and security situations. This is
simply because we should not risk the progress that has
already been achieved. We believe the evalution of the
strategic assessment mission should be carried out in
close collaboration with the new Haitian Government
in order to ensure the success of the transition. For this
reason it is pertinent that the mission be deployed once
a new President has taken office — one who has been
democratically elected in Haiti — and preferably once
his new Government team is in place.
Spain would like to highlight the need for these
recommendations, in addition to being based on the
results of the strategic assessment mission, to deal with
the politico-institutional situation in the country and
16-31783

11/10/2016

The question concerning Haiti

assess its impact on security and stability in Haiti. We
also support the notion that the Security Council should
work in the most inclusive and transparent manner
possible and that its decisions always take the interests
and opinions of the States affected by them into account.
It is for that reason that we shall listen attentively to the
statement made by the Ambassador of Haiti and to his
thoughts and expectations as to MINUSTAH, as well
the contributions of countries involved in the Mission.
Finally, Spain aligns itself with the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union later in
this meeting.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would like
to begin by thanking the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for her detailed statement, as well
as for her outstanding work at the head of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
On behalf of the Senagalese people and its
Government, I should also like to express our sincere
condolences and solidarity with the brotherly people of
Haiti, who suffered a tragic blow in the wake of Hurricane
Matthew early this month. Hurricane Matthee, quite
frankly, has further complicated the lives of the people
of Haiti, which were difficult enough before that. We
are all aware of the statistics arising from this disaster,
so I shall not dwell upon them. Nevertheless, suffice it
to say that much human life and property has been lost,
while cases of cholera have increased, exacerbated by
floods and damage to numerous health centres. That is
why my country would once again urge the international
community to mobilize the delivery of humanitarian
assistance commensurate with the damage suffered by
the Haitian people.
In addition to the emergency situation caused
by this catastrophe, we have seen yet another
postponement of the electoral process in spite of the
efforts of the Haitian authorities, who, as we know, were
forced to postpone the elections. In spite of this new
ordeal, my country calls on the Haitian Government
to spare no effort to organize free, transparent and
credible elections as soon as possible. We welcome the
outstanding work accomplished by the good offices
of Special Representative Honoré and congratulate
her efforts and those of her team to ensure a return to
constitutional order, peace, stability and prosperity in
Haiti. Ms. Honoré may rest assured that she has the
renewed support of the Senegalese Government.

S/PV.7789

I should like also to pay tribute to MINUSTAH not
only for the role it is playing during this difficult time
but also for everything that it is doing in Haiti. The most
striking example, perhaps, is its cooperation with the
Haitian National Police in order to ensure the security
of the elections. Senegal, which has a presence in the
Mission through its police units, urges the Security
Council to provide all necessary support to the Mission
by supporting the recommendations emanating from
the recent visit made to the country by the Department
for Peacekeeping Operations from 30 June to 3 July.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.
We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Sandra Honoré, for presenting
the report on the activities of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), which
she heads, as well as her detailed statement concerning
the situation in the country. We express our condolences
to the families of the victims of Hurricane Matthew,
which tore through the Caribbean last week. We hope
that Haiti, with the help of the international community,
will be able very quickly to rebuild after this natural
disaster.
We take note of the fact that, owing to the hurricane,
the presidential and parliamentary elections in the
country have been postponed yet again. We hope that
Ms. Honoré will present the next report when Haiti has
a duly elected President.
We continue to follow the development of the
internal political situation in the country. More than
three months after the expiry of the 120-day term of the
provisional President, the National Assembly has yet to
adopt measures to ensure continuity in the functioning
of the executive, in line with the provisions of the
agreement of 5 February. Unfortunately, the country
continues to face political and institutional uncertainty,
which poses an obstacle to its sustainable economic
and social development. We urge all key stakeholders
in the country to make efforts jointly to tackle the
most relevant task today, that is, the conclusion of the
electoral process and the appointment of the new head
of the executive, so as to serve all Haitians.
We welcome the intention of the Government to
ensure transparent and democratic elections, which are
to take place without any external intervention. We are
satisfied that technical preparations for this important

16-3178317/29

S/PV.7789

The question concerning Haiti

event over the past month have gone smoothly, and we
hope to see a successful finish to the electoral race.
Haiti cannot afford any fresh stalemates in the light
of the numerous social and economic issues facing
its people.
We wish also to express our concern regarding a
certain surge in the number of cholera cases. On the
one hand, we welcome the vigorous measures taken by
the United Nations to counter this dangerous disease
and overcome its impact. On the other hand, Port-auPrince must also do its part to deal with issues such the
provision of water as well as sanitation and health-care
services. Resolving these problems will depend not
only on outside financing but also on the efforts of local
administrative bodies. Another priority is providing
people with information about the disease and ways to
avoid infection. Indeed, forewarned is forearmed.
We would like to see the full implementation of
MINUSTAH’s mandate. The capacity of the Haitian
National Police is ever-growing, and it has demonstrated
its ability and determination to ensure law and order. It
is encouraging that the rise in crime is being contained.
Any strikes are essentially for social and economic
reasons, just as in other countries of the world. The
police have been able to ensure control over mass
events; they still receive support from MINUSTAH but
in the near future should become fully operationally
independent, in line with national law.
We stand ready to carefully study the review of
the United Nations presence in the country, which
ideally should be carried out after the elections and
the swearing-in of the new President, and should
involve also an assessment of the professionalism
and number of Haitian National Police troops. We
hope that the document will contain information as
to the results of activities carried out in past years as
well as arrangements for a gradual drawdown of the
United Nations presence in the country. In the context
of preparations for this forthcoming stage, we need to
develop a plan for the transition period and persistently
strengthen MINUSTAH.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Haiti.
Mr. Régis (Haiti) (spoke in French): I would be
remiss were I not to begin my statement by conveying
the heartfelt thanks and gratitude of the people and
18/29

11/10/2016

the Government of Haiti for the kind words and
demonstrations of solidarity expressed to my country
following the destructive strike of Hurricane Matthew
last week, with its tragic consequences. To one and all,
I say thank you, thank you, thank you, on behalf of the
people and the Government of Haiti.
I am pleased to have the chance once again to share
the views of the Haitian Government on the important
report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
(S/2016/753), issued pursuant to resolution 2243 (2015),
of 14 October 2015. Allow me also to express to the
Security Council the deep gratitude of the President
of the Republic and the Government of Haiti for its
steadfast commitment for close to 12 years now in
the process of building the rule of law and democracy
in Haiti.
The Government of Haiti would like also to thank
the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for the high
quality of his report to the Security Council. This
document yet again bears witness, as if any more
proof were needed, to the Secretary-General’s ongoing
leadership in ensuring the success of the mandate
of MINUSTAH.
With the balance and objectivity characteristic of
the Secretary-General, he takes an in-depth look at the
various dimensions of the Haitian crisis stemming from
the interruption in January 2016 of the electoral process
and at the institutional difficulties and structural and
context-based obstacles facing the country at this
critical juncture, and voices concerns regarding the
various challenges the country faces in the areas of
security and human rights and on the humanitarian
front. He also takes a close look at the achievements
registered while underscoring the work that remains
to be done so as to conclude the electoral cycle under
way, which, as we all know, is crucial to Haiti’s longterm stability.
The Government has duly taken note of the
observations made by the Secretary-General. The
return to constitutional order on 7 February 2017
is indeed the binding obligation that falls to the
Haitian Government. The President of the Republic, His
Excellency Mr. Jocelerme Privert, has made it the key
feature of his work as Head of State. As he has pointed
out repeatedly, in particular on 23 September from the
rostrum of the General Assembly, (see A/71/PV.17),
he has no other mandate than that which was invested
16-31783

11/10/2016

The question concerning Haiti

in him by the National Assembly in accordance with
the agreement of 5 February, namely, the completion
and of the electoral process. Shouldering this historical
responsibility, he is sparing no effort in achieving the
conditions that will foster the organization of free,
inclusive and fair presidential and legislative elections,
under the aegis of the Provisional Electoral Council
(PEC), allowing for the reset and normalization of our
democratic institutions.
The results achieved to date have been convincing.
The Electoral Council has hit its stride. The electoral
process is going smoothly despite the uncertainties
of some of the most difficult economic and financial
factors, characterized by, inter alia, the freezing and
reduction of development aid. Of the total budget
estimated at $55 million, the Government has already
disbursed a first tranche of $25 million, enabling the
PEC to hold the first round of elections. The campaign
was launched on 23 August. The overhaul of the
electoral mechanism, making it more reliable in line
with the recommendations of independent electoral
evaluation and verification commission, ensures the
holding of fair and transparent elections. The first
round of elections was set for 9 October.
The upcoming elections are a necessary right
of passage. Only they can dispel the “prevailing
political uncertainty” mentioned in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2016/753, para. 10) to overcome
the institutional crisis and finally address structural
deficiencies, which are hampering the economic and
social modernization of the country and are obstacles to
the full development of human rights. The Government
is grateful to the Secretary-General for welcoming in
his report the “promising signs” that are reflected in
[t]he commitment displayed so far by the national
authorities to assume greater ownership of all
facets of the electoral process, including financial
and operational aspects” (ibid., para. 58).
Similarly, we particularly appreciates his call to all
our international partners for constructive cooperation
in considering
“further financial contributions, in particular with
a view to strengthening the electoral council’s
capacity to manage the logistical aspects of the
electoral process” (ibid., para. 59).
Finally, the Government fully aligns itself with the
call for the partners to redeploy

S/PV.7789

“international electoral observation and expert
missions ... to diversify levels of scrutiny and
promote confidence in the electoral process” (ibid.,
para. 59).
Turning to security, the Government believes
that, in the current context, MINUSTAH’s support
to the Haitian National Police aimed at strengthening
security, which is necessary for the success of the
electoral process, remains crucial. It therefore notes
with the greatest of interest the recommendation made
by the Secretary-General that
“the mandate of MINUSTAH be extended for
a further six months, until 15 April 2017” (ibid.,
para. 61).
With regard to the longer-term presence of
MINUSTAH, the Government is in favour, following
the elections, of sending the strategic assessment
mission, the concept of which has already been agreed.
It is well understood that the next Government, once
elected, will have to jointly define with the members
of the Security Council the terms of reference for the
future Mission as well as the dimensions of the new
configuration. Nevertheless, we believe it useful to
recall the principled position of the Government with
regard to the MINUSTAH transition plan under way
and the profile of the future Mission, both of which
must fully take into account the changing situation on
the ground. In that respect, the smooth rolling out of the
forthcoming elections should be a key indicator for the
prospects for stabilization and medium- and long-term
security needs.
The key is to safeguard the achievements of
MINUSTAH’s presence over past 12 years and enable
Haitian institutions, in particular the Haitian National
Police, to gradually and effectively take over the roles
previously filled by the Mission. In the immediate
future, and in tandem with the electoral process,
we are supporting the efforts of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, which is working with
police-contributing countries, to offset the current
shortfall of 250 police officers against the authorized
level of 951 officers.
The Secretary-General’s report highlights a number
of other challenges and notes his particular concerns
about the worsening social, economic and humanitarian
situation. It should be stressed that the recent reduction
in official development assistance and the freezing of
various cooperation programmes have significantly

16-3178319/29

S/PV.7789

The question concerning Haiti

reduced public investment in necessary infrastructure,
while limiting the United Nations response capability
in providing humanitarian aid to the most vulnerable
groups in Haiti.
Moreover, the resurgence of the cholera epidemic
has compounded an already deeply troubling health
situation. In that regard, while we express our hope
that, at the highest level, further talks between Haiti
and the United Nations on the cholera epidemic will be
undertaken as soon as possible, the Government wishes
to commend the concerted action that the SecretaryGeneral is deploying to implement a more substantial
package that
“would provide material assistance and support
to those Haitians directly affected by cholera,
[including victims of the disease and their families]”
(ibid, para 62).
The Government also notes with the greatest of interest
the urgent call of the Secretary-General for
“Member States to demonstrate their solidarity
with the people of Haiti by increasing their
contributions to efforts to eliminate cholera and
provide assistance to those affected” (Ibid, para 62).
In that vein, I would be remiss not to highlight the
new approach recently adopted by the United Nations
with regard to the cholera epidemic, which has been
raging in Haiti since 2010. With admirable frankness,
the Secretary-General officially acknowledged, based
on irrefutable evidence, that the United Nations had a
moral responsibility towards the victims of the cholera
epidemic and that therefore, given the role it had played
in the outbreak of the epidemic and the suffering
of victims, it was incumbent upon the Organization
to do more and make every effort to help Haiti in
overcoming it.
We welcome that courageous new attitude, which
echoes the suffering of the victims and above all sends a
clear message to the international community about the
importance of switching from words to action in order
to help Haiti deal with a humanitarian situation that has
just deteriorated alarmingly in the wake of Hurricane
Matthew. For the United Nations this is more than a
moral imperative, it is a duty of international solidarity
that will require a far more substantial effort than
previous ones in order to significantly step up the fight
against cholera, slow its progression and ultimately
eliminate it, by helping the Government to develop the
20/29

11/10/2016

infrastructure needed to address its structural problems
related to the provision of drinking water, sanitation
and health care in Haiti. We hope that the new two-part
approach recommended by the Secretary-General will
result in an ambitious programme of action that will
finally be equal to these challenges and that the Haitian
people have been pleading for for a long time.
In the same spirit, we welcome the enthusiasm of
the international solidarity that has been expressed to
the victims of last week’s disastrous hurricane, which,
as the Council is aware, resulted in tremendous damage
in various parts of the country, particularly the south,
and which, as is understandable, has forced the general
elections originally set for 9 October to be postponed
to a later date. The Government of the Republic of
Haiti is deeply grateful to all the friendly countries,
the cooperative partners, the United Nations and
the non-governmental organizations that have stood
spontaneously and generously with the Haitian people
in the face of a situation that has once again bordered on
tragedy in some of the affected areas. The Government
is grateful to the United Nations for the joint appeal
to international solidarity, launched on 10 October,
with the goal of collecting $120 million for aid for the
next three months to the communities that have been
tragically affected by Hurricane Matthew.
In order to avoid the problems resulting from the
fragmentation, misuse and ineffectiveness of aid that
Haiti has unfortunately experienced all too often in the
past, the Government hopes fervently that international
action and donor contributions can be smoothly
synchronized with the efforts of local stakeholders
and appropriately channeled through the existing
coordination mechanisms for external cooperation that
have already been shown to work elsewhere.
My country is at a crossroads. The next elections will
be a test of our consolidation of a culture of democracy
and the country’s long-term stability, economic
modernization and development. The Government is
fully aware of this and intends to show itself equal to the
challenge and its mission. It is prepared to make every
sacrifice and to take on its obligations in full, despite
the extremely tenuous means at its disposal. It calls for
cooperation on the part of all of Haiti’s partners on the
logistical, financial and operational fronts, in order to
enable the Provisional Electoral Council to complete
the election process and to perform its urgent mission
efficiently and effectively at this difficult juncture.
16-31783

11/10/2016

The question concerning Haiti

The Government of Haiti would like to once again
assure all of its partners in the international community
that it will spare no effort to ensure the success of the
forthcoming elections, which will be the proof of the
peaceful political transition and return to a functional
constitutional order that are the conditions for lasting
political stability.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): We thank the
Russian Federation for organizing this important
debate on the situation in Haiti. I would also like to
thank Ms. Sandra Honoré, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, for her briefing and to reiterate
my Government’s gratitude and respect for her work
and continuing support to the consolidation of peace
and democracy in Haiti. And I thank Ambassador
Denis Régis for his statement.
Brazil is standing by Haiti at another difficult
moment. Hurricane Matthew’s passing through the
Caribbean last week created the worst humanitarian
crisis there since the devastating earthquake six years
ago. We send our heartfelt condolences to the families of
those who lost their lives and we reiterate our willingness
to help the Haitian Government to provide immediate
assistance for the hundreds of thousands of people in
urgent need. We commend the troops of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
for their commitment and we recognize the work
they have been doing in these difficult days for Haiti.
Even before the arrival of the hurricane, the military
personnel of MINUSTAH’s Brazilian contingent were
deployed to the most vulnerable parts of the country. In
an impressive effort, they cleared roads and prepared
airports to receive humanitarian aid in Les Cayes. They
were the first to arrive by land in Jérémie, the capital
of the worst affected department. As I speak, they are
already supporting the Haitian authorities in the most
challenging period for the reconstruction activities.
Despite the necessary and justifiable postponement
of the first round of elections, the Haitian authorities
should not slacken the momentum for organizing
their new date as soon as possible. Brazil strongly
urges Haiti’s political actors to work cooperatively in
the interests of their people, while joining forces in
prioritizing the country’s return to full constitutional
normality by completing the electoral process that
is already under way in order to ensure the holding

S/PV.7789

of free, fair, inclusive and transparent presidential
and legislative elections. It is also crucial to ensure
that Haiti’s political stakeholders spare no effort in
encouraging citizens to develop a greater level of
involvement in the upcoming electoral rounds.
Brazil agrees with the Secretary-General’s
assessment regarding stability and security in Haiti,
while recognizing that the security situation remains
relatively calm but fragile, owing to the prevailing
political uncertainty. There are still reasons for concern
about security, including gang activity, the smuggling
of weapons, and politically motivated violence. We
support the recommended extension of MINUSTAH’s
mandate for an additional six months until 15 April
2017, while maintaining the current troop and police
levels. According to Interim President Jocelerme
Privert’s recent statement in the General Assembly
(see A/71/PV.17), the military and police components
continue to have a very relevant role in the country’s
logistics, humanitarian and security operations.
Regarding the strategic assessment mission to be
undertaken for MINUSTAH, with a view to making
recommendations for a future United Nations presence
in the country, we expect that it will happen after the
installation of the new President and the formation
of a new Government. It is crucial to the success of
any future decision to ensure that the United Nations
conducts that pivotal process in consultation with the
appropriate Haitian interlocutors. It is also essential to
ensure that the reconfiguration process be guided by
conditions on the ground and by the need to preserve
and consolidate the progress that has been made in
the past 12 years. Any prejudgement of the situation
may jeopardize investments made by the international
community in stabilizing the country so far.
We concur with the Secretary-General’s observation
that the Haitian National Police is not yet operationally
independent and continues to rely on MINUSTAH’s
support to fulfil its constitutional mandate. Despite
its enhanced performance in preventing crimes and
controlling civil unrest, we note with regret that the
police force will not be able to reach the target of 15,000
officers by the end of 2016, as initially envisaged.
Furthermore, we are concerned that only half of the
Haitian National Police development plan for the period
2012-2016, one of the benchmarks of the Mission, has
been attained so far.

16-3178321/29

S/PV.7789

The question concerning Haiti

During the transition period, we encourage the
Security Council to keep tools that are part of the
MINUSTAH mandate aimed at developing quick-impact
and community violence-reduction projects, as well as
an adequate engineering capability. Experience in Haiti
has clearly shown that such initiatives directly benefit
the local population and assist in building confidence
in the peace process and the Mission throughout its life
cycle. Any future presence of the Organization in Haiti
should take this success story into account and ensure
the continuity of such activities in order to contribute to
the sustainability of reconstruction efforts.
The humanitarian situation continues to raise
serious concern. Hurricane Matthew negatively
impacted the living conditions of a significant number
of internally displaced people, currently at 61,000, in
a context of an increase in the number of new cholera
cases and a decrease in the levels of food and nutrition
security in rural areas. We commend the tireless
response activities of the Government of Haiti and the
United Nations, and underline the particular importance
and urgency of the Haiti humanitarian response plan
2016 appeal, launched jointly to meet the critical
humanitarian needs of 1.3 million people, including of
the Haitians and persons of Haitian descent returning
from the Dominican Republic.
Brazil also underscores the importance of
strengthening Haiti’s national health institutions and
United Nations efforts to combat cholera, including
through the Secretary-General’s initiative to support
the national plan for the elimination of cholera for the
period 2013-2022. We welcome his intention to develop
a package that would provide additional material
assistance and support for those Haitians directly
affected by the disease. The Brazilian Government built,
and currently supports, three community hospitals and
one rehabilitation centre in Haiti, the largest project
implemented so far by Brazil in terms cooperation,
with a budget of $90 million.
The Brazilian Government is also committed to
maintaining its humanitarian cooperation efforts,
as well as the current special immigration policy for
Haitians. In that regard, I wish to recall that, according
to the Brazil declaration entitled “A Framework for
Cooperation and Regional Solidarity to Strengthen
the International Protection of Refugees”, adopted
in Brasilia on 3 December 2014, Latin American
Governments consider people fleeing from natural
22/29

disasters as victims
and protected.

11/10/2016

who

should

be

received

We recall that the Peacebuilding Commission could
assume a central role in the stabilization and development
efforts in Haiti. Access to justice and poverty reduction
are important elements in the promotion of Haiti’s
development and stability, which deserve more careful
consideration. They can help to empower the weakest
and the poorest, especially through the effectiveness
of social rights, and produce tangible dividends for the
most vulnerable. In that regard, attention should be
given to the further strengthening of Haitian judicial
and correctional systems in order to support a more
integrated and cohesive Haitian security sector. The
programmatic resources recently allocated to those
efforts can certainly contribute to reverse the slow
progress towards consolidating the rule of law in Haiti.
(spoke in French)
Brazil continues to be committed to its Haitian
brother and sisters in their efforts to establish a
stable democracy and sustainable development. We
are convinced that, as in several other periods of
difficulty, Haitians will be able to overcome the current
difficulties. The people of Haiti deserve all our support
in order to break with the cycle of instability and
political uncertainty, including through our support to
the elections and the swearing in of a new President in
Feburary 2017.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to Mr. João Pedro Vale de Almeida, Head of the
Delegation of the European Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Vale De Almeida (spoke in French): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union and
its 28 member States.
I thank the Secretary General for his report
(S/2016/753), and the Special Representative for her
briefing. I also thank the Permanent Representative of
Haiti for his statement.
The following countries align themselves with this
statement: the candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; potential candidate country Bosnia and
Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova, Armenia and Georgia.
At the outset, I would like to convey our
condolences to the Government and the people of Haiti,
16-31783

11/10/2016

The question concerning Haiti

who have been affected by Hurricane Matthew. The
European Union, in solidarity with the people of Haiti,
has decided to step up its support with a contribution of
€1.5 million of emergency assistance to meet immediate
needs. That funding is in addition to the €255,000 of
humanitarian aid initially provided by the European
Union and the funds made available by our members
under the European Civil Protection Mechanism.
Following the contested outcome of the elections in
August and October 2015, the first round of presidential
elections was annulled. The term of office of the
interim President, which expired in June this year, was
not renewed. The country is therefore in an anomalous
institutional situation, and one that is very fragile.
The completion of the electoral process in a context
of legitimacy and transparency is the fundamental
precondition for ensuring political and institutional
stability. Concluding the process is also an urgent need
to allow Haiti to face up to the many economic, social
and environmental challenges facing the country.
As in recent years, the efforts of all to ensure
stability and security continue to be vital for the
democratic consolidation process. The European Union
remains a faithful partner of the Republic of Haiti and
continues to be determined to support the country
during this delicate stage, working with other partners.

S/PV.7789

European Commission to take the decision to withdraw
that election observation mission.
Beyond the judgment that the international
community might draw on the annulment of the first
round of the presidential elections, following a process
that was not provided for under Haitian law and was
not based on any agreement, it is clear that, in any
case, the electoral process must continue and lead to
peace, inclusion, transparency and legitimacy. As soon
as possible the country must return to constitutional
normality, with a President and a Government that are
elected in transparent, inclusive and credible elections.
The European Union has taken note of the revised
electoral timetable, which was announced by the
Provisional Electoral Council, and the delay in the
balloting planned for 9 October due to the impact of
Hurricane Matthew. We call upon all political actors
in Haiti, in particular the interim President, to do
everything possible to complete the electoral cycle
under way and return to constitutional order as soon
as possible. Everyone must demonstrate responsibility
and restraint in that regard.

The European Union supported the holding of
general elections in Haiti both in August and October
2015 in two ways: through a financial contribution of
€5 million to the Trust Fund managed by the United
Nations system, and by sending an election observation
mission, which was requested by the Haitian authorities
and in agreement with them. That mission, in a totally
independent manner and according to a methodology
and an established code of conduct in line with
international standards, verified the compliance of all
stages of the process with regional and international
obligations and standards for elections, as well as with
Haitian legislation.

The European Union is a long-time supporter and
a friend of Haiti. It is also one of its main donors in
terms of emergency assistance and in development
aid. This financial support from the European Union,
however, depends on respect for democratic principles,
including the right of the people to choose their own
Government through the ballot box, and not through
street demonstrations. Political conditionality clauses
are an integral part of the Cotonou Agreement, which
links the European Union to the African, Caribbean and
Pacific Group of States, of which Haiti is a member.
Institutional stability is essential if European aid is to
be effective and produce lasting effects that benefit
the population. It is urgent and necessary to establish
democratically elected and legitimate institutions that
can immediately address the major economic and
structural challenges the country faces.

According to the mission’s observations, despite
some irregularities, there were no significant problems
with the outcomes of the first round of the presidential
elections. However, the annulment of the results of
the first round of the presidential elections and its
consequences, which in fact go against the conclusions
of the European Union election observation mission,
led the High Representative of the Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy and Vice-President of the

Although the overall security situation remains
stable, it is nonetheless fragile due to tensions caused by
the electoral climate. The European Union commends
the professionalism of the Haitian National Police, which
successfully managed the recent events on its own, for
the most part. It believes that the presence of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
in the country, and in particular its support in
maintaining security during elections, always bearing

16-3178323/29

S/PV.7789

The question concerning Haiti

in mind respect for and the protection of human rights
and the principles of sovereignty, remain important,
even now, in ensuring that the process continues and
that peace and stability prevail. Once conditions allow,
based on the Secretary-General’s recommendations, we
encourage reflection on the future of MINUSTAH.
In conclusion, I would like to express the European
Union’s gratitude for the significant contribution made
by MINUSTAH to stabilizing the security situation and
bolstering democracy and the rule of law in Haiti. The
European Union remains committed to supporting the
efforts of the Haitian authorities, the United Nations
and the international community to ensure a better
future for the people of Haiti.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mexico.
Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, I would like to offer the
condolences and solidarity of Mexico to the people of
Haiti for the tragic loss of life and the damage caused
by Hurricane Matthew. Mexico joins the international
community in offering humanitarian assistance to
prevent the spread of the cholera epidemic and restore
the supply of urgent basic services as soon as possible.
On instructions from President Enrique Peña Nieto,
my Government will provide resources, through
the Mexican Agency for International Development
Cooperation, to support Haiti in meeting those
basic needs.
The Government of Mexico would also like to
thank Ms. Sandra Honoré for her work and dedication
and the Secretary-General for his report on the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (S/2016/753).
In spite of the delays in the electoral process in
Haiti, it is important to acknowledge that the political
players have made considerable progress, such as the
re-establishment of the Provisional Electoral Council
and the drafting of an electoral timetable. We are well
aware that the hurricane’s impact affected the elections
scheduled for 9 October, but we believe that Haiti
cannot allow itself to be brought to a standstill yet
again. That is why we eagerly await the announcement
of a new election date and call on the political
stakeholders to pool their efforts to prioritize stability,
institution-building and the restoration of constitutional
order. Mexico shares the Secretary-General’s concern
with regard to the rise in the level of food insecurity
among a significant segment of the Haitian population,
24/29

11/10/2016

as well as the increase in the number of cholera cases
in that sisterly nation. We believe that it is essential
to strengthen efforts to prevent those challenges from
jeopardizing Haiti’s present and future.
It is at critical moments like these, as Haiti seeks to
grapple with the impact of Hurricane Matthew, that we
recognize and value the vital role played by the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
Mexico reiterates the importance of ensuring that the
possible drawdown of MINUSTAH is gradual and
cautious and takes into account the progress made
in overcoming the humanitarian emergency and
strengthening political stability in the country. The plan
for Haiti’s transition should be based on coordination
between MINUSTAH, the States Members of the United
Nations — in particular troop- and police-contributing
countries — and, above all, the Haitian Government.
We note the recommendations of the SecretaryGeneral on extending the MINUSTAH mandate by six
months. We hope that the strategic assessment to be made
on the situation in Haiti will take into consideration,
first, the situation on the ground; secondly, adjustments
made to the election timetable and the restoration of
constitutional order; thirdly, the security situation in the
country; and fourthly, the progress made in enhancing
the professionalism and the operational capabilities of
the Haitian National Police.
We believe that such an assessment should
be conducted once the electoral process has been
completed. In that way, the Secretary-General
would have a comprehensive understanding of the
situation so as to be able to offer recommendations
on the future of MINUSTAH. Mexico hopes that the
strengthening of institutions, and in particular of the
Haitian National Police, will remain the cornerstone
of efforts to restructure the United Nations presence
in Haiti. Cooperation with MINUSTAH will remain
vital to addressing issues of public order and to
combating crime, as well as to ensuring that the Haitian
National Police is better trained and able to shoulder
greater responsibility.
In conclusion, I would like to make it clear that
Mexico, as a troop-contributing country, is grateful to
other States that provide troops and police, to the Group
of Friends of Haiti and to all of those who take part in
MINUSTAH. Mexico is committed to continuing to
work to lay the foundations of lasting peace in Haiti.
16-31783

11/10/2016

The question concerning Haiti

The President (spoke in Russian): I give the floor
to the representative of Colombia.
Mr. Morales López (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the Russian Federation for having convened
today’s debate on the situation in Haiti and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti,
Ambassador Sandra Honoré, for her detailed briefing
to the Security Council.
Colombia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the Ambassador of Peru on behalf of the
Group of Friends of Haiti.
At the outset, allow me to extend the condolences of
Colombia to the people and the Government of Haiti and
to the loved ones of the hundreds of victims claimed by
Hurricane Matthew as it swept through the Caribbean.
We would also like to offer our solidarity in the light
of the immense damage. Colombia sought to help ease
the painful situation being endured by the Haitian
population by donating emergency humanitarian aid,
consisting of food and hygiene kits, which arrived on
the coast of Port-au-Prince today on our national naval
vessel 7 August.
We would like to acknowledge the efforts of
Haiti’s Provisional Electoral Council in accepting
most of the recommendations of the Independent
Electoral Evaluation Commission, which will allow
for presidential elections to be held. In that regard, we
reaffirm the importance of ensuring that the elections
are free, fair, peaceful and fully respectful of democratic
values and principles. Colombia is making an appeal
to ensure that the devastation caused by Hurricane
Matthew does not lead to unnecessary delays in the
revised election timetable. It is crucial to maintain the
rule of law in Haiti, and it is up to its Government and
leaders to honour that commitment. Colombia shares
the concerns outlined in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2016/753) with regard to the slow progress being
made in consolidating the rule of law, as well as to
the social and economic inequalities that have led to
a significant increase in the number of protests and
strikes since April.
We are also concerned that, four months before the
deadline date for implementation, only 58 per cent of the
development plan for 2012-2016 has been implemented.
The humanitarian challenges that Haiti faces are being
exacerbated by the impact of the latest natural disaster
and the increase in the number of suspected cases of

S/PV.7789

cholera and the deaths resulting from the disease. In that
regard, we welcome the Secretary-General’s intention
to prepare a package of material assistance and support
measures for Haitians who have been directly affected.
Colombia believes that the advances made in the areas
of security, rule of law, national reconciliation and
sustainable development, including the fight against
joblessness and poverty, are mutually reinforcing.
Once again, we highlight the invaluable work done
by the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti,
and in particular the leadership of Sandra Honoré as
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of Mission, to ensure the sustainable wellbeing of the Haitian people. Our country reiterates its
position that any decision about the permanence of
MINUSTAH should be taken solely on the basis of the
conditions on the ground, while taking into account the
Mission’s contribution to the security and stability of
the Haitian people, thereby avoiding backsliding in the
progress already achieved.
We recognize the important efforts of the Haitian
National Police to increase its numbers, the ground it
covers and its institutional strengthening. Colombia
reaffirms its interest in maintaining its support for
MINUSTAH by sending more Colombian police
officers and by providing advice and training to officers
of the Haitian National Police.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Chile.
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Haiti, Ms. Sandra Honoré, for her briefing.
We appreciate her leadership in these difficult
circumstances. We also welcome the presence of
the Permanent Representative of Haiti, Ambassador
Denis Régis.
Chile aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the delegation of Peru on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti.
On behalf of the Government and the people of
Chile, I would like to extend my sincere condolences to
our Haitian brothers and sisters in connection wiht the
devastating loss of life and material damage caused by
Hurricane Matthew. We assure them of our solidarity,
which initially consisted of a financial contribution
through the International Committee of the Red Cross,
with additional assistance to be provided later based on

16-3178325/29

S/PV.7789

The question concerning Haiti

Haiti’s priorities. The latter includes the work on the
ground being done by our national contingent as part
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), which is supporting all the tasks that
it is responsible for in responding to this catastrophe.
This is a reminder to the international community
that it must continue to support Haiti. It is essential
that the major donors support the recent emergency
humanitarian appeal launched by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, which seeks
to raise $119 million to provide immediate lifesaving
assistance to more than 750,000 Haitians.
We must contextualize the terrible impact of the
hurricane within the existing chronic vulnerabilities of
a country that is highly prone to natural disasters and
where there are also various long-term humanitarian
and development challenges. As such, it is crucial to
strengthen the response to overcome food insecurity
and the cholera epidemic, among other challenges. In
that regard, we note the recent strategy of the SecretaryGeneral along two axes and we look forward to its
prompt submission to the General Assembly. In this
complex scenario, it is more important than ever that
all the Haitian political players work cooperatively and
constructively to make progress in strengthening the
State and its institutions. We are confident that once the
emergency situation has been normalized, the electoral
timetable will be re-established.
With regard to the strengthening of MINUSTAH,
my delegation supports the Secretary-General’s
proposal set out in his report contained in document
S/2016/753. We believe that these recommendations
are adequately reflected in the text, which is currently
under consideration by the Security Council.
It remains essential to continue strengthening
national capacities in terms of the police, the rule of
law, democracy and human rights, under the principle
of national ownership, so as to build on the gains
achieved thanks to the presence of the Mission.
Historically, the Haitian people have demonstrated
unique resilience. There is no doubt that once again
they will use that resilience to overcome the greatest
humanitarian catastrophe since the 2010 earthquake.
I would like to conclude by reiterating Chile’s
commitment to strengthening Haiti’s institutions and
to the development of Haiti and its people. We call
on Council members to adopt by consensus the draft
26/29

11/10/2016

resolution that will renew the Mission’s mandate,
thereby showing the unity needed at this time.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Peru.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti, which
includes Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia,
France, Guatemala, the United States, Uruguay,
Venezuela and my country, Peru.
I would like to join other speakers in regretting the
tragic loss of life and devastation wrought by Hurricane
Matthew and to share in the expressions of solidarity
with the people of Haiti.
The Group of Friends welcomes the presence of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Haiti, Ms. Sandra Honoré, and wishes to thank her for
her comprehensive briefing and for the hard work she
is doing.
Strengthening the rule of law and democratic
institutions, establishing a political culture conducive
to democratic stability and improving socioeconomic
conditions are key elements needed to achieve greater
security, stability and prosperity in Haiti. In that regard,
the Group of Friends deeply regrets the damage caused
by Hurricane Matthew. The Group of Friends calls
upon the international community for humanitarian
assistance and is pleased that the United Nations
system and the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) have been assisting in evacuations
of vulnerable communities and other responses to the
emergency needs of the country.
The Group of Friends recognizes the postponement
of the 9 October elections established in the revised
electoral calendar as a result of Hurricane Matthew,
but strongly hopes that the consequences of Hurricane
Matthew will not jeopardize the deadlines of the
revised calendar. Even with the devastation brought
about by Hurricane Matthew, we urge the Government
of Haiti to hold elections as soon as possible. The final
results of the presidential election should be announced
by 30 January 2017, and the installation of the newly
elected President should take place on 7 February 2017,
in accordance with the Haitian Constitution.
The Group of Friends underscores the importance
of the Government of Haiti, the Provisional Electoral
Council, as well as political parties and all political
actors, ensuring that the upcoming rounds of elections
16-31783

11/10/2016

The question concerning Haiti

are conducted in a free, fair, inclusive, peaceful,
transparent, credible and democratic manner and
in accordance with the electoral law. The Group of
Friends welcomes the efforts carried out by the Special
Representative to promote the continuation of dialogue
among all the national actors in order to strengthen the
political process.
The Group of Friends recognizes the increased
capacity of the Haitian National Police and
acknowledges the important role of MINUSTAH in
ensuring stability and security in Haiti. In the light
of Haiti’s current security challenges, including those
related to the ongoing elections, the Secretary-General
should continue monitoring closely the situation on the
ground. In line with his latest report (S/2016/753), the
Secretary-General should conduct a strategic assessment
mission to Haiti by the end of the new mandate, which
is to say, before April 2017, and preferably after the
inauguration of a newly elected President and, on
that basis, should present his recommendations on the
possible withdrawal of MINUSTAH and the future
presence and role of the United Nations in Haiti in his
next report to the Security Council.
The Group of Friends expresses gratitude to the
personnel of MINUSTAH and to their countries and
pays tribute to those injured or killed in the line of duty.
The Group of Friends commends the wide range of
reconstruction efforts in Haiti and the successful work
done by MINUSTAH’s military engineering units.
The Group of Friends reiterates the importance
of the commitment by the Government of Haiti to
strengthening the rule of law and to making further
progress in the judiciary and the security sectors. In
that respect, the Group would like to welcome the
ongoing strengthening, professionalization and reform
of the Haitian National Police, to reiterate that police
capacity-building should remain a most critical task for
MINUSTAH and to note that the Haitian National Police
has continued to implement its 2012-2016 development
plan, and to note as well MINUSTAH’s support for the
development of the 2017-2021 strategic plan.
The Group of Friends notes with concern the slow
progress towards consolidating the rule of law and calls
on the Haitian Government to address the deficiencies
in the justice and corrections systems, prolonged
pretrial detention, prison overcrowding, widespread
corruption and the denial of human rights, including
fair trial guarantees.

S/PV.7789

The Group of Friends notes the continuing work
of the Government of Haiti, MINUSTAH and others
to protect members of vulnerable groups and urges the
utmost attention of all actors to preventing and reducing
violent crime, particularly against women and children,
including rape and other sexual violence crimes, and
supports continued violence-reduction efforts that
promote the well-being of at-risk youth and vulnerable
communities. The Group of Friends continues to
support attention to gender and child-protection issues.
The Group of Friends also expresses concern
about the continuing humanitarian challenges
and underlines the importance and urgency of the
humanitarian response plan appeal launched jointly
by the Government of Haiti and the United Nations
to meet the critical humanitarian needs of 1.3 million
people. The Group of Friends notes with concern that
food insecurity was prevalent even before the current
flooding of farm lands and loss of livestock.
The ongoing efforts to eliminate the cholera
epidemic remind us of the importance of sustaining
cooperation between the international community
and the Government of Haiti to meet the needs of the
Haitian people. The Group of Friends takes note of the
intention of the Secretary-General to develop a package
that would provide material assistance and support to
those Haitians directly affected by cholera.
The Group of Friends of Haiti reiterates its
commitment to the United Nations zero-tolerance policy
on sexual exploitation and abuse, recalling resolution
2272 (2016), and in this regard expects all United
Nations personnel to adhere to the highest standards
of conduct. The Group urges all actors involved to
assume their responsibilities in order to prevent such
cases, investigate allegations and hold accountable
those responsible.
The Group stresses that there can be no genuine
stability or sustainable development in Haiti without
strengthening democratic institutions and credible
democratic processes. In that context, the Group
emphasizes the importance of promoting the rule of
law through the strengthening of Haitian institutions
and further reaffirms the responsibility of MINUSTAH
for supporting the Haitian State by promoting improved
governance structures, the extension of State authority
and the promotion and protection of human rights, in
accordance with its mandate.

16-3178327/29

S/PV.7789

The question concerning Haiti

The Group of Friends reaffirms its solidarity with
and commitment to the people and the Government
of Haiti in their pursuit of stability, reconstruction,
recovery,
socioeconomic
development
and
democratic consolidation.
The Group of Friends of Haiti acknowledges the
important role of MINUSTAH in supporting the efforts
of the Government of Haiti to provide stability and
security in Haiti, and expresses its support for and
recognition to the women and men of MINUSTAH for
their dedication and tireless efforts to support recovery
and stability in Haiti.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Grant (Canada) (spoke in French): Let me
start by thanking Ms. Sandra Honoré for her briefing
earlier today and her ongoing leadership.
Canada aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Peru on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti.
Allow me, on behalf of all Canadians, to express
our solidarity and friendship with the Haitian people
after the devastation wrought by Hurricane Matthew.
We are saddened by the heavy loss of life caused by the
hurricane in Haiti. In view of those tragic circumstances,
our immediate thoughts are naturally with the victims
and their families and loved ones. We are committed
to helping the stricken people of Haiti and will support
them during these trying times.
Canada rapidly deployed the Canadian Disaster
Assessment Team to Haiti, which worked closely with
Haitian authorities and international humanitarian
organizations to assess the most pressing needs.
Canada has already allocated more than $4.5 million
to meet the urgent needs expressed by our partners.
Canada’s humanitarian assistance is being delivered
through United Nations humanitarian agencies and
international organizations that are currently on the
ground to address the emergency needs of vulnerable
populations in such areas as shelter, food assistance,
water, sanitation and basic health care in the coming
days and weeks.
This natural disaster poses an additional challenge
to the organization of elections originally scheduled
for 9 October. Helping victims must remain our top
priority. Canada notes the decision of the Provisional
Electoral Council to take stock of the situation after
28/29

11/10/2016

the hurricane and to communicate its assessment on
Wednesday, 12 October. Canada urges the Haitian
authorities, including the Provisional Electoral Council,
to continue to pursue the electoral process diligently
and resolutely and to provide an election date as soon
as possible in order to inaugurate an elected president
on 7 February 2017, at the latest. We also encourage
all political actors, civil society and each citizen to
contribute actively to a successful electoral process.
The restoration of constitutional order through
impartial, credible and transparent elections is an
essential step towards greater stability and prosperity in
Haiti. The emergence of strong democratic institutions,
guided by the principles of representativeness and good
governance, is an absolute prerequisite for the country’s
reconstruction on a solid and sustainable foundation.
(spoke in English)
I wish to take this opportunity to reiterate Canada’s
support for the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) and the renewal of its mandate on
the basis of proposals made by the Secretary-General
and the Group of Friends of Haiti. We are also grateful
to MINUSTAH and its components for their work in
the country and with the population in the wake of this
devastating hurricane.
As highlighted by the Secretary-General in
his most recent report to the Security Council
(S/2016/753), the security situation remains fragile
and the Haitian National Police must continue to rely
on the support of the international community to
pursue its professionalization and, ultimately, to fully
and independently assume its security prerogatives.
Consequently, Canada remains convinced that any
decision regarding the mandate, composition and fate
of MINUSTAH must be in keeping with the situation
on the ground and the Haitian National Police’s
ability to fully discharge its duties as a public service.
MINUSTAH must also continue to have the resources
and means necessary to carry out its mission. While
MINUSTAH is not a permanent solution for security
in Haiti, we should avoid reduction scenarios that could
jeopardize the results achieved to date.
Beyond security considerations, Haiti still faces a
multitude of challenges. The socioeconomic situation
remains precarious against a backdrop of chronic
political instability and persistent humanitarian
challenges, compounded by the recent disaster. There
has been an increase in reported cases of cholera over
16-31783

11/10/2016

The question concerning Haiti

the past year, and we applaud the Secretary-General’s
intent to deploy renewed efforts to fight that problem.
In addition, many victims of the 2010 earthquake
are still waiting for a resettlement solution. The
repatriation of large numbers of Haitians and people
of Haitian descent from the Dominican Republic also
continues to place demands on the State’s resources. At
the same time, Canada continues to be concerned about
the slow progress in strengthening the rule of law,
persistent weaknesses in the judicial and correctional
systems, and the status of women.
More than ever, those challenges require not
only coordinated and sustained action on the part of
international partners, but also increased effectiveness
on the part of the Haitian authorities, more particularly
in terms of identifying needs, setting priorities and
coordinating responses. Canada will continue, for
its part, to work closely with national actors and the
international community to focus on an integrated
response combining socioeconomic considerations,
a security dimension and development issues, while
continuing to pay special attention to the most
vulnerable, including women and children.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.
Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me, at the outset, to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting. I also welcome the presence
and briefing, via video teleconference, by Ms. Sandra
Honoré, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Haiti. I also thank her and her team for their
work and commitment. We also thank the Permanent
Representative of Haiti for his participation and
statement at this meeting of the Security Council.
Argentina aligns itself with the statement delivered
by our colleague from Peru on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti.

S/PV.7789

Allow me, in my national capacity, to express my
country’s solidarity with the people and the Government
of Haiti. We regret the tragic loss of human life caused
by the passing of Hurricane Matthew, in particular in
the southern region of the country.
On Friday, 7 October, the mobile hospital unit of
the Argentine Air Force, which is part of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
and is made up of 12 doctors and nurses, was deployed
to Les Cayes, the capital of Sud department, which was
severely affected by the hurricane. Furthermore, the
White Helmets Commission of Argentina’s Ministry for
Foreign Affairs is developing an offer of humanitarian
assistance, be presented in the coming days, to help the
people of Haiti.
We are receiving alarming information from our
Embassy in Haiti regarding the loss of human lives, the
destruction of infrastructure, the loss of crops and a
lack of drinking water. Our humble assistance is added
to that of friendly countries in the region, which have
never turned their backs on the people of Haiti, as well
as that of Haiti’s major donors and traditional partners.
That assistance is essential in order for the country to
face this new challenge imposed upon it by the forces
of nature.
Finally, my country would like to appeal to the
Government of Haiti to renew its commitment to the
deadlines set for the electoral timetable and to establish
a new date for the elections as soon as possible.
With regard to the draft resolution on MINUSTAH
being considered by Council members, we urge
its adoption by consensus in order to show unity
in confronting the adverse scenario facing Haiti
today. My country has always promoted the prompt
re-establishment of a constitutional Government and
the strengthening of democratic institutions, which no
doubt will contribute to improving the well-being of the
people of Haiti.
The meeting rose at 5.50 p.m.

16-3178329/29
