Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fonrth Committee

4. Condemns the policies of those Governments,
particularly the Governments of South Africa and
Portugal, which continue to maintain political, economic, military and other relations with the illegal
racist minority régime, in contravention of the relevant
resolutions of the United Nations and contrary to their
obligations under the Charter, and calls upan those
Governments to cease forthwith all such relations;
5. Reatfirms its conviction that the sanctions will
not put an end to the illegal racist minority régime
unless they are comprehensive, mandatory, effectively
supervised, enforced and complied with by all States,
particularly by South Africa and Portugal;
6. Strongly urges all States to take more stringent
measures in arder to prevent any circumvention by all
individuals and bodies corporate of their nationality,
or under their jurisdiction, of the sanctions prescribed
by the Security Council, and to refrain from any action
which might confer a semblance of legitimacy on the
illegal racist minority régime;
7. Strongly deplores the imprisonment and detention of freedom fighters of Zimbabwe by the illegal
racist minority régime and calls upan the administering
Power to effect the immediate and unconditional release
of those persons;
8. Calls upon all States to take all appropriate steps
to ensure the exclusion of the so-called N ational Olympic Comrnittee of Rhodesia from participating in the
XXth Olympic Games and requests the SecretaryGeneral to draw the attention of the President of the
lnternational Olympic Committee to the relevant provisions of Security Council resolution 253 (1968) for
appropriate action;
9. Calls upon all States, the specialized agencies
and other organizations within the United Nations
system, in consultation with the Organization of African
Unity, to extend al1 moral and material assistance to
the people of Zimbabwe;
10. Calls upon the Government of the United Kingdom, in view of the armed conflict in the Territory
and the inhuman treatment of prisoners, to ensure the
application to that situation of the Geneva Convention
relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War14 and
the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War, 16 both dated 12 August 1949;
11. Calls upon the Government of the United Kingdom to report on the implementation of the present
resolution to the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and to the General Assembly at its
twenty-seventh session;
12. Draws the attention of the Security Council, in
view of the gravity of the situation arising from the
further intensification of repressive activities against
the people of Zimbabwe, to the urgent necessity of
taking further steps to ensure the full and strict compliance by all States with the decisions of the Council,
in accordance with Article 25 of the Charter, and to
the need to widen the scope of the sanctions against
the illegal racist minority régime and to impose sanctions against South Africa and Portugal, whose Governments persist in their refusal to carry out the
mandatory decisions of the Council;
14 United Nations,
111 United Nations,

Treaty Series, vol. 75 (1950), No. 972.
Treaty Series, vol. 75 (1950), No. 973.

101

13. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-seventh session on the
implementation of the present resolution;
14. Requests the Special Committee to keep the
situation in the Territory under review.
2012th plenary meeting,
1 O December 1971.

2865 (XXVI). Question of Papua New Guinea
The General Assembly,
Recalling the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations and General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV)
of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples,
Recalling its previous resolutions concerning Papua
and the Trust Territory of New Guinea, in particular
resolutions 2590 (XXIV) of 16 December 1969 and
2700 (XXV) of 14 December 1970,
H aving considered the report of the Trusteeship
Council covering the period from 20 June 1970 to 18
June 197116 and the relevant chapters of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,17
Having heard the statement of the representative of
the administering Power,18
Taking into account the conclusions and recommendations of the Special Committee and the Trusteeship Council regarding developments in Papua and
the Trust Territory of New Guinea,
N oting in particular the express desire of the people
of Papua and the Trust Territory of New Guinea for
national unity and independence as a single political
and territorial entity,
Taking note of the decision of the House of Assembly of Papua and the Trust Territory of New Guinea
that the Territory formed from the administrative
union of those two Territories should be named Papua
New Guinea,
Bearing in mind the decisions taken during 1971
by the House of Assembly of Papua and the Trust
Territory of New Guinea and the administering Power
with regard to the attainment of full interna! selfgovernment during the perlad 1972-1976, and the
affirmation by the Government of Australia, as the
administering Power, that the interval between the
attainment of full self-government and independence
will be a matter to be determined by the then Govemment of Papua and the Trust Territory of New Guinea,
N oting further the decision of the Govemment of
Australia to invite a special mission of the Trusteeship
Council, including two members of the Special Committee, to observe the elections to the Third House
of Assembly of Papua and the Trust Territory of New
Guinea in 1972,
Mindful of the responsibility of the United Nations
to render all help to the people of Papua and the
10 Of]icial Records of the General A.ssembly, Twenty-sixth
Session, Supplement No. 4 (A/8404).
17 lbid., Supplement No. 23 (A/8423/Rev.1), chaps. IV and
XIX.
18 Ibid., Twenty-sixth Session, Fourth Committee, 1956th
meeting.

102

General Asse01bly-Twenty-sixth Session

Trust Territory of New Guinea in their eflorts freely
to decide their own future,
l. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Papua and the Trust Territory of New Guinea to selfdetermination and independence in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and the
Trusteeship Agreement of 13 December 1946;
2. Decides that, in accordance with the express
desire of the people of the Territories, the name to be
applied for United Nations purposes to the Territory
of Papua and the Trust Territory of New Guinea shall
henceforth be "Papua New Guinea";
3. Calls upon the administering Power to take all
necessary steps to ensure the speedy attainment by
Papua New Guinea of self-govemment and independence as a single political and territorial entity and,
in that regard, to establish, in consultation with the
freely elected representatives of the people, a specific
time-table for the free exercise by the people of Papua
New Guinea of their right to self-determination and
independence;
4. Urges the administering Power to discourage
separatist movements and to ensure that the unity of
Papua New Guinea is preserved throughout the period
leading up to independence;
5. Requests the Trusteeship Council, while continuing to exercise its specific responsibilities towards
the Trust Territory of New Guinea, and the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples to bear
in mind the need to consider Papua N ew Guinea as a
single political and territorial entity and to take account
of this when determining the hineraries of future
visiting missions in consultation with the administering
Power;
6. Further requests the Trusteeship Council to continue to include non-members of the Trusteeship Council in its periodic visiting missions on the basis recommended in General Assembly resolution 2590 (XXIV);
7. W elcomes the invitation extended by the administering Power to the Trusteeship Council to dispatch a
special mission to observe the elections to the Papua
New Guinea House of Assembly in 1972 and the fact
that the mission will be composed as recommended in
General Assembly resolution 2590 (XXIV);
8. Recommends that the report of this special mission and those of future missions should be submitted
both to the Trusteeship Council and to the Special
Committee;
9. Urges the administering Power to intensify its
programme of political education in Papua New Guinea
and to expedite the implementation of the programme
for accelerated localization of the Papua New Guinea
public service;
1O. Requests the administering Power further to
intensify and extend the educational services, including
technical and administrative training, provided for the
people of Papua New Guinea;
11. Further requests the adrninistering Power to
continue to expand the measures being taken to promote ownership, management and participation by the
inhabitants of Papua New Guinea in enterprises
throughout all sectors of the economy;
12. Requests the administering Power to report to
the Trusteeship Council and the Special Committee on
the implementation of the present resolution;

13. Requests the Trusteeship Council and the Special Committee to continue to examine this question
and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its
twenty-seventh session.
2028th plenary meeting,
20 December 1971.

2866 (XXVI). Question of the Seychelles
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the Seychelles,
Having considered the relevant chapter of the report
of the Special Cornrnittee on the Situation with regard
to the lmplementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, 19
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October 1970, containing the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration,
Recalling further its previous resolutions relating to
the question, in particular resolution 2709 (XXV) of
14 December 1970,
A ffirming that the Seychelles should accede to independence without any prejudice to their territorial
integrity,
_Mindful of the views expressed to the Special ComIlllttee by the leader of the Seychelles People's United
Party, 20
Noting the statement of the Chief Minister of the
Seychelles21 that he would welcome the dispatch of a
United Nations mission to the Territory and would
agree to the holding of a referendum on the future
status of the Territory under the auspices of the
United Nations,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
the Seychelles to self-determination and independence
in conformity with General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV), and calls upon the Govemment of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northem Ireland, as the
administering Power, to take ali necessary measures to
enable the people to exercise that right without further
delay;
2. Requests the administering Power, in accordance
with the provisions of the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly, to receive the special mission of the
United Nations envisaged hereunder and to make the
necessary arrangements, in consultation with the special
mission, for the holding of a referendum on the future
status of the Territory;
3. Requests the Special Comrnittee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, in consultation with the administering
Power and with the assistance of the Secretary-General,
to appoint immediately a special mission to visit the
Seychelles for the purpose of recommending practica!
steps to be taken for the full implementation of the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly-in particular for the purpose of determining the extent of
19 !bid., Twenty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/8423/
Rev.1), chap. IX.
20 See A/ AC.109/SC.2/SR.96.
2 1 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentysixth Session, Fourth Committee, 1927th meeting.
