S/2018/874

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
28 September 2018
Original: English

United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2366
(2017), by which the Council established the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia and requested me to report on its activities every 90 days. The report covers
the period from 21 July to 26 September 2018.

II. Main developments
2.
Since the swearing-in of Iván Duque Márquez as President on 7 August, the new
Government has taken detailed stock of the country’s situation, organized the new
Administration to strengthen inter-agency coordination, made institutional
appointments and prepared policies on a range of key national matters. Under the
Constitution, the President is to present the Government’s four-year national
development plan by 15 November, which will cover the full extent of the
Administration’s agenda and serve as a basis for public investments.
3.
In August, the President appointed Miguel Ceballos as High Commissioner for
Peace, Emilio José Archila as High Counsellor for Post-Conflict, responsible for the
reintegration of former Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia — People’s Army
(FARC-EP) members, and Nancy Gutiérrez as Minister of the Interior. On
17 September, those three officials were appointed as members of the Commission
for the Follow-up, Promotion and Verification of the Implementation of the Final
Agreement. Mr. Archila was appointed as the representative of the Government on
the National Reintegration Council, together with the Director of th e Agency for
Reintegration and Normalization. Mr. Archila was also designated to lead the
secretariat of the National Commission on Security Guarantees, among other
functions. I welcome the appointments to these three important bodies established
under the Peace Agreement and urge the prompt resumption of their activities.
4.
During his inauguration, in subsequent weeks and at a joint press conference on
20 September with my Special Representative for Colombia and Head of Mission,
Jean Arnault, the President reiterated several commitments that have a bearing on the
Mission’s mandate. He emphasized his firm support for a more effective reintegration
of former FARC-EP members engaged in the peace process. Given the persistent
pattern of killings of community leaders in zones of conflict, on 23 August the

18-15879 (E)

031018

*1815879*

S/2018/874

President, together with the Inspector General, announced the adoption of a broad
“pact for life and the protection of social leaders and human rights defenders” and
instructed the Ministry of the Interior to urgently formulate a policy based on the
commitments set forth in the pact. In line with the Mission’s own considerations, as
mentioned in my previous report (S/2018/723), the President emphasized the need for
more focused and tightly coordinated actions by State agencies in bringing
development, security and the rule of law to the areas affected by conflict. He
underscored his commitment to social dialogue and travelled extensively throughout
the country to meet local authorities, the business community and civil society.
5.
On 30 August, the President sent a letter addressed to the Security Council and
to me with a joint request by the Government and the People ’s Alternative
Revolutionary Force (FARC) to extend the mandate of the Mission. I am grateful for
the confidence thus placed in the United Nations by both parties to the Peace
Agreement. I am convinced that the Council’s support, as reaffirmed in its resolution
2435 (2018), by which it renewed the Mission’s mandate for an additional year until
25 September 2019, remains one of the key assets of the peace process.
6.
During the reporting period, and especially since the new Government took
office, there have been developments relating to the peace process and the
implementation of the Peace Agreement, as set out below.
Risks to the reintegration process
7.
On 6 September, the Mission issued a press release in which it expressed its
concern over the possible implications for the reintegration process of the departures
of several former FARC-EP commanders from the territorial areas for training and
reintegration in the south-eastern region. Some of them have cited concerns about
their physical and legal security as a motivating factor for leaving the areas where
some 1,500 former combatants are undergoing reintegration. Regardless of their
motivations, this development has underlined the continued fragility of the peace
process, owing in particular to the persistence of violence in the zones of conflict
linked mainly to criminal groups. Some of those groups include former FARC-EP
members commonly referred to as “dissidents” who have abandoned the peace
process. Reintegration in Colombia is facing daunting challenges, as described in my
previous reports, and which include weak or absent State institutions, the impact of
illegal economies and the relentless efforts by armed group s to lure former FARC-EP
members into their ranks. The latest developments confirm what I stressed exactly a
year ago in my final report on the work of the United Nations Mission in Colombia
(S/2017/801), namely that the effective reintegration of former FARC-EP members is
central to the overall peace consolidation agenda.
Congressional developments
8.
In early September, the Senate and the Chamber of Representatives each elected
its Peace Commission, whose mandate is to support the peaceful resolution of
conflict, social dialogue and reconciliation. On 10 September, the Senate Peace
Commission, with the Mission’s support, made a first visit to a territorial area for
training and reintegration, in San Vicente del Caguán, Caquetá Department, to
ascertain the state of reintegration in that region, to interact with former FARC -EP
members, neighbouring communities and representatives of the Armed Forces and to
affirm their support for the reintegration effort. The visit reassured former FARC-EP
members and enhanced the senators’ understanding of the pending challenges. It is
hoped that the visit will be followed by others, which will also have the Mission ’s
support. Field visits by members of the Commission from the Chamber of
Representatives, most recently to Antioquia Department, have also been valuable.

2/15

18-15879

S/2018/874

9.
Following the visit, the Senate Peace Commission, the High Commissioner for
Peace and the High Counsellor for Post-Conflict agreed to work together on
reintegration challenges.
Constitutional Court review of peace-related legislation
10. On 16 August, in an important decision, the Constitutional Court upheld the
constitutionality of the statute on the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, while providing
clarification thereon. In particular, the Court found that the sentences that the Special
Jurisdiction was authorized to impose of five to eight years of special restrictions on
freedom were compatible with participation in politics (provided that the sentenced
individual fulfilled a series of conditions), while stricter sentences were not. Overall,
the decision amounts to a clearer and more solid legal framework for the work of the
Special Jurisdiction. This will, in turn, contribute to greater legal certainty i n the
implementation of the Peace Agreement, for the individuals subject to its jurisdiction
and for victims.
11. The Court also declared constitutional Decree Law 902, which outlines
measures for the implementation of comprehensive rural reform, and Legi slative Act
No. 5 of 29 November 2017, which upholds the State ’s monopoly on the legitimate
use of force and prohibits support for civilian armed organized groups.
12. In the Peace Agreement, the signatories agreed to submit legislation adopted by
Congress through the fast-track procedure for a prior and automatic review by the
Constitutional Court. With its recent decisions, the Court has completed its work in
this regard and has undertaken, in total, the judicial review of six constitutional
amendments, four statutes and 35 decrees related to the implementation of the
Agreement. By doing so, it has undoubtedly contributed substantively to the peace
process. The adjustments and clarifications that it has made during its review have
sought to reconcile differing views of the Agreement and the outcome has brought
key provisions into line with constitutional norms.
Comprehensive System for Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition
13. The United Nations system, at the request of the Government, continu es to
provide important technical and operational support to all three components of the
Comprehensive System for Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition: the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace, the Truth Commission and the Special Unit for the
Search for Persons Deemed as Missing.
14. Equipped with a solid legal framework, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace
opened its first cases. Case 001 is focused on kidnappings by FARC-EP; case 002 on
violent events involving multiple parties in Tumaco, Department of Nariño, from
1990 to 2016, when communities of Afro-Colombian and indigenous communities
were particularly affected; and case 003 on extrajudicial executions by State agents.
The Special Jurisdiction has held hearings with senior representatives of the fo rmer
FARC-EP and current and retired senior officials of the armed forces and national
police, often with the participation of victims. Several civilian third parties, including
two former members of Congress, have also brought cases that will be heard und er
the Special Jurisdiction. A wide variety of State and non-State institutions have also
submitted information to the Special Jurisdiction documenting cases and patterns of
violence.
15. Earlier in 2018, FARC expressed concern about the situation of the assets that
the group had handed over to the Government in August 2017 to be used for the
purpose of providing reparation to victims. In August and September, the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace requested information from various competent authorities to
ensure that the assets were used for the originally intended purposes.
18-15879

3/15

S/2018/874

16. As part of its examination of the case of FARC leader Seuxis Pausias Hernández
Solarte (alias Jesús Santrich), who is under an extradition order from the United States
of America, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace is considering evidence provided by
the Office of the Attorney General. On 12 September, the Special Jurisdiction
requested from the Office all evidence in its possession.
17. Further to the concerns made public by the Mission on the whereabouts of
several former FARC-EP commanders, on 12 September the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace requested the 31 members of the former FARC-EP General Command to
provide a report on their contributions to truth and reintegration, including s upport
for the location of missing persons.
18. Decree 1393, of 2 August, established the internal structure and functions of the
Unit for the Search for Persons Deemed as Missing during the armed conflict. The
Special Jurisdiction for Peace, the International Committee of the Red Cross and other
organizations working on behalf of families of the disappeared called for adequate
support to be provided to this effort of the transitional justice system.
Referendum on corruption
19. The fight against corruption was a key theme throughout the electoral campaign.
On 26 August, a referendum on seven proposals to address corruption and promote
transparency was held at the initiative of several political parties and with the support
of the President. While the results missed the threshold of approval by a slim margin,
they nevertheless showed a high level of popular support for tackling corruption. As
a result, the President invited all political parties to support a citizens ’ compact
against corruption. A package of reforms, including the seven proposals submitted to
the referendum, was negotiated among political parties and submitted to Congress on
18 September. I note that those reforms are consistent with the provisions of the Peace
Agreement that, in the chapter on security guarantees, call for the Government to
prevent and control corruption, in particular by regulating the integrity, performance
and assets of public officials.
Substitution of illicit crops
20. On 19 September, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and
the Government launched a report on illicit crop monitoring for 2017. By the end of
2017, the country’s coca cultivation had reached record levels of 171,000 ha, with a
potential production of 1,379 tons of pure cocaine. Illicit economies, which include
mining and drugs, are a continued source of violence in the country and a threat to
the peace process.
21. Meanwhile, as reported by UNODC, 77,659 families have signed voluntary
substitution agreements under the National Comprehensive Programme for the
Substitution of Illicit Crops, committing themselves to eradicating approximately
49,000 ha of coca cultivation. As at 20 August, around 20,845 ha of coca crops had
been eradicated under those agreements. The armed forces have assisted in the
voluntary eradication of an additional 5,374 ha. Despite serious challenges, including
the killing of community members and threats against leaders of the substitution
programme, the continued participation of communities demonstrates that they can
spearhead such an effort. While the Government is formulating a comprehensive
policy on drug cultivation, it has reiterated its commitment to families who have
already signed voluntary substitution agreements.
Negotiations between the Government and the National Liberation Army
22. On 1 August, the sixth round of talks between the Government and the National
Liberation Army (ELN) concluded in Havana. The negotiating teams reported that,
4/15

18-15879

S/2018/874

although they did not reach definitive agreements, p rogress was made, in particular
with regard to designing a process for the participation of society in building peace.
23. With respect to future negotiations, ELN has called for continuity with regard
to both the negotiating agenda agreed to in 2016 and the negotiating format, including
the participation of guarantor and supporting countries.
24. Discussions on the continuation of the talks with the new Government were
affected by the kidnapping, in early August, of seven uniformed personnel and two
civilians by ELN in two separate events. The groups were released on 5 and
12 September, respectively. A minor kidnapped on 7 September was released on
19 September.
25. After deliberating for a month, the President announced on 8 September that he
was prepared to renew discussions with ELN, provided that the group release all
hostages under its control and cease all acts of violence. ELN rejected those
preconditions and insisted that those issues be discussed at the negotiating table. In
the absence of direct negotiations, the continued direct communication between the
Government and ELN is welcome. The Government has made it clear that it expects
a cessation of all violence; the ELN, for its part, has stated that it aims to bring about
substantive change based on a broad social dialogue. The two goals are not
incompatible. As I stated during my visit to Colombia at the beginning of 2018, full
social participation requires a situation exempt from violence and conducive to an
effective and respectful dialogue. I invite the two sides to explore further this potential
for convergence and to bring about a process that promptly delivers benefits to the
Colombian society as a whole.

III. Mission tasks
A.

Socioeconomic and political reintegration
26. The process of economic reintegration is clearly lagging behind other
dimensions of reintegration. As I indicated in my previous report (S/2018/723), the
fundamental goal of providing income-generating opportunities to some 14,000
former combatants is far from being realized, as illustrated by the fact that only
17 projects have been approved, of which only 2 are currently funded. Meanwhile,
dozens of initiatives led and mainly funded by former FARC-EP members are at
various stages of implementation in the territorial areas for training and reintegration
and new settlements, with varying levels of success. As shown in several cases, many
of the initiatives can be turned into viable income -generating ventures if provided
with better access to technical and marketing advice, land and overall support from
the Government, local authorities and the private sector, among others.
27. While the payment of monthly allowances and the provision of other early
reintegration services, including the provision of food in the territorial areas for
training and reintegration, to former FARC-EP members are continuing, over the past
few weeks the new Government has been taking stock and developing its own
approach. Some of its conclusions are consistent with the lessons identified in my
previous report: (a) the importance of ensuring that regional and local authorities are
empowered and, along with the private sector and other actors, actively engaged in
the reintegration process; (b) the need to bring the reintegration of former FARC-EP
members closer to the development of communities; and (c) the value of linking
reintegration strategies to the work done under another pillar of the Peace Agreement,
the development programmes with a territorial focus. A territorial and communitybased approach is particularly appropriate given the increased dispersal of former
FARC-EP members outside the territorial areas for training and reintegration. This

18-15879

5/15

S/2018/874

approach is consistent with the aspirations of FARC and the framework
implementation plan, as well as the policy on reintegration adopted in June. The
functioning of the National Reintegration Council must be improved in order to
ensure that reintegration is rooted in local realities and opportunities. Now that the
new members of the Council have been appointed, it is of utmost importance that
economic reintegration activities resume on a larger scale and at a faster pace than
before.
28. Taking into account the period of transition between the two administr ations,
the Mission has redoubled its efforts to support swift income -generating activities
drawing on extrabudgetary funding from the Department of Political Affairs trust fund
and additional contributions from donors. In total, the initiatives support 47
microenterprises by former FARC-EP members in all 25 territorial areas for training
and reintegration and in 22 new settlements, in both urban and rural settings. Nine of
the microenterprise projects are led by women, and gender considerations are ensured
in all initiatives that are supported.
29. As part of the effort to bolster reintegration, the Mission has agreed with the
Resident Coordinator, the High Commissioner for Peace and the FARC leadership to
prepare a joint proposal to be submitted to the Peacebuilding Fund. The proposal will
address socioeconomic reintegration and reconciliation and be implemented by
several United Nations agencies.
Political reintegration
30. As mentioned in my previous report, FARC representatives were sworn into 8
of the 10 congressional seats allocated to the party under the Peace Agreement. The
allocation of the seats that were not taken by FARC leaders Iván Márquez (who did
not present himself to be sworn in) and Jesús Santrich (who was in detention pursuant
to an extradition request) is still under discussion by the relevant institutions. The
four FARC senators and four representatives are serving on key congressional
committees covering issues relating to constitutional affairs, the budget, peace,
agriculture, health and gender. FARC legislators have proposed and supported draft
legislation related to aspects of the Peace Agreement.

B.

Legal guarantees
31. During the transition to the new Government, the Mission continued to work
cooperatively with the Office of the High Commissioner for Peace and FARC. This
tripartite approach to legal guarantees has been effective and I hope that its
continuation will help to bring agreed solutions to outstanding issues.
32. As at 30 August, approximately 13,000 former FARC-EP members had been
accredited by the Office of the High Commissioner for Peace and 12,773 of them had
been notified of and provided with their accreditation, an inc rease of 150 since my
previous report. The increased dispersal of former FARC-EP members, which was
described in the previous report, continues to complicate the tripartite efforts of
FARC, the Office of the High Commissioner and the Mission to locate thes e
individuals and inform them of their accreditation.
33. The Office of the High Commissioner for Peace continued to review, with
FARC, the list dated 15 August 2017 of former FARC-EP members: 24 individuals
were excluded from the list and 33 were accredited.
34. At the end of August, 232 accredited former FARC-EP members remained in
prison. The Special Jurisdiction for Peace has opened some cases related to those
individuals, as well as to some 250 others designated as “peace advocates”, largely

6/15

18-15879

S/2018/874

made possible by the implementation, within the Special Jurisdiction, of the
Independent System for Advice and Defence, and by legal support provided by the
international community and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP).
This represents a small increase over the figures in my previous report as a result of
recent new accreditations of former FARC-EP members in prison.
35. It is very important that the Independent System for Advice and Defence be
adequately resourced and staffed in order to fulfil its responsibilities in terms of the
provision of legal guarantees and reintegration. The previous Government approved
the decree for its establishment, but it was the new Government that approved the
funds for its functioning. The funds must be made available as soon as possible,
thereby permitting the System to be staffed with some 30 lawyers in the next few
months, at a time when demand for the System has increased sharply.
36. In addition, as previously reported, FARC has consolidated a list of some 1,000
additional former FARC-EP members. The Office of the High Commissioner for
Peace received the list on 10 August. The list includes people who are recognized by
FARC as former FARC-EP members, but who do not appear in the list of 15 August
2017. Most of them come from areas affected by continuing security challenges and
where the integration of the individuals into the process could be beneficial. As such,
I hope that this matter will be treated by the new Government as a priority.

C.

Security guarantees
Security of former members of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of
Colombia — People’s Army
37. The military and police forces continue to secure the area around all territorial
areas for training and reintegration. New settlements of former FARC-EP members
outside those areas continue to expand and some of them are located in areas exposed
to the influence of illegal armed groups. Their security requirements highlight the
importance of a wider effort to extend security to the broader zones of conflict.
38. Close protection by the Specialized Subdirectorate for Security and Protection
of the National Protection Unit remains a key element of the security measures
implemented for former FARC-EP members. During the period under review, an
additional 56 bodyguards, including 2 women, were hired. The recruitment of a
further 46 bodyguards would meet the target of 1,200 as set out in the Peace
Agreement.
39. At the national, regional and local levels, the Tripartite Protection and Security
Mechanism, with the participation of the Police Unit for Peacebuilding, the National
Protection Unit and the Mission, continued to operate during the transition period and
remains the main mechanism for dialogue and monitoring of the protection of and
security measures for former FARC-EP members. The performance of the Police Unit
and National Protection Unit within this mechanism is commendable. The Mechanism
is strengthening its capacity to respond to specific risks faced by former FARC -EP
female members and has effectively integrated gender focal points for FARC, the
Police Unit and the Mission into its structure. Local FARC focal points, supported by
the Mission, are playing a significant role in enhancing understanding of and ensuring
adequate institutional responses to local security challenges.
40. Outside the scope of those security measures, nine former FARC -EP members
in the process of reintegration were killed during the reporting period, bringing the
total number killed since the signing of the Peace Agreement to 71. Deteriorating
security conditions for former FARC-EP members living outside the territorial areas
for training and reintegration were starkly exposed by the tragic events in El Tarra,

18-15879

7/15

S/2018/874

Norte de Santander Department, where 10 people, including four former FARC -EP
members, were killed on 30 July.
41. The Special Investigation Unit of the Office of the Attorney General continues
to be responsible for investigations into the killings of former FARC -EP members. It
has pointed out that three quarters of those killings are concentrated in five
departments: Nariño (16 victims), Antioquia (14 victims), Cauca (12 victims),
Caquetá (8 victims) and Norte de Santander (7 victims). In 34 cases, the Unit reported
significant progress in its investigations, with 17 instigators or perpetrators arrested.
Of these, 15 cases involved dissident groups, 7 involved private individuals, 6 were
attributed to ELN, 4 cases were attributed to the Clan del Golfo criminal group,
1 involved local criminal organization and 1 case remains under investigation.
According to the Investigation Unit, the principal motives behind the attacks are
related to territorial control (21 cases) and revenge (3 cases). Other motives identified
are revenge for prior grievances, internal differences within territorial areas for
training and reintegration, refusal to join a criminal organization and extortion. It is
key to ensure that the Unit broadens its territorial presence, particularly as it is
expanding its investigations into the killings of social leaders.
42. The statistics from the Special Investigation Unit confirm the need to pay special
attention to the security situation in and around certain territorial areas for training
and reintegration in the Departments of Nariño, Antioqu ia and Cauca. Other incidents
have occurred in the territorial areas in the Departments of Arauca and Putumayo,
where attacks have taken place, including within the perimeter of the territorial areas.
Armed groups and dissidents have been observed in the surrounding areas.
Security guarantees for communities, human rights defenders and social leaders
43. As mentioned herein, on 23 August, at a meeting in Apartadó, Antioquia
Department, the President and the Inspector General announced the adoption of t he
pact for life and the protection of social leaders and human rights defenders and
instructed the Ministry of the Interior to follow up urgently with policy guidelines.
44. The sense of urgency is driven by recent developments. All sources, including
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in
Colombia, attest that killings of and threats against social leaders and human rights
defenders continue unabated. According to an early warning from the Office of the
Ombudsman in February 2018, the killings and threats affect 12 of the 32 departments
in the country. This same alert identifies the multiple issues behind the killings,
including the victims’ involvement in defending land and natural resources; in
implementing parts of the Peace Agreement, in particular the coca substitution
programme and the formulation of rural development plans; in land restitution and
the return of displaced persons; in defending their land against private interests; in
denouncing drug dealing, the presence of illegal armed actors and the use of children
and adolescents in marginalized urban areas; in protesting against specific
investments of public resources; and in political participation. Reversing this trend is
critical to protecting human rights and preserving spaces for social actors to uphold
their rights.
45. The investigation carried out by the Inspector General, which coincides with the
analysis by the Office of the Ombudsman, identifies three factors: control of
territories for the drug trade; large infrastructure projects; and pressure on ethnic
communities. These factors are present in several of the 12 departments most affected.
46. Most of the victims are members of local action boards, the most basic form of
association officially recognized by the Constitution; leaders of indigenous
communities and communities of Colombians of African descent; and leaders of coca
substitution programmes.
8/15

18-15879

S/2018/874

47. As shown above, the persistent pattern of killings is relatively well defined in
terms of its geographical scope, the people targeted and the typology of motivations.
As I underscored in previous reports, there is a need for a proactive and integrated
State presence in former conflict areas. A focused, coordinated and sustained effort
by State institutions, as called for in the pact adopted in Apartadó and signed by the
President, the Deputy Attorney General, the Inspector General, the Ombudsman and
several governors, should be able to address this challenge forcefully.
48. In its current work to develop guidelines for the implementation of the pact, the
Ministry of the Interior is finalizing its analysis of existing mechanisms for the
protection of social leaders. These include the security guarantee round tables created
in 2007, the National Protection Unit and the mechanisms recently established under
the Peace Agreement such as the Intersectoral Commission for Rapid Response to
Early Warnings to ensure an effective response to the Ombudsman ’s alerts, and the
comprehensive programme for the protection and security of communities and
organizations.
49. In the Mission’s assessment, the early warnings issued by the Office of the
Ombudsman have confirmed their value as a tool for prevention, risk analysis and
raising awareness among institutions and the public at large. With regard to the
Intersectoral Commission, it will be important to promote and improve inter -agency
responses at the local level. The National Commission on Security Guarantees has a
key role to play in bringing together all competent institutions at the highest level
under the leadership of the President. It offers a platform for dialogue with civil
society organizations and is a feature unique to the Colombian peace process.
50. The importance of a State-wide action plan to respond effectively to patterns of
violence in zones of conflict cannot be overstated. Success in this area will have to
be a key priority of the new Government and one of its main contributions to the
consolidation of the peace process.
Early warnings by the Office of the Ombudsman
51. During the reporting period, the Mission monitored 13 early warnings issued by
the Office of the Ombudsman in 16 municipalities, with repeated warnings in the
Departments of Nariño, Chocó and Tolima. These warnings highlighted the presence
of illegal armed groups and the resulting risk to social leaders and communities
participating in the National Comprehensive Programme for the Substitution of Illicit
Crops and development programmes with a territorial focus, both linked to the Peace
Agreement. All 13 warnings pointed to specific risks to women, ethnic groups and
children and were linked to gender and ethnic violence and to the recruitment of
children under 18 years old into illegal armed groups. The warnings note that armed
violence is affecting communities at large, including former FARC -EP members in
the process of reintegration, leading communities and social organizations to demand
effective government measures for stabilization and territorial security.

D.

Cross-cutting issues
Gender mainstreaming and engagement with women’s groups
52. The Vice-President, Marta Lucía Ramírez, who is responsible for leading the
Government’s gender agenda, stated her intention to maintain a regular dialogue with
women’s groups during an initial meeting in July and convened a Cabinet meeting to
take this agenda forward on 28 August, emphasizing the economic empowerment of
women and efforts to eliminate sexual violence. The Special High-level Forum of
Women, established under the Peace Agreement, is working to strengthen its
monitoring mechanism for the gender provisions of the Final Peace Agreement.

18-15879

9/15

S/2018/874

53. During the reporting period, as mentioned above, the gender technical working
group of the National Reintegration Council strove to promote the gender-sensitive
reintegration of female former FARC-EP members, among others with guidance for
the implementation of the gender actions of the policy on reintegration adopted in
June 2018 and technical support for the implementation of productive projects. There
was progress in identifying and prioritizing women-led productive projects.
54. The security guarantees for women leaders and human rights defenders remain
an issue of concern. The effective implementation of the recently launched
Comprehensive Security Programme for Women Human Rights Defenders, and the
corresponding action plan, offers an opportunity to address the differentiated risks
and the responses that women require. In this respect, the national police are
continuing their efforts in seven regions to improve their ability to respond to genderbased violence through improved training and coordination with local authorities, as
well as gender awareness activities with respect to military personnel deployed in the
territorial areas for training and reintegration.
55. In an effort to promote the meaningful political participation of women, a
non-governmental organization, La Kolectiva, is working with FARC, the United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women)
and donor countries to open a school for the exercise of citizenship and political
advocacy for the reintegration of women former combatants. This initiative is under
implementation in seven territorial areas for training and reintegration in th e
Departments of Antioquia and Cauca and provides education on the rights and
obligations of citizenship and strategies for the promotion of women ’s rights and
gender equality.
56. The Mission has been supporting dialogues among diverse actors at the local
and regional levels to foster confidence-building and create spaces to exchange best
practices on local peacebuilding. For example, in Nariño Department, the Mission, in
coordination with UN-Women, supported a process of dialogue and reconciliation
between women victims of the conflict and female former FARC-EP members,
bringing together more than 32 former women combatants and representatives of
regional victims’ organizations. This initiative will be replicated in other locations,
creating a network of women working for reconciliation.
57. Based on its experience throughout the country, the Mission has developed a
guidance handbook on gender-sensitive verification for its staff. It has adopted a
Mission-wide gender directive and continues to strengthen its dialogue with women’s
organizations at the national and local levels, including FARC women ’s groups in
territorial areas for training and reintegration and respective local government bodies.
58. The Peace Agreement continues to be cited, rightly, as ground-breaking in terms
of how gender is mainstreamed into its provisions. Nevertheless, its implementation
remains a challenge, including with regard to security guarantees and reintegration.
This challenge can be met only with greater prioritization and re sources.
Ethnic perspectives
59. On 9 August, the second day of his term, the President met representatives of
indigenous communities and committed himself to including a chapter on indigenous
peoples in his national development plan. The need to address the situation of ethnic
communities was highlighted by the killings of and high number of threats against
ethnic leaders and the confinement and displacement of indigenous communities and
communities of Colombians of African descent registered during the reporting period.
60. On 28 August, the Mission leadership met the High-level Forum of Ethnic
Peoples established to monitor the implementation of the Final Peace Agreement and
10/15

18-15879

S/2018/874

engage with the Commission for the Follow-up, Promotion and Verification of the
Implementation of the Final Agreement. The High-level Forum and the Mission have
identified a joint work agenda that includes follow-up on ethnic indicators of the
Framework Plan for the Implementation of the Peace Agreement with regard to
reintegration and security guarantees. Reintegration-related monitoring will comprise
the inclusion of an ethnic approach in productive projects; the promotion of conflict
prevention on territorial issues; and reconciliation and dialogue between traditional
authorities and the leadership of territorial areas for training and reintegration. With
regard to security guarantees, joint efforts will focus on integration of ethnic
considerations in the protection of communities, organizations and leaders in the zone
of conflict. Provision of operational support to the High-level Forum will assist in
fulfilling its functions and advancing the implementation of the ethnic chapter of the
Peace Agreement.
Child protection
61. The Government’s reintegration programme for children, entitled “A Different
Path of Life”, continued to be implemented under the coordination of the newly
appointed presidential Counsellor for Human Rights. The Agency for Reintegration
and Normalization and the technical working group on children of the National
Reintegration Council have become more involved in supporting children in the
programme who are now adults. Notwithstanding these advances, the number of cases
in which children have not received adequate support for daily subsistence remains
of concern. A decree is pending to clarify the Government’s response to adolescents
and young people who have decided to continue their reintegration within the
territorial areas for training and reintegration, and the definition of a legal entity to
guarantee the sustainability of and budget for the Government’s reintegration
programme for children.
62. There was no progress regarding day-care facilities for children of former
FARC-EP members living in the territorial areas for training and reintegration. The
lack of social inclusion programmes, such as preventive health, education,
recreational and cultural activities, is also a challenge requiring a clear policy from
the Government. There are also a growing number of cases related to former FARC EP members, especially women, seeking to regularize the legal guardianship of their
children. A special protocol for those cases may be required in the light of the
implications for their reintegration.
63. The recent adoption by the Government of guidelines on the prevention of
recruitment and sexual violence against children is a welcome development. It will
be important to implement them in zones of conflict. To ensure their effectiveness,
the guidelines should dovetail with existing frameworks and structures for community
security guarantees as provided for in the Peace Agreement, including the early
warning system.
Youth and peace and security
64. The Mission has adopted a strategy for the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018) on youth and peace and security, with a
focus on the role of young people in reintegration and security guarantees. On
reintegration, the Mission is continuing to facilitate visits to the territorial areas for
training and reintegration by young entrepreneurs, civil society leaders and university
students, focused on providing first-hand information about the reintegration process
and identifying opportunities for supporting productive projects. For example, young
entrepreneurs from the tourism sector who have participated in the visits are helping
to promote the projects of former FARC-EP members through their travel agencies
and social media. On security guarantees, the Mission is strengthening its dialogue
18-15879

11/15

S/2018/874

with youth leaders and organizations and young former FARC -EP members to better
understand their specific security needs and concerns. The Mission is also working
with the National Council for Peace and Reconciliation, established under section 3.4
of the Final Agreement, to promote increased engagement by young people with the
territorial peace councils. In order to integrate a youth focus throughout its
verification and liaison activities, the Mission has established a network of youth
focal points throughout its regional and subregional offices.
Liaison and coordination
65. During the transition period, the Mission established relations with the new
Administration, sharing its assessment of the peace process and emphasizing the need
to devote full attention to the still fragile reintegration process. Initial dialogue with
the High Commissioner for Peace, the High Counsellor for Post Conflict and the
Minister of the Interior has been positive and productive.
66. The Mission has also continued its engagement with independent oversight
institutions. It has strengthened its relationship with the Inspector General, who is
increasingly active in support of the peace process, especially with regard to security
guarantees for community and social leaders.
67. In an effort to create favourable conditions for reconciliation at the territorial
level, the Mission has been supporting dialogue among diverse actors at the local and
departmental levels to foster confidence-building and create spaces to exchange best
practices on local peacebuilding. For example, the Mission has supported dialogue
with local social leaders to help to understand the risks and regional dynamics related
to protection and facilitate information-sharing with national authorities and
competent institutions. Additional initiatives are under way with diverse actors,
including former FARC-EP members, youth leaders, community action associations,
universities, the armed forces and victims of the conflict.
68. The Mission has continued to promote the involvement of the private sector in
the reintegration process. In the territorial area Llano Grande in Antioquia
Department, the Mission facilitated an alliance between 14 private sector foundations
to support social, educational and cultural programmes in the territorial area and the
surrounding community. The Mission also sees great potential in the private sector
supporting former FARC-EP members’ productive projects through the provision of
technical assistance, the development of business plans and the commercialization of
products produced in the territorial areas for training and reintegration.

IV. Coordination with the United Nations country team
69. The Mission continues to work closely with agencies, funds and programmes of
the United Nations system on matters that relate to their specialized mandates,
including through the liaison efforts of the Mission’s gender, child protection and
advisers on ethnic issues and joint thematic working groups on reintegration and
security guarantees.
70. The United Nations country team, the Mission and relevant institutions
continued to coordinate programming in support of the reintegration process. The
United Nations multi-partner trust fund has allocated $9 million to socioeconomic
reintegration interventions, in addition to support from bilateral donors. UNDP has
been a strategic partner of the Mission in mobilizing, designing and implementing
funds for micro-level income-generating reintegration projects for former FARC-EP
members in the territorial areas for training and reintegration and new settlements.
The World Food Programme, the International Organization for Migration, the Food

12/15

18-15879

S/2018/874

and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and UN-Women are providing
technical assistance across nine territorial areas for training and reintegration, where
collective projects have been approved, including ensuring a gender equality
approach.
71. With regard to security guarantees, the Mission and United Nations agencies
met representatives of the Government to explore specific actions to take forward the
pact for life and the protection of social leaders and human rights defenders agreed
upon in Apartadó. The Mission and the country team have also collaborated in efforts
to strengthen the early warning system. In early September, OHCHR and the Mission
co-organized a meeting with representatives of human rights platforms to strengthen
joint coordination and cooperation on a shared peace and human rig hts agenda; this
dialogue will be replicated at the regional level. In addition, the United Nations multipartner trust fund and the Peacebuilding Fund have financed activities in more than
135 municipalities since late 2017, including support to local jus tice mechanisms,
humanitarian demining and mine action, community infrastructure and community based measures to reduce violence against women and children.

V. Mission structures
Mission planning, operations and support
72. During the reporting period, the Mission undertook a detailed analysis of
evolving factors in the operating environment with potential implications for its
mandate, deployment and geographical coverage. One factor considered was the
increased dispersal of former FARC-EP members in new settlements across the
country, as well as in some larger cities. Based on this analysis, the Mission slightly
adjusted its deployment and the areas of responsibility assigned to its offices to ensure
an effective, cost-efficient and flexible implementation of its mandate in the field.
The changes complement the Mission’s hub-and-spoke approach, which relies on
greater mobility of staff operating from hub offices in urban centres, rather than on a
larger number of stand-alone camps. The Mission has begun relocating local sites to
hub locations, has closed high-cost remote camps and has identified office premises
in new areas of operation. Once completed, the field redeployment process will result
in the consolidation of Mission locations from 43 to 37 field sites, and an overall
reduction in operational support requirements in deep -field locations. The Mission
continues to work closely with counterparts to ensure full adherence to national and
United Nations environmental standards.
73. Significant efforts were undertaken during the reporting period to advance the
Mission’s strategy on gender parity. Following a recent recruitment drive, 58 per cent
of Professional-level field staff positions are filled by women and 65 per cent of field
office teams are led by women. In addition, 28 of 111 international unarmed observers
are women.
Safety and security
74. The residual risk levels after the implementation of the security risk
management measures remain medium and low. However, there were several
noteworthy security incidents and developments during the reporting period. In the
first incident, FARC-EP dissidents forcibly entered a meeting of the FARC party in
Norte de Santander Department; two Mission personnel were present and no
participants were injured. As a result of new mines placed by illegal armed groups
linked to drug trafficking, the number of civilian victims of anti -personnel mines in
the first eight months of 2018 was 46, more than double the 18 registered during the
same period in 2017. Activities of illegal armed groups in the Departments of Arauca,
18-15879

13/15

S/2018/874

Norte de Santander, Chocó, Cauca, Nariño and Antioquia pose indirect threats to
United Nations personnel and operations. Lastly, the security recommendations in
effect since the Hidroituango dam crisis remain in place as the situation remained
largely unchanged.
Conduct and discipline
75. The Mission continues to hold regular training sessions for new and existing
personnel. A campaign to raise awareness regarding the sexual exploitation and abuse
policy, prohibited conduct and respect in the work environment is under way.
76. During the reporting period, five allegations of misconduct were reported to the
Mission and are under investigation. There are no pending cases related to sexual
exploitation and abuse.

VI. Observations
77. The present report is issued at the end of the first year of the Mission ’s mandate
and the beginning of the new Administration. For the new Gove rnment, as well as for
the United Nations, it is an opportunity to take stock of the progress made thus far in
the peace process and draw some lessons for the future.
78. In my previous report (S/2018/723), which coincided with the culmination of
the electoral process, I highlighted that the congressional and presidential elections
of 2018 were recognized as the least violent and the most participatory in decades,
making them one of the most tangible benefits of the peace process for society at
large. While the peace process is not exempt from serious challenges, and it has been
marked by political controversy since its inception, the relevance of the Peace
Agreement for the country’s future has grown.
79. The commitment of the new Government to applying itself to the
implementation of the Peace Agreement, and the broad support that the Agreement
enjoys from the opposition and independent parties, are testament to the increased
support for the peace process today. In addition to the Government and political
parties, several of the most important institutions of the State, including Congress,
the Constitutional Court, the Supreme Court, the Office of the Inspector General and
the Office of the Ombudsman, have supported and contributed to the implementation
of key parts of the Agreement. If the viability of a peace process is judged by the way
it fares through a change from the Government that negotiated and signed it to a new
one, the steps taken by the President, as outlined herein, are promising. I am hopeful
that Colombian institutions will continue to pursue what is at the core of the peace
agenda: security, development and the rule of law in the areas affected by conflict; an
effective system of truth, justice and reparation to the victims; and the essential
commitments to those who laid down arms. I call upon the authorities to make
available the resources necessary for those critical investments in the future of
Colombia, with all possible support from the international community.
80. As evidenced by the more worrying developments referred to herein, including
the expansion of illegal economies, the competition of criminal groups for territorial
control and the persistence of violence, the challe nges remain formidable. Nothing
less than a determined mobilization by State institutions in alliance with civil society
and communities will be up to the challenge of bringing stability and development to
vast and remote areas that are prey to those inter connected threats. I am encouraged
by the spirit of national consensus that has emerged in recent weeks around the
protection of social leaders and efforts to combat corruption. I hope that the same
search for consensus will extend to the other dimensions of this agenda. As the

14/15

18-15879

S/2018/874

President and his Government are formulating key policies, I hope in particular that
the broad social dialogue in which he is engaged will enable him to forge a national
consensus around a policy on illegal drugs, on which unfortunat ely so many farmers
in the zones of conflict depend.
81. The resolution of the issues in the mandate of the Mission, including the
reintegration of former FARC-EP members and the security guarantees for
communities in areas most affected by conflict, is intimately linked to the challenges
described above. The experience of the past year has shown how difficult these tasks
are, and the number of leaders killed, as well as the frustration of many former
guerrillas, stand as evidence of this. However, these tasks are not intractable. Some
of the lessons learned have been outlined in past reports, as well as in the present one.
They involve designing solutions much closer to the problems at hand, empowering
and trusting local actors and having institutions respond faster and more coherently.
I trust in particular that the signatories to the pact for life and the protection of social
leaders and human rights defenders concluded in Apartadó on 23 August will deliver
fully on their commitments.
82. The Mission aspires to contribute to those aims through its mandate and the
presence of its staff throughout the zones of conflict, together with the United Nations
system and the international community as a whole. I take this opportunity to
acknowledge the extraordinary dedication that each and every member of the Mission
has demonstrated under the committed and experienced leadership of my Special
Representative. I take the recent request of the Government and the FARC party to
renew the Mission’s mandate as evidence of their commitment to seeing this process
through to its successful conclusion, and of their trust that the Mission can contribute
to this end. I am grateful once again to the Security Council for expressing its
confidence in the peace process and the service that the Mission can render to it.

18-15879

15/15
