United Nations

S/PV.6470

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6470th meeting
Wednesday, 19 January 2011, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Barbalić . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bosnia and Herzegovina)

Members:

Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Salam
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Sangqu
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-21051 (E)

*1121051*

S/PV.6470

The meeting was called to order at 10.30 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I should like to invite
the representatives of Algeria, Australia, Bangladesh,
Chile, Cuba, Egypt, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Japan, Jordan, Malaysia, Morocco, Norway,
Pakistan, the Philippines, the Sudan, Tajikistan,
Tunisia, Turkey, Saudi Arabia, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Uganda and the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela to participate in this meeting.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: Due to an ongoing labour dispute
of Israeli Foreign Service employees, the Israeli
Permanent Mission to the United Nations will
unfortunately not be able to participate in today’s
Security Council meeting.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 17 January 2011 from the
Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United Nations,
which will be issued as document S/2011/23 and which
reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council that will
be held on Wednesday, 19 January 2011, on the
situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question.”
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting in accordance with the rules
of procedure and previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Lynn Pascoe, UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs.

2

Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Abdou
Diallo, Chair of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Pedro
Serrano, Acting Head of the delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Pascoe.
Mr. Pascoe: As a new year begins — one in
which we hope there will be some progress in Middle
East peacemaking — several immediate challenges are
present. Israeli-Palestinian negotiations remain at a
deadlock. Developments in both the occupied
Palestinian territory and in Lebanon have heightened
tensions in the reporting period.
On the Israeli-Palestinian track, we appreciate
and support United States efforts to engage in parallel
talks on substance with the parties. United States
Envoy Mitchell visited the region in late December,
and Israeli and Palestinian negotiators held separate
consultations with the United States in Washington,
D.C., earlier this month. I would like to reiterate the
Secretary-General’s call on the parties to seriously
engage on final status issues, and welcome United
States intentions to be a proactive participant offering
ideas and proposals when appropriate. We also
appreciate the diplomatic efforts of a number of other
world leaders who have recently visited the region.
However, the target dates supported by the
Quartet for reaching an Israeli-Palestinian framework
agreement on permanent status and for completion of
the Palestinian Authority’s two-year State-building
programme will be upon us in eight to nine months
from now. In this regard, the viability of the political
process and the credibility of the Quartet are also at
stake this year. We are seriously concerned at the
continuing lack of progress in the search for a
negotiated settlement. Peace and Palestinian statehood
cannot be further delayed.
Quartet members will meet in Munich on
5 February. The Secretary-General also recently
underlined to League of Arab States Secretary-General
Amre Moussa his commitment to ensuring close
coordination, and efforts are continuing to convene a
11-21051

S/PV.6470

meeting between the Quartet and the Arab League
Follow-Up Committee. We take note of the Arab
League position lending support to the position of
President Abbas on settlements and its call for the
provision of parameters by the United States and the
Quartet to facilitate a negotiated endgame based on the
1967 lines.
During the reporting period, a further number of
Latin American countries extended recognition to a
State of Palestine based on the 1967 lines. During his
visit to the occupied Palestinian territory yesterday,
President
Medvedev
reiterated
the
Russian
Federation’s long-standing support to the inalienable
right of the Palestinian people to an independent State
with its capital in East Jerusalem.
Further settlement expansion in the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, continues to undermine trust
and prejudices final status discussions. The sharp
increase in Israeli settlement construction activity
recorded at the end of the settlement moratorium on
26 September 2010 has continued, with construction
work beginning on up to 2,000 units in the West Bank
since that time.
On 9 January, the Secretary-General issued a
statement deploring the demolition of Shepherd’s Hotel
in the heart of a Palestinian neighbourhood in East
Jerusalem. The Secretary-General expressed deep
regret regarding Israel’s failure to heed growing
international concern over the expansion of illegal
settlements. We are also worried about plans being
developed to expand the Gilo settlement in East
Jerusalem, near Bethlehem. I reiterate the SecretaryGeneral’s call on Israel to freeze all settlement activity
in conformity with international law and the Road
Map.
Despite mounting challenges on the ground, the
Palestinian Authority continues to make strides in its
State-building agenda. We alert donors to an estimated
$100-million shortfall in external financing of
recurrent expenditures of the Palestinian Authority
from last year. The Palestinian Authority continues to
seek to reduce its reliance on this financing, but it is
nevertheless vital that donors continue to provide
predictable, adequate and timely support.
The Palestinian Authority has continued its
efforts to promote security in Area A. We also note
positively a recent decision to cease bringing civilians
before Palestinian Authority military tribunals. We

11-21051

believe that Israel can and must do more to enable
Palestinian efforts to improve both security and
economic conditions by easing restrictions on
movement and access and facilitating Palestinian
Authority efforts in Area C.
We note that Israeli security forces conducted 486
search operations in the West Bank. While we are
cognizant of the security concerns that Israel cites in
the context of these actions, we believe that they
seriously undermine the Palestinian Authority when the
strategic goal should be the opposite. Eighty-seven
Palestinians were injured and 251 arrested in Israel
Defense Forces (IDF) actions. However, most worrying
were the deaths of four Palestinians in separate
incidents,
which
warrant
more
transparent
investigations and measures of accountability from
Israel. The authorities must take greater precautions to
ensure the protection of the civilian population under
occupation and refrain from excessive use of force.
The most serious incidents include the killing of
an unarmed man at a checkpoint on 2 January and of a
65 year-old man in his bed during an incursion in
Hebron on 7 January, aimed at arresting alleged Hamas
militants released by Palestinian security forces the day
before for lack of evidence. In addition, a Palestinian
woman died on 31 December after inhaling tear gas
used by the IDF to disperse demonstrators protesting
the barrier. A Palestinian man was also shot and killed
at a checkpoint on 8 January; Israeli soldiers reported
the discovery of two pipe bombs and a knife on his
body. Some 43 others were arrested while protesting the
barrier during the reporting period, and an anti-barrier
Israeli activist was sentenced to 16 months in jail. In
addition, 13 Palestinians were injured by Israeli
settlers. Four settlers and seven members of the Israeli
forces were injured by Palestinians during the reporting
period.
On 12 January, a Palestinian involved in
organizing protests against Israeli settlements in
Silwan was expelled for four months to the West Bank.
The fate of three Hamas-affiliated Palestinian
legislators from East Jerusalem who have taken refuge
in a compound of the International Committee of the
Red Cross since July remains unresolved, while a
legislator earlier transferred to Ramallah has not been
allowed to return. We continue to be concerned about
the human rights situation of Palestinian East
Jerusalemites and to oppose any measures of forcible
transfer. On 4 January, the Israeli authorities

3

S/PV.6470

announced the arrest of two Palestinian East
Jerusalemites in connection with an alleged plot to fire
a missile into the Jerusalem football stadium.

We can report no progress in efforts to further
Palestinian reconciliation. We continue to monitor
internal tensions.

During the reporting period, 30 Palestinian
structures were demolished in East Jerusalem and 41 in
Area C of the West Bank, displacing 148 Palestinians.
This is worrying and gives rise to serious humanitarian
concerns, while contributing to heightened tensions. I
am also concerned by the difficulties faced by
impoverished Palestinian communities in Area C that
have no adequate access to basic services because of
problems in obtaining permission from the IDF to
develop infrastructure in their areas. The Humanitarian
Coordinator has supported a humanitarian response
plan to meet a first set of urgent needs in education,
water and shelter in Area C, which has received limited
facilitation by the Israeli authorities thus far.

A fundamental goal of the United Nations
continues to be the revitalization of Gaza’s economy
and the search for an end to the Israeli closure policy
within the framework of resolution 1860 (2009). Import
and export levels have improved from the period before
Israel’s 2010 policy adjustment, but are still
significantly below pre-2007 levels. On United Nations
projects, on 6 January, Israel approved an additional
$26.4 million in projects of the United Nations
Development Programme and the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA), including seven additional UNRWA
schools. That brings the total portfolio of approved
United Nations projects to $136.4 million.

We remain concerned about the situation in Gaza,
including a recent increase in tensions. Palestinian
militants fired 31 rockets and 47 mortar shells into
Israel — which represents approximately a four-fold
increase from the previous reporting period — while
Israel conducted 11 incursions and 26 air strikes in
Gaza. On 21 December, an Israeli child was wounded
after a rocket landed near a kindergarten, while two
foreign workers in Israel were wounded by a mortar on
8 January. Four Palestinian civilians, including persons
apparently accessing lands in the Israeli-declared
buffer zone for civilian purposes, were killed by Israeli
fire. Eleven Palestinian militants were also killed.
Nineteen Palestinian civilians and 15 Palestinian
militants were injured. An Israeli soldier was killed and
four others were wounded by friendly fire during a
clash with Palestinians on 7 January.

Looking ahead, the scaling-up of the scope of
goods allowed for export and the scale at which they
are permitted to exit the Strip remains a key priority.
The United Nations will also continue to put forward
new programmes of work to the Government of Israel
that complement those already presented, including
programming to revitalize the private sector and
rehabilitate public health infrastructure. These are
already under active discussion with Israeli authorities.
We appreciate the strong support of the Palestinian
Authority for these efforts. We continue to engage
Israeli authorities on the need to ensure sufficient
crossings capacity.

We condemn the indiscriminate firing of
projectiles towards Israeli civilian areas by Palestinian
militants. We equally stress that all parties must refrain
from actions contrary to international humanitarian law
that target or endanger civilians. The Office of the
United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process was active during the reporting
period to promote a restoration of calm. Egyptian
authorities have urged Hamas to put an end to violence.
The de facto Hamas authorities in Gaza recently stated
publicly their commitment to maintaining calm, and
claimed that there is inter-factional agreement on this.
All responsible parties should cease acts of violence. A
new outbreak of major hostilities would be devastating,
and must be avoided.

4

Allow me to reiterate our continuing concern at
the detention by Hamas of Staff Sergeant Gilad Shalit,
and to once again appeal for his release and for
humanitarian access to be granted without further
delay. We continue to follow the situation of
Palestinian prisoners, including women and children
and persons held without trial, and underline the
importance of progress in prisoner releases by Israel.
We regret the lack of progress in the effort to
promote peace between Israel and Syria, despite
continuing contacts by diplomatic actors, including
reportedly French and United States envoys. While the
situation in the occupied Syrian Golan has remained
stable in spite of continued settlement activity, the
resolution of the conflict between these two countries
on the basis of relevant Security Council resolutions is
critical for regional stability, and an essential part of
realizing the vision of the Arab Peace Initiative.

11-21051

S/PV.6470

Please allow me now turn to developments in
Lebanon, where the political crisis provoked by
divergent views over the Special Tribunal for Lebanon
has continued to deepen. On 12 January, the
resignation of 10 cabinet ministers from the opposition,
along with one minister from President Sleiman’s bloc,
forced the collapse of the Government of national
unity. The Secretary-General called for continuing
dialogue among the parties and respect for the
Constitution and the laws of Lebanon, while
emphasizing the importance of preserving calm. The
Secretary-General also reiterated his full support for
the independent work of the Special Tribunal for
Lebanon.
On 13 January, President Sleiman issued a
statement accepting the resignation of the ministers but
requesting that the Government continue functioning in
a caretaker capacity. The President announced that he
would conduct parliamentary consultations to
designate a new Prime Minister. The consultations,
originally scheduled for 17 January, were postponed
until 24 January. Let me comment here that it is
essential for all Lebanese leaders to continue to address
the current political situation through dialogue, within
the parameters established by the Constitution of
Lebanon.
A trilateral meeting was held in Damascus on
17 January to discuss the situation in Lebanon, which
was attended by Syrian President Al-Assad, Turkish
Prime Minister Erdoğan and Emir Sheikh Hamad bin
Khalifa Al-Thani of Qatar. On the following day, the
Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of Qatar, together
with the Foreign Minister of Turkey, held a series of
meetings with all concerned parties in Beirut.
On 17 January, the Prosecutor of the Special
Tribunal for Lebanon announced that he had submitted
an indictment and supporting materials to the pre-trial
judge for his review on that day. The content of the
indictments would remain confidential at this stage. In
that regard, the Secretary-General noted that the filing
of an indictment by the Prosecutor was in pursuit of the
Special Tribunal’s mandate to end impunity for the
terrible crimes that took the life of former Lebanese
Prime Minister Rafiq Hariri and 22 others, and related
attacks. The Secretary-General reiterated his call on all
parties to refrain from attempts to interfere in, or to
influence, the work of the Special Tribunal, underlining
that the independent judicial process should not be

11-21051

linked with any political debate and that it was
important not to prejudge its outcome.
In the early hours of 18 January, organized groups
of unarmed men — reportedly from Hizbullah —
deployed in various parts of Beirut for several hours.
They withdrew before 8 a.m., without causing further
disruption to normal life and business in the city. The
Lebanese Army eventually deployed personnel in
several locations of Beirut, citing the need to reassure
citizens.
The overall situation in the area of operations of
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon was
generally calm and stable. Almost daily intrusions into
Lebanese airspace by aircraft of the Israel Defense
Forces, in violation of resolution 1701 (2006), have
continued in high numbers.
Preserving the stability of Lebanon and ensuring
an end to impunity there is essential, if only because
the Lebanese themselves have a right to both. But it is
also critical to the broader fate of a region that needs,
more than anything else, all elements to be conducive
for progress towards comprehensive peace.
Efforts to bring Israelis and Palestinians to
engage seriously on final status issues will be at the top
of the agenda when the Quartet meets in Munich. Our
collective task remains to spare no effort to support the
search for a negotiated solution that will end the
occupation that began in 1967 and end the conflict,
establishing an independent and viable Palestinian
State with Jerusalem emerging as the capital of two
States living side by side in peace and security. We will
continue to do all we can to promote dialogue and
preserve the stability and security of the region as a
whole, in pursuit of the comprehensive regional peace
envisaged in the Madrid terms of reference, the
relevant resolutions of the Council and the Arab Peace
Initiative.
The President: I thank Mr. Pascoe for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): On behalf of Palestine,
I congratulate the fraternal country of Bosnia and
Herzegovina on its presidency, confident of your wise
stewardship, Sir, of the Security Council. We express
appreciation as well to the United States of America for
its skilled guidance of the Council last month.

5

S/PV.6470

I also wish to extend Palestine’s sincerest
congratulations to the new members of the Security
Council, the friendly countries of Colombia, Germany,
India, Portugal and South Africa. We express full
confidence in their commitment to upholding the
Charter, international law and the Council’s
resolutions, and we wish them every success in
fulfilling their responsibilities. I also convey
Palestine’s appreciation to the Council members whose
terms ended in December 2010, the friendly countries
of Austria, Japan, Mexico, Turkey and Uganda, who
served with skill and dedication in the pursuit of peace
and security, including with regard to the efforts to
address the question of Palestine.
I also thank Under-Secretary-General Lynn
Pascoe for his briefing and, through him, express our
appreciation to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
leadership on this important issue and his commitment
to upholding the principled positions enshrined in the
relevant United Nations resolutions.
While a new year should begin with hope and
optimism, the Palestinian people regrettably begin yet
another year facing serious challenges and hardship
under Israel’s now nearly 44-year military occupation
of the Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem.
It is unimaginable that two years have passed
since the December 2008-January 2009 Israeli military
aggression in the Gaza Strip, and the Palestinian people
are still being prevented from reconstructing and
rehabilitating their communities and lives. There has
been no accountability for the crimes perpetrated by
the Israeli occupying forces and no justice reached for
the victims. Resolution 1860 (2009) remains
unimplemented, and the Israeli blockade of Gaza
continues. The debilitating effects of that military
aggression and the blockade continue to impair the
socio-economic and humanitarian conditions of the
Palestinian civilian population and to sow the seeds of
despair and hopelessness, with grave consequences for
Palestinian society now and in the future.
We continue to call for the immediate and full
lifting of the Israeli blockade and the sustained opening
of Gaza’s border crossings for the movement of
persons and goods. This is vital to allowing the longoverdue reconstruction process to truly get under way,
and to economic and social recovery through the
restoration of livelihoods, dignity and hope. We
deplore the escalation of violence, particularly the

6

recent Israeli military attacks in Gaza and the
perpetration of yet another extrajudicial killing of a
Palestinian in the recent period, raising tensions and
instability.
As all are aware, Israel, the occupying Power,
also continues to carry out illegal settlement activities
throughout the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, in
violation of international law, United Nations
resolutions and the Quartet Road Map obligation to
freeze all settlement activities, including so-called
natural growth. Israeli settlement construction and
expansion have feverishly intensified since the
expiration of the so-called partial moratorium, in
flagrant contempt of the united calls for a full cessation
of all such illegal policies and measures.
The confiscation of Palestinian land, the
construction of settlements and so-called outposts, the
transfer of more settlers, home demolitions and
evictions, the construction of the wall, the imposition
of hundreds of checkpoints and other colonization
measures have not ceased for a single moment. This
has included the approval of thousands of new
settlement units, in addition to the construction of
thousands of units already under way; the continued
construction of the so-called Jerusalem light rail; the
demolition of the historic Shepherd’s Hotel; and
ongoing settler violence against Palestinian civilians
and properties — a phenomenon fostered by the
military, financial and physical support, and incentives
provided by the Israeli Government, including the
failure to hold the perpetrators accountable for their
crimes.
As indicated in recent letters to the President of
the Council, occupied East Jerusalem in particular
remains the target of an extremely aggressive campaign
to illegally alter its demographic composition, status
and distinctly Palestinian Arab character and identity,
and to isolate it from the rest of the Palestinian
territory. Such illegal actions in East Jerusalem, in
addition to provocative statements by Israeli officials,
including the Prime Minister and the Foreign Minister,
continue to be inflammatory, threatening further
destabilization and stoking religious sensitivities.
The cumulative impact of this illegal Israeli
policy on the contiguity, integrity, unity and viability
of the Palestinian territory has been destructive and had
an equally destructive impact on the drive for peace.
Once again, in the tortured history of the peace

11-21051

S/PV.6470

process, we face an impasse and the further erosion of
trust and confidence between the parties. Israel
continues to demonstrate to the Palestinian people in
word and deed that it is not a credible peace partner
and remains unwilling to abide by the principles
underpinning the process and fundamental to reaching
any peace treaty.

“that the policy and practices of Israel in
establishing settlements in the Palestinian and
other Arab territories occupied since 1967 have
no legal validity and constitute a serious
obstruction to achieving a comprehensive, just
and lasting peace in the Middle East” (resolution
446 (1979), para. 1).

It is widely recognized that Israel’s settlement
campaign now poses the most serious threat to the
prospect of achieving the two-State solution for peace
on the basis of the pre-1967 borders. As such, it
constitutes a direct threat to the prospects for peace and
security in the Middle East region — a goal long on the
Council’s agenda. Rather than progressing towards
actually bringing an end to the occupation that began in
1967, Israel’s settlement campaign has entrenched the
occupation and continues to hamper all peace efforts,
to the grave detriment of the Palestinian people, the
region and the international community, which
continues to face the instability and crises caused by
the ongoing conflict, which remains at the core of the
Arab-Israeli conflict as a whole.

In that same resolution, the Council clearly called once
again upon Israel, the occupying Power,

As has been repeatedly stated and widely
acknowledged, we are at a crossroads. After nearly two
decades of the peace process, we are rapidly facing the
demise of the two-State solution if nothing is done to
stop the unlawful and destructive colonization
campaign and to compel Israel to finally abandon its
expansionist agenda and abide by its legal obligations
and international commitments.
We come before the Security Council once again
to appeal to it to uphold its duties under the Charter to
address these ongoing Israeli violations in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, and to
help us to overcome the current impasse in the search
for peace. We believe that Israel’s intensification of
settlement activities, despite the global calls and
demands for cessation, requires an equally intense
response from the international community. A strong
message needs to be sent that we are entering a new era
and that Israeli defiance of the law and the will of the
international community will not be tolerated at the
expense of the realization of peace and security, to
which our peoples are entitled and for which they
continue to suffer and strive.
As early as March 1979, the Security Council, in
its resolution 446 (1979), had the foresight to declare
its determination:

11-21051

“to abide scrupulously by the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Times of War, to rescind its previous measures
and to desist from taking any action which would
result in changing the legal status and
geographical nature and materially affecting the
demographic composition of the Arab territories
occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem, and, in
particular, not to transfer parts of its own civilian
population into the occupied Arab territories”
(ibid. para. 3).
That resolution, and subsequent ones adopted by
the Council, reflected the political will of the
international community at that time, in line with
international humanitarian law. Those resolutions
remain valid today. They constitute the basis of the
international consensus rejecting Israel’s unlawful
settlement campaign and deeming it the major obstacle
to the achievement of a just and lasting peace on the
basis of the two-State solution. Even back then, there
was global recognition that the settlements were
contrary not only to the law, but also to the aim of
ending the Israeli occupation that began in 1967.
While the legal positions, principles and concerns
remain exactly the same today, the situation on the
ground is far worse, owing to Israel’s continuous
breaches and the failure of the Security Council to
implement its resolutions. The inability of the
international community to uphold its legal
responsibilities under United Nations resolutions and
the 2004 Advisory Opinion of the International Court
of Justice, and the failure of the high contracting
parties to uphold the obligation, under article 1 of the
Fourth Geneva Convention, to respect and ensure
respect for the Convention in all circumstances, have
allowed Israel to persist with its settlement activities
with impunity for years, including under the cover of
the peace process. The result is now 180 settlements,
100 so-called outposts and over half a million Israeli

7

S/PV.6470

settlers in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East
Jerusalem,
including
numerous
Israeli
Government officials, which has deepened the
occupation and further compounded this problem.
The settlements are not, of course, the only final
status issue in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, which
involves the core issues of Palestinian refugees,
Jerusalem, settlements, borders, security, water and
Palestinian prisoners — all of which must be justly
resolved in order to secure a lasting peace. However, it
is an established fact that the settlements represent the
major obstacle to peace because of the physical
destruction being caused to the two-State solution and
because the settlements are linked to and seriously
affect almost all other final status issues, in particular
Jerusalem, borders, security and water. The impact of
the settlements on those issues is vastly detrimental
and complicates their resolution by prejudicing the
outcome of negotiations, as those issues are being
illegally predetermined by the occupying Power in its
attempt to impose a fait accompli.
At this moment, it is clear that the settlements are
an existential threat to the two-State solution, based on
the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid
principles, including the principle of land for peace,
the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet Road Map.
With every stone that is laid, the Palestinian territory is
further fragmented, the viability of the Palestinian
State is further impaired, and the potential for
achieving the two-State solution further dwindles,
giving increasing rise and lending credence to other
alternatives. Action by the international community to
reverse the deterioration of the situation and salvage
the prospects for peace is thus of the utmost urgency.
In that regard, international consensus on the
two-State solution is far greater today than it was in
1947, at which time there was in fact no consensus on
partitioning Mandate Palestine. Yet, the political will
was found to take that decision, propelling us on a
course of conflict and tragedy that remain unresolved
to this day.
It is high time that the international community
bolster its resolve to act on the consensus of the twoState solution, in fulfilment of its responsibility towards
the question of Palestine. In the immediate period, this
requires acting on the consensus in rejection of Israel’s
settlements in the Palestinian territory occupied since
1967, including East Jerusalem.

8

It is time to find the political courage to
implement the Council’s resolutions towards the
achievement of a just, lasting, comprehensive and
peaceful solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and
to the Arab-Israeli conflict as a whole. We cannot
continue to allow one State — Israel, the occupying
Power — to continue obstructing the realization of
peace and security in the Middle East. It cannot be
allowed to continue to oppress and colonize the
Palestinian people, denying them their inalienable
rights, including their right to self-determination and
independence in their homeland, and to defy the
international community without consequence.
In regard to the draft resolution presented to the
Security Council by Lebanon on behalf of its sponsors,
which number 122 thus far — and we hope that many
others will follow suit — I wish to thank our brothers
in Lebanon and all of the 122 countries that have
sponsored the draft resolution for their efforts and
support. The draft resolution, sponsored by a majority
of Member States, represents a constructive, collective
effort to address this burning issue and to positively
chart the way forward, in line with international law,
United Nations resolutions and the international
position in that regard.
After years of silence on illegal Israeli settlement
activities, the Security Council, mandated to address
issues endangering international peace and security, is
duty-bound to redress the matter at this critical
juncture. Israel must be compelled to cease completely
its settlement campaign in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, and begin its
reversal, which would represent a serious reflection of
the Israeli intent to roll back the occupation and to
move towards ultimately ending it. There is no
justification whatsoever for allowing or accepting
continued settlement activities while we are trying to
negotiate an end to the occupation. We reiterate that
settlements and peace negotiations aimed at ending the
occupation that began in 1967 are diametrically
opposed and cannot coexist.
A cessation of Israeli settlement activities is
essential to improving the situation on the ground,
building confidence between the two sides and
promoting an environment conducive to the resumption
of direct peace negotiations that are fair, credible and
meaningful and that can be accelerated towards
achieving a successful outcome. That outcome is the
realization of the two-State solution with the

11-21051

S/PV.6470

achievement of the independence of the State of
Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital, living side
by side with Israel in peace and security, and a just,
agreed solution for the Palestine refugee question
based on General Assembly resolution 194 (III).
The potential for resuming such a credible peace
process is rapidly disappearing. We must not allow the
efforts exerted internationally and regionally, including
by the United States, the other Quartet members — the
European Union, the Russian Federation and the
United Nations — the League of Arab States and all
other concerned members of the international
community, as well as by the Palestinian side, under
the leadership of President Mahmoud Abbas, to be in
vain or to continue to be arrogantly ignored and
undermined by the occupying Power.
We therefore reiterate our call on the Security
Council to shoulder its responsibilities and reaffirm its
strong position in rejection of Israel’s illegal settlement
activities. We know there is unanimity among Council
members on this matter and we urge them to take
action aimed at removing this major obstacle to peace
and security in our region.
Israel must be compelled to cease all settlement
activities in the Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem; to abide by its legal obligations, including
under the Fourth Geneva Convention; and to truly
commit to the path of peace. Moreover, we firmly
believe that the time has come for the Council to
reassert its rightful role vis-à-vis the efforts to attain a
just, lasting and comprehensive peace settlement to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
The Palestinian people and their leadership
remain committed to peace. They continue to work
hard to rebuild and develop their national institutions
and to heal and strengthen their society as they strive
to realize their right to self-determination in an
independent State. The State-building plan launched by
Prime Minister Salam Fayyad in August 2009 is being
pursued with determination and is moving towards the
final implementation stage of the second phase — the
“Homestretch to Freedom” — which we hope to
complete by August 2011, when we believe our
national efforts for independence will converge with
the international efforts in this regard.
We are grateful for the strong international
support for this initiative. We are also deeply grateful
for the principled position that has now been taken by

11-21051

107 Member States — nine of them seated at this table,
not including Palestine — of extending recognition to
the State of Palestine on the basis of the pre-1967
borders. This effort is of course in line with the
relevant United Nations resolutions and the
international consensus on the two-State solution for
peace.
We are heartened by the political, humanitarian
and development support and solidarity extended to
Palestine from all corners of the globe. Thus, despite
our deep disappointment and frustration in the recent
period, we have not lost hope and will continue to
strive to realize our legitimate national rights, refusing
to allow the occupying Power to unilaterally determine
our fate and destiny as a people. We call on all
members of the international community, including the
Security Council, to uphold their responsibility to help
us end this long and tragic conflict and to finally usher
in an era of peace, security and coexistence for the
Palestinian and Israeli peoples and the Middle East
region as a whole.
The President: I thank the Permanent Observer
of Palestine for his statement.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes, in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate their texts in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his briefing today.
The United States remains committed to a twoState solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict that is
agreed to by the parties. We call on both parties to
return to good-faith, direct negotiations, which remain
the best path for the parties to reach a solution
resolving all issues, ending all claims and establishing
a sovereign State of Palestine alongside a secure State
of Israel as a key part of a comprehensive peace among
Israel and all of its neighbours. There is no better
alternative to reaching mutual agreement: the stakes
are too high, the sorrows too deep and the issues too
complex.
The United States policy on settlements has not
changed and will not change. We believe that
continued settlement expansion is corrosive not only to

9

S/PV.6470

peace efforts and the two-State solution but also to
Israel’s future itself. The fate of existing settlements is
an issue that must be dealt with by the parties, along
with other permanent status issues. But like every
United States Administration for decades, we do not
accept the legitimacy of continued Israeli settlement
activity.
The United States policy on Jerusalem also
remains unchanged. The status of Jerusalem and all
other permanent status issues should be resolved
through negotiations between the parties. The United
States recognizes that Jerusalem is a deeply important
issue for Israelis and Palestinians, as it is for Jews,
Muslims and Christians around the world. We believe
that through good-faith negotiations the parties can
agree to an outcome that realizes the aspirations of
both parties for Jerusalem and safeguards its status for
people around the world.
We are therefore very concerned by the
commencement of demolition of the Shepherd Hotel in
East Jerusalem and reports that Israel will consider
planning for 1,380 new units near Gilo. These
disturbing developments undermine peaceful efforts to
achieve the two-State solution and contradict the logic
of a reasonable and necessary agreement between the
parties. We have long urged both parties to avoid
actions, including in Jerusalem, that may undermine
trust or prejudge negotiations.
Ultimately, the lack of a resolution to this conflict
harms Israel, the Palestinians, the United Sates and the
international community. We will continue to press
ahead with the parties to resolve the core issues,
including Jerusalem, in the context of a peace
agreement.
As we have consistently said, permanent status
issues can only be resolved through negotiations
between the parties, and not by recourse to the Security
Council. We therefore consistently oppose attempts to
bring these issues to the Council and will continue to
do so because such action would move us no closer to
the goal of a negotiated final settlement; rather, we
believe, it would only complicate efforts to achieve
that goal.
We are troubled by the violence in recent weeks
involving civilians. We condemn continued and
escalating incidents of rocket fire from Gaza into
southern Israel. We must work together to stop Hamas
and other violent extremists from launching terrorist

10

attacks and from bringing increased misery to the
people of Gaza. We once again call on Hamas to
immediately release the Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit,
abducted by Hamas and held since 2006. We also call
upon the Government of Israel to fully investigate the
deaths of at least three Palestinian civilians in
encounters with Israeli forces in the West Bank since
1 January.
We remain concerned about the situation in Gaza.
The United States is working with the Palestinian
Authority, Israel and international partners to improve
the lives of ordinary people there and to increase the
flow of needed commercial goods and construction
supplies while taking appropriate measures to ensure
that they do not fall into the wrong hands.
We are pleased with Israel’s decision to allow
exports from Gaza, which will foster legitimate
economic growth there. This is an important and
overdue step, and we look forward to seeing it
implemented soon. We also welcome the recent
approval of additional United Nations and international
reconstruction projects for Gaza.
The United States remains convinced that peace
in this troubled region is both necessary and possible.
We will persist. We will push the parties to grapple
with the core issues. As Secretary of State Clinton said
in her speech to the Saban Forum in December, in the
context of our private conversations with the parties,
we will offer our own ideas and bridging proposals
when appropriate. We will also work with the
Palestinians to continue laying the foundations for a
future Palestinian State. Israelis deserve to be able to
live in security, at peace with their neighbours and
confident in their future. And Palestinians deserve to
have the dignity and justice of a State of their own and
the freedom to chart their own destiny.
Let me now turn to Lebanon. We echo the
Secretary-General’s statement of support for the
Special Tribunal for Lebanon and his call to all parties
to refrain from any interference or influence in its
work. We welcome the recent announcement by the
Prosecutor for the Tribunal that he has filed an
indictment related to the assassination of former Prime
Minister Rafiq Hariri and 22 others. This represents an
important step towards ending the era of impunity for
political murder in Lebanon and achieving justice for
the Lebanese people.

11-21051

S/PV.6470

We urge that Lebanon’s constitutional process be
followed in selecting its next Government and we
encourage all parties to avoid threats or actions that
could cause instability in Lebanon or the region. We
urge this Council and the international community to
remain firm in its support for Lebanon’s sovereignty
and independence, resolute in its commitment to all
Security Council resolutions related to Lebanon and
vigilant to threats to international peace and security.
We commend the efforts of France, Qatar, Saudi
Arabia, Turkey and other key international and regional
actors working to maintain calm in Lebanon and ensure
that the Tribunal’s work continues unimpeded.
We support French President Sarkozy’s intention
to form a contact group to help resolve the political
crisis in Lebanon. We support a political outcome that
reduces tension and allows the Lebanese Government
to return to the business of the people without
undermining the Special Tribunal for Lebanon. The
Lebanese people should not have to choose between
justice and stability. Like all nations, Lebanon deserves
both.
Finally, let me say a few words about the
situation in Tunisia, which is important to the Middle
East as a whole. The United States stands with the
entire international community in bearing witness to
this brave and determined struggle for the universal
rights that we must all uphold. We will long remember
the images of the Tunisian people seeking to make
their voices heard. We urge all parties to maintain calm
and avoid violence, and we call on the interim Tunisian
Government to respect human rights and to hold free
and fair elections that reflect the true will and
aspirations of the Tunisian people. The United States is
prepared to assist the people and the interim
Government of Tunisia as they move towards these
elections.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): As
Council members know, the sixth paragraph of Article
49 of the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Times of War states
that “[t]he Occupying Power shall not deport or
transfer parts of its own civilian population into the
territory it occupies”. The International Committee of
the Red Cross has recognized that the purpose of that
paragraph of the Convention is to prevent the
recurrence of actions carried out by certain States
during the Second World War, which transferred a

11-21051

portion of the population of territories occupied by
them for political and ethnic reasons with a view to
colonizing those territories. Those explanations require
no further comment.
Article 8, paragraph 2(b)(viii) of the 1998 Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court identifies as
a war crime “[t]he transfer, directly or indirectly, by the
Occupying Power of parts of its own civilian
population into the territory it occupies”.
After having reaffirmed in resolution 446 (1979)
that the Fourth Geneva Convention applied to the Arab
territories occupied by Israel since 1967, the Security
Council affirmed in paragraph 1 of the resolution that
“the policy and practices of Israel in establishing
settlements in the Palestinian and other Arab
territories occupied since 1967 have no legal
validity and constitute a serious obstruction to
achieving a comprehensive, just and lasting peace
in the Middle East”.
The Security Council has reaffirmed that position
for over 30 years, including in resolutions 449 (1979),
452 (1979), 465 (1980), 476 (1980) and 478 (1980)
regarding settlement activities. Similarly, the General
Assembly has reaffirmed it in dozens of resolutions.
Most recently, resolution 65/104 reaffirms that
settlement activities in Arab territories occupied since
1967 are illegal and constitute an obstacle to achieving
peace. The Assembly has called for the immediate and
complete cessation of settlement activities.
The International Court of Justice concluded in
paragraph 120 of its 2004 advisory opinion on the legal
consequences of the separation wall that the
settlements in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem, were created in violation of
international law. It is also worth noting that the Road
Map adopted by the international Quartet and by the
Security Council in resolution 1515 (2003) calls on
Israel to freeze all settlement activity, including natural
growth of settlements, and to immediately dismantle
settlement outposts erected since March 2001.
The Joint Understanding of the 2007 Annapolis
Conference reaffirmed the fact that the parties were to
continue to implement their mutual commitments in
accordance with the Road Map until the achievement
of a peace agreement. This includes Israel’s
commitment to freezing all settlement activities. The
Security Council adopted the contents of the Joint

11

S/PV.6470

Understanding in resolution 1850 (2008). Pursuant to
that declaration, the international Quartet continues to
call for implementation of the provisions of the Road
Map, including freezing all settlement activities, most
recently in its statement of 21 September 2010.

affected because the impression would then be that a
double standard is being applied with regard to certain
States while the actions of another are ignored, as if
that State were above the law and could not be subject
to any accountability.

The provisions of international law with respect
to the settlements include the resolutions of the
Security Council and the General Assembly, the
Advisory Opinion of the International Court of Justice,
and the positions of the Quartet on the subject of
Israeli settlement activities. However, these are the
very positions and provisions that Israel continues to
disregard and to defy. In point of fact, Israel’s
settlement policy was established and has continued
since 1967. To date, neither international legitimacy
nor the peace efforts has dissuaded Israel or stopped it
from carrying out settlement activities. For example,
the numerous settlements today include more than
517,000 settlers within the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem. This is more than
twice the number that existed on the eve of the 1993
Oslo agreement. It is striking that the number of
settlers since 1990 has increased by 4.9 per cent
annually — three times more than the rate of growth of
Israeli society, which is at only 1.5 per cent.

We therefore submitted yesterday a draft
resolution on Israel’s settlement activities, and it has
been circulated to the Council in blue ink (S/2011/24).
We are proud to see the unprecedented number of
sponsors for this draft — more than 120 States — and
we express our full gratitude to them. The purpose of
this draft resolution is to ensure that the Council will
stand on the side of justice, and we trust it will play its
role in supporting this draft resolution unanimously in
the very near future.

Since the Israeli Government lifted the freeze on
settlements last September — a freeze that was only
partial, in point of fact — the settlement activities have
not only reached their previous rate of growth but
doubled to the point that, during the first six weeks
after that September date, they had made up for that
10-month freeze and even gone beyond it.
Those are the latest developments in settlement
activity, the latest challenge of which was on 16 January
2011, when Israel declared that it was building 1,400
new housing units.
Israel’s settlement policy is not only a challenge
to the will of the international community and a
violation of the provisions of international law. It
carries the danger that Palestinian land is being
absorbed and dismantled, and in that way the basis of
the two-State solution is being undermined.
While we recognize all the international efforts to
resolve the Arab-Israel conflict — in particular the
efforts of President Obama’s Administration — if the
Council today cannot oppose the grave dangers of
Israel’s settlement activities, then its credibility and
effectiveness will be hampered. Our image will be

12

Just as the Council has responded and spoken in a
single voice when adopting historic resolutions —
resolutions 242 (1967), 252 (1968), 338 (1973), 446
(1979), 1397 (2002), 1515 (2003) and 1850 (2008) —
we invite it to speak with a single voice on the
settlement activity and say that enough is enough.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs for his briefing and the Permanent Observer of
Palestine for his statement.
France associates itself with the statement to be
made by the Head of the Delegation of the European
Union.
The peace process in the Middle East remains at
an impasse. On 21 September the Quartet established a
one-year deadline to achieve a framework agreement
on all final status issues for the creation of a sovereign,
independent, viable and democratic Palestinian State
living in peace alongside Israel within safe and
recognized borders. We recall the importance of
achieving this goal because more than ever, time is
working against peace.
Attaining this objective in 2011 means the swift
resumption of negotiations on final status issues, which
is the only way to bring an end to the conflict. The
deadline established by the Quartet is ambitious, but
this urgency is dictated by the situation on the ground,
where the viability of a two-State solution seems more
threatened every day. In the immediate term, moves to
recreate the conditions for confidence that are
necessary for negotiations, both politically and on the
ground, are awaited.

11-21051

S/PV.6470

The parameters for a negotiated solution are
known, and we do not need to reinvent the foundation
of a process that has been under way for some 20 years
now. Moreover, the European Union publicly recalled
those parameters recently. Accordingly, France deems
it necessary, in line with what Mrs. Clinton said in her
speech at the Saban Forum, to call on the parties to
provide their positions on the main final status issues.
We welcome the fact that the United States is planning
to provide the parties with its proposals if that becomes
necessary, but we recall that a close involvement of the
other members of the Quartet and certain Arab States
in those efforts would increase their chances of
succeeding. The international community, including
within this Council, must indeed be able to support
those efforts in all their forms and confer on them the
necessary legitimacy. We thus hope that the
forthcoming meeting of the Quartet, on 5 February,
will contribute to recreating conditions of confidence
that are necessary between the parties.
France and the European Union have reiterated
their availability to make a substantial contribution to a
peace agreement and to the arrangements that that
would involve. That is the message that the French
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mrs. Michèle Alliot-Marie,
while visiting the region from the 19 to 23 January, will
bring to the parties, as well as to the two main regional
actors in the peace process, Egypt and Jordan. The
support of States in the region for the political process,
based on the Arab Peace Initiative, remains crucial.
This objective involves preserving the viability of
the two-State solution on the ground. Given the
increasing speed of construction, the international
community, in particular this Council, cannot relax its
attention with regard to the question of settlement
activity. As the European Ministers recalled on
13 December, settlement activity is illegal. It is an
obstacle to peace, as it undermines confidence between
parties and the viability of prospects for peace.
France desires that initiatives in this area may
constitute a constructive element of the effort to
relaunch discussions between the parties on all final
status issues. There will be no solution to the conflict
without a cessation of settlement activity, including
with regard to natural growth of existing settlements.
We are asking in particular for the cessation of all
measures that affect the demographic balance in
Jerusalem, which is destined to become the capital of

11-21051

the two States. In East Jerusalem, settlement activity is
not only illegal but increases the likelihood of violent
incidents in the Holy City, with political implications
that are to be feared. At present, France is concerned
by the situation and condemns the recent demolition of
Shepherd Hotel in order to build a new settlement in
the Palestinian quarter of Sheikh Jarrah. We call on the
parties to avoid all provocation in a context of
increasing tensions. This situation on the ground, like
the increasingly fragile political outlook, is likely to
undermine the projects of the Fayyad plan, which is
main tangible achievement on the way to the
attainment of a Palestinian State since the Annapolis
Conference in 2007.
The support of the international community for
the Palestinian Authority and for President Abbas in
order to strengthen the institutions for a future
Palestinian State must not waver. In order to
consolidate this international support, the President of
France announced our country’s willingness to
organize a second donor conference in Paris in the
spring. This should be linked to the political process; it
can in no way be an economic substitute for the peace
process. The challenge is also for Israel to align itself
with this movement in a much more determined way,
particularly in the West Bank. Gestures have been
made on the ground, but they remain insufficient,
especially in terms of freedom of movement and
access.
The situation in Gaza continues to be of concern.
A change in approach, without infringing on Israel’s
security imperatives, is necessary and possible. Our
Minister of State, who is going to Gaza, will reaffirm
our willingness to contribute to this.
France welcomes the Israeli Government’s recent
decision to authorize the export of several categories of
products from the area and to develop infrastructure at
crossing points. This announcement is in the right
direction, as it promotes the growth of Gaza’s economy
by supporting the development of its private sector. We
should work together to ensure that it is rapidly
implemented, and secure complementary measures that
can help achieve a comprehensive lifting of the
blockade. In that regard, we are also awaiting sped up
implementation of United Nations construction
projects and a relaxation in restrictions on movement
in and out of the Gaza Strip. The European Union has
proposed concrete assistance in that regard.

13

S/PV.6470

We must not forget Gilad Shalit, who has been a
hostage in the Gaza Strip for four years now, in
disregard of the principles of international
humanitarian law and basic humanity. France remains
ready to help achieve his immediate and unconditional
release. We also continue to call for an immediate halt
to all violence, particularly rocket fire into southern
Israel.
With regard to the political crisis that Lebanon is
currently experiencing, France supports the Lebanese
authorities and remains committed to respect for
institutions and the framework defined by the Taif
Agreement, as well as democratic principles and the
stability, independence and sovereignty of Lebanon.
We encourage the Lebanese people and representatives
of Lebanese institutions to find a solution to the current
crisis through dialogue. Given recent developments,
following discussions with the main Lebanese and
regional stakeholders, France’s President has proposed
international consultations to help Lebanon overcome
the difficulties it faces. France is of course
coordinating its efforts with the Secretary-General.
With regard to the Special Tribunal for Lebanon,
on 17 January the Prosecutor submitted an indictment
to the judge, thus launching the judicial phase of the
Tribunal’s work. France of course fully supports the
work of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon, which was
established by resolution 1757 (2007). We call on all
parties, especially those in Lebanon and the region, to
respect the Tribunal’s independence, to reject any
political manipulation and to refrain from hindering the
Tribunal’s work. Lastly, in this very unstable
environment, we call on all parties to respect resolution
1701 (2006), and commend the work done in southern
Lebanon by the United Nations Interim Force in that
country.
The regional aspect of the peace process is
crucial. We are working to create the conditions for a
renewal of negotiations between Syria and Israel, in
close cooperation with the United States and Turkey.
The Middle East is a region of great cultural,
human and religious diversity. Peace and stability there
is inconceivable without the preservation of the culture
of tolerance and respect that is the foundation of the
region’s richness. The recent attacks aimed at religious
communities demonstrate a desire to fuel hatred. We
must join forces with those countries that have been
attacked so we can together fight terrorism and combat

14

those who want to promote the notion of a conflict
between civilizations. The perpetrators of such terrorist
acts must be prosecuted. Members of religious
minorities must be able to live in safety in their
countries. France stresses the importance of the
effective protection of minorities, of respect for their
freedom of religion and belief and of the promotion of
tolerance. We encourage and support the efforts of the
Governments of the region to that end.
Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in
French): First of all, let me begin by thanking UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs Lynn Pascoe for
his briefing.
Our debate is taking place at a time when the
peace process in the Middle East remains at an
impasse. It should be remembered that this follows
Israel’s lifting of the moratorium on Jewish settlement
activity in the Palestinian territories. My delegation
therefore urges both parties to resume direct dialogue,
which is an essential condition for arriving at an
acceptable and definitive settlement of the conflict. As
we have always emphasized, the goal is the
establishment of a viable Palestinian State living side
by side with Israel within secure and internationally
recognized borders.
We wish to reaffirm our appreciation for the
diplomatic efforts being made by the United States of
America, the Quartet and countries of the region aimed
at restarting direct peace negotiations. We urge them to
continue their efforts. In that regard, we welcome the
announcement of an upcoming Quartet meeting to be
held in Munich in the next few days.
There will be no lasting solution to the IsraeliPalestinian crisis unless it is part of a process towards a
comprehensive negotiated settlement of the various
crises in the region. We are convinced that the effective
involvement of countries of the region in peace talks is
absolutely essential to achieving these goals.
With regard to Lebanon, we urge the country’s
political leaders to pursue dialogue and national
reconciliation in order to ensure unified participation in
a comprehensive peace process in the region. We hope
that the current political crisis associated with the work
of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon will be resolved
through negotiations.
Lastly, we reaffirm our support for the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and its

11-21051

S/PV.6470

mandate. We urge Israelis and Lebanese to cooperate
with UNIFIL to ensure the full implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006).
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, let me extend my thanks to Mr. Lynn
Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
for his report on the situation in the Middle East,
including the question of Palestine. I should like to
point out that his briefing on recent events in the
region is very disturbing. I should also like to thank
Ambassador Riyad Mansour for his statement to the
Council.
We are gathered in the Council today to consider
the situation in the Middle East and, in particular, the
issue of settlements in the Palestinian territories. That
is without a doubt an important issue that must be
resolved in the context of the search for a negotiated
settlement to a long-standing historic conflict. We
believe that the settlements violate international law,
the agreements established in the Road Map and the
negotiations conducted by the Quartet.
The Middle East issue has historically occupied a
permanent place in Colombia’s foreign policy, which
includes a vision of Statehood. Even prior to the
General Assembly’s resolution approving the partition
of Palestine in 1947, Colombia had referred to the
importance of ensuring genuine viability in the
process, which should be both stable and lasting.
Former Colombian President Alfonso López, our first
Permanent Representative to the United Nations, said
in 1947 that “to divide Palestine without a real
alternative for the Palestinians would be a monumental
error”. History has shown that our illustrious
compatriot was right. It was as true then as it is now
that we need to find a settlement that provides a better
basis for understanding and a comprehensive solution
to the unstable situation in the region.
Consistent with this conviction, Colombia
abstained in the voting on the resolution, despite our
belief that it was just to provide a national homeland
for Jews and Palestinians alike. However, we never had
any doubts about the core issue. Since then, and in the
following decades, the Colombian position has
remained clear. Israel is a State with the right to exist
in peace within secure borders, while the Palestinians
have the right to their own State where they can live
side by side with Israel in peace and work for common
prosperity.

11-21051

Whenever we have been in the Security Council,
we have voted in favour of resolutions that seek to
establish lasting peace in the region. Moreover, on a
number of occasions, we have sponsored proposals to
that end within the various United Nations bodies. We
believe that two ancient peoples who have contributed
so much to science, the arts and the world economy
have the right and the obligation to live in peace.
Jewish and Palestinian immigrants alike have
contributed to the prosperity and even the identity of
our country. We view with interest and approval any
approach aimed at achieving and consolidating lasting
peace in the region.
For Colombia, the peaceful settlement of
disputes, the obligation not to use force in international
relations and the self-determination of peoples are
fundamental principles, as are human rights and
respect for the dignity of all, without exception.
Israelis and Palestinians can no longer remain in
a situation of confrontation and mistrust. We strongly
urge both parties to continue negotiations on the basis
of mutual respect and recognition of the identity and
rights of each people.
Colombia has the highest regard for peace, built
on a solid and realistic basis, and we offer our firm
support to every possible approach aimed at promoting
sustainable and balanced solutions in the Middle East.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe
for his briefing on developments in the situation in the
Middle East.
The situation in the region remains tense and of
particular concern to us is the lack of progress towards
the resumption of direct Palestinian and Israeli
dialogue. The current visit to the Middle East by the
President of Russia, Dmitry Medvedev, is focused first
and foremost on finding ways to renew the regional
peace process. During his visit, the President of Russia
has laid out our view of how to achieve lasting peace in
the region. First, both sides should refrain from
unilateral moves that may predetermine the outcome of
a settlement, respect their international obligations,
display political will and a willingness to adopt
confidence-building measures, and promote sustainable
dialogue that would facilitate the effective settlement
of the whole range of final status issues.

15

S/PV.6470

Israel should freeze its settlement activities in the
West Bank and East Jerusalem, which violate
international law. It should honour the requirements of
the relevant Security Council resolutions and the
decisions of the Quartet of international mediators.
Acts such as demolishing the Palestinian Shepherd’s
Hotel in order to build more settlement units only
further complicate the situation. We trust that the
Israeli leadership will finally heed the unwavering
requirements of the international community. At the
same time, the legitimate security interests of Israel
must be ensured and rocket attacks on Israeli territory
must end.
Of equal relevance is the objective of restoring
intra-Palestinian unity on the Palestine Liberation
Organization platform. Russia continues to actively
facilitate this by supporting the relevant mediation
efforts, primarily those of Egypt.
Along with these efforts, there is a need for
further measures to lift the blockade of the Gaza Strip
in order to improve the humanitarian and socioeconomic situation there. Among the efforts needed to
ensure progress in a Palestinian and Israeli settlement
is to focus on generally recognized international legal
bases, including Security Council resolutions, the
decisions of the Quartet and the Arab Peace Initiative.
The forthcoming ministerial meeting of the
Quartet on 5 February in Munich, convened on
Russia’s initiative, should determine practical steps for
a swift resumption of the Palestinian and Israeli
negotiation process. The ultimate aim of this process is
to implement the two-State solution of Palestine and
Israel coexisting in peace and security within
internationally recognized borders.
Russia consistently supports the right of
Palestinians to establish their own independent,
contiguous and viable State, with its capital in East
Jerusalem. Everyone — Palestinians, Israelis and the
entire Middle East region — will gain from that.
In speaking at the joint press conference with
Palestinian President Abbas in Jericho, President
Medvedev confirmed that the Russian initiative to
convene an international conference on the Middle
East in Moscow remains on the table. The aim is not
just to meet, but to achieve significant progress
towards achieving a comprehensive Middle East
settlement. If we manage to move the negotiating
process forward, including during consultations with

16

the Quartet, the prospects for the Moscow conference
will become clearer.
Recent events in Lebanon concerning the
resignation of the Government are of serious concern
to us. Of principal importance now is that the situation
remains in the constitutional sphere. To that end, the
Lebanese parties need to display calm and restraint and
avoid making moves that would exacerbate the
situation and harm both the Lebanese and the entire
region. Despite existing political disagreements, the
search for dialogue-based solutions to contentious
issues on the national agenda is in the interest of all
Lebanese and must be maintained.
The work of the Special Tribunal has moved into
a new phase. We trust that the decision of the Tribunal
will be considered extremely carefully and based on
evidence. This will not only directly determine the
triumph of justice and the fair prosecution of
perpetrators, but will also maintain peace and stability
in the country and in the region as a whole.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his
briefing. I have also listened carefully to the statement
made by the Permanent Observer of Palestine.
The current situation in the Middle East remains
complex and fragile and is a source of concern. The
international community should continue to push for a
political settlement of the question of Palestine. This is
not only in line with the universal expectations of the
people of the region, including the Palestinians and
Israelis, and the international community, but also
touches directly on lasting peace and security in the
Middle East.
China has always maintained that, on the basis of
relevant Security Council resolutions, the principle of
land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
Middle East Road Map to peace, Palestine and Israel
should settle their differences through dialogue and
negotiation that will result in the establishment of an
independent State of Palestine so that Palestine and
Israel can coexist in peace.
At present, the issue of settlements is the greatest
obstacle to the resumption of direct talks. China urges
Israel to immediately and completely cease settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including the West Bank and East Jerusalem. China
hopes that Israel will adopt a serious and responsible

11-21051

S/PV.6470

approach and create the conditions necessary to
building mutual trust and relaunching the peace talks.
China welcomes and supports all international
peace efforts to resolve Palestinian and Israeli
differences and to restart dialogue and negotiation. We
hope that Palestinians and Israelis will make common
efforts for the early resumption of talks and the
achievement of substantive results.
The humanitarian situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory, especially in the Gaza Strip,
remains harsh and serious. That is not good for
regional stability, nor is it conducive to the creation of
appropriate conditions for peace talks between
Palestine and Israel. We hope the parties concerned
will effectively implement the relevant United Nations
resolutions and quickly and completely lift the
blockade on the Gaza Strip and return to the people of
Gaza normal and respectful conditions for survival and
development. The international community should
continue to provide more assistance and support to the
Palestinian people. China is ready to join hands with
the various parties and to continue to play a
constructive role for the early achievement of a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I wish
to thank Mr. Pascoe for his extensive briefing and the
representative of Palestine for his statement.
The year 2011 marks twenty years since the
Madrid Conference launched the Middle East peace
process. The goal of the international community
should be to ensure that this is the last year of the
process and the beginning of a lasting agreement
between the parties. The current stalemate is deeply
damaging. The longer it continues and the more facts
that are created on the ground, the slimmer the
prospects for peace become. The urgency and gravity
of the situation should not be lost on anyone.
So it is critical that the parties find a way to
restart negotiations, which represent the best way to
achieve a sovereign, viable and contiguous Palestinian
state living in peace and security alongside a safe and
secure Israel and other neighbours in the region. The
international community must continue to stress the
importance of this to both parties.
For renewed negotiations to have a chance of
success, the parties should be clear on the parameters

11-21051

within which they are working: a two-State solution,
based on 1967 borders, with Jerusalem as the future
capital of two States and with a fair settlement for
refugees.
If we are to overcome the current impasse, it is
also vital that the parties refrain from taking unilateral
actions that make peace harder to achieve.
The demolition of Shepherds Hotel in East
Jerusalem and the plans to expand the Israeli
settlement of Gilo by a further 1380 units are exactly
the sort of actions that must be avoided. The United
Kingdom has always been clear that settlements are
illegal and an obstacle to peace. Pushing ahead with
settlement activity is a deeply unhelpful move. With
actions such as those, it is no surprise that this Council
has been asked to consider a resolution condemning
settlement activity.
Creating an atmosphere conducive to peace
entails responsibilities on both sides. Israel’s legitimate
security concerns must be met. Israelis should not have
to live under the constant threat of rocket attacks and
random acts of violence. We are increasingly
concerned by recent incidents in the Gaza area. We
strongly condemn the continuing rocket fire by
militants in Gaza, who target and endanger thousands
of Israeli citizens with the goal of provoking reaction
and further stalling the peace process.
We remain concerned by the prevailing situation
inside Gaza. There has been some welcome progress:
the move from a list of permitted goods to a list of
banned goods and an increase in the volume of imports.
But more fundamental changes are needed in order to
achieve pre-2007 levels of imports and exports, and
greater effort is required to improve cooperation with
the United Nations and non-governmental organizations.
The recent Israeli measures to facilitate exports
from Gaza are welcome, but they need to be swiftly
implemented. That means action on the ground. The
United Kingdom is ready to help. We are coordinating
closely with Baroness Ashton’s office on her package
of proposals for Gaza: expanding the infrastructure at
Kerem Shalom, providing security equipment to
facilitate exports and expanding the role of the
European Union’s Police Mission in the occupied
territories to provide training in border and crossings
management for the Palestinian Authority.

17

S/PV.6470

Progress must be judged by impacts on the
ground rather than simply through counting inputs,
such as truck numbers. Aid dependency and
unemployment remain high, and construction of
schools is still held up. We are urging Israel to address
those issues concretely. Gaza’s aid dependency will
continue until the economy recovers, which is why it is
so important to make progress on exports and to
improve access to land and to fishing areas. The surest
way to safeguard Israel’s security is through
empowering Gaza’s business fraternity.
Turning briefly to Lebanon, the events of the past
week could have grave implications for Lebanon and
for regional stability. We call on all parties to work
together for a peaceful resolution to the crisis caused
by the decision by the opposition to withdraw from
government. We condemn continuing attempts to
undermine the Special Tribunal for Lebanon, which
must be allowed to carry out its work without
hindrance or impediment. Justice needs to be done, and
there must be an end to impunity for political
assassinations in Lebanon.
We will engage strongly over the coming months
with the United States, the parties to the conflict and
with our European Union and United Nations partners
to find a way to re-start meaningful negotiations to
achieve a two-State solution.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): I wish to thank UnderSecretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his comprehensive
briefing and the Permanent Observer of Palestine for
his statement.
Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the delegation of the European
Union (EU) on behalf of the Union.
For too long, the peoples in the Middle East have
suffered from conflict and confrontation. They aspire
to peace, freedom and a decent life. It is our longstanding conviction that good governance, the rule of
law and religious tolerance, including protection of
religious minorities, form the basic pillars upon which
durable stability and prosperity are based.
It is time to finally make decisive progress
towards a peaceful solution of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. A just, lasting and comprehensive solution is
needed if we want to prevent the conflict from
continuing to overshadow the lives of millions of
people and from being a catalyst of extremism and

18

violence. A continuation of the current impasse is not
an option.
The goal is clear: we want to see the State of
Israel and a sovereign, independent, democratic,
contiguous and viable State of Palestine living side by
side in peace and security. That objective is shared by
practically the entire international community. It has
repeatedly been endorsed by the parties themselves. We
remain convinced that there is no viable alternative to
the two-State solution.
There is also broad international consensus about
the key parameters of the solution: borders based on
the 1967 lines, with agreed territorial swaps; Jerusalem
as the future capital of two States; an agreed, just, fair
and realistic solution to the refugee question; and
arrangements that ensure the security, both collective
and individual, of the Israeli and Palestinian people.
Progress toward that goal is urgently needed. I
wish to make four points that we believe are
fundamental to making progress.
First, sustainable peace can be achieved only
through negotiations. We urge both parties to return to
direct negotiations and to engage substantively on final
status issues. Such negotiations must be conducted
with the goal of achieving a framework agreement
within the 12-month period defined by the Middle East
Quartet.
Secondly, both sides must work hard on creating
an atmosphere conducive to progress. That includes
abiding
by
international
law
and
previous
commitments, particularly the provisions of the Road
Map. As the EU has consistently and repeatedly made
clear, the continuation of settlement activity in the
occupied Palestinian territories is illegal under
international law and an obstacle to peace. It must stop.
At the same time, the Palestinian side must refrain
from incitement and violence.
Thirdly, Palestinian State-building needs to be
continued. Sustainable peace will need to rest on two
pillars: a negotiated settlement and viable institutions
of the future State of Palestine. We congratulate the
Palestinian National Authority on the progress
achieved so far in institution-building, including
implementation of the Fayyad Plan.
Fourth is Gaza. If we are to prevent the further
isolation and radicalization of the population in Gaza,
the policy of closure must end. Recent decisions by the

11-21051

S/PV.6470

Government of Israel to ease access to and exports
from Gaza are steps in the right direction. Those
decisions need to be fully implemented. Import and
export flows should return to pre-2007 levels.
Complementary measures are necessary to allow for
the economic recovery of Gaza, while addressing
Israel’s legitimate security concerns. In that respect, we
call for the full implementation of resolution 1860
(2009).
We remain seriously concerned about the fate of
the Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit, who has been in
captivity for much too long. He must be released
without further delay.
Germany commends the tireless efforts of and
valuable services delivered by the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA), and this year will continue to
support UNRWA by contributing an additional amount
of $8 million.
Finally, the strong support of the international
community is crucial to progress in the peace process.
We need an even more active role of the Middle East
Quartet. We welcome the Quartet meeting of principals
in Munich scheduled for 5 February, and expect a
strong political signal in that regard. The active
backing of Arab States is necessary to creating an
atmosphere conducive to progress. We need to send a
clear and unambiguous message that we stick to our
shared vision of two States living side by side in peace
and security. We need to be clear about the parameters
of such a solution and our willingness to support its
implementation, as required.

establishing the Special Tribunal remain valid.
Germany calls on all parties to support the important
work of the Tribunal, to respect its independence and
to refrain from political interference and coercion. The
successful conclusion of the work of the Special
Tribunal is essential to long-term stability in Lebanon.
Germany will continue to support the Tribunal.
Regional efforts aimed at stabilizing the situation
are very welcome. At the same time, we cannot
compromise when it comes to justice.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): My delegation
thanks Mr. Pascoe for his briefing to the Council. We
would like to associate ourselves with the statement to
be delivered later by the representative of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. We also thank
the Permanent Observer of Palestine for his
comprehensive statement.
The Middle East peace process, including the
question of Palestine, has been on the agenda of the
Council for more than 60 years without resolution.
Perhaps we need to collectively ask ourselves the
question: Is there anything we could or should do
differently that may lead to the desired outcome?
We pose that question in the light of the fact that
we have repeatedly articulated the problems, but we do
not seem to move forward in terms of addressing them.
As we continuously congregate in this manner to
discuss the matter every month, without making any
concrete progress, the people of Palestine and Israel
are no nearer to living in peace as neighbours than they
were 60 years ago.

The international community stands ready to
invest considerably in a peaceful settlement and to help
shape the way forward, but only the parties themselves
can make the crucial compromises and lay the
foundations for a better future. It is up to them to take
the
decisive
steps
and
commit
themselves
unambiguously.

My delegation is of the view that the Security
Council should recommit to the following key
principles. The Security Council has the Charter-given
mandate to address all matters of international peace
and security, without exception; and, in view of that
responsibility, the Council cannot delegate or outsource
its responsibility to address the situation in the Middle
East, in particular the Palestinian question.

With regard to Lebanon, we call on all parties to
abide by their obligations under resolution 1701
(2006). I would like to recall that the decision to
establish the Special Tribunal was taken following a
request by Lebanon and on the basis of negotiations
between Lebanon and the United Nations. It was
created in order to bring stability to the country and to
end impunity by prosecuting persons responsible for
the attack of 14 February 2005. The reasons for

A few months ago, we were hopeful that the
direct talks on final status issues between the leaders of
Israel and Palestine would yield positive results.
However, that move was once again frustrated by
Israel’s intransigence with regard to the halting of
settlement construction in the occupied territories,
including East Jerusalem. The continuous building of
settlements, the freezing of which is a condition for the

11-21051

19

S/PV.6470

Palestinians to go back to the negotiating table, seems
to be a major setback to the peace talks. As
documented in many international legal texts,
including article 49 of the Fourth Geneva Convention,
which prohibits the occupying Power from transferring
its own civilian population to the territory that it
occupies, the building of those settlements is illegal. In
that regard, we call on Israel to act in good faith and
reimpose a moratorium on settlement construction as a
show of goodwill and confidence in the negotiations.
It is more than 16 years since the signing of the
Oslo Accords, which represent the beginning of formal
negotiations between the Palestinians and the Israelis.
Instead of resolving the matter, or at least improving
the situation, it has become worse. More Palestinians
have been displaced; there has been more curtailment
of movement and access; and many more illegal
settlements have been built.
However, the continued settlement building
ominously changes the geographical make-up of
Palestine and has the potential to render impossible the
capacity to bring about a two-State solution, in line
with the overwhelming call for the creation of a
sovereign, independent, democratic, viable and
contiguous Palestinian State, coexisting peacefully
alongside the State of Israel on the basis of the 1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital. The creation
of a viable Palestinian State with the rights and
responsibilities inherent to statehood, within a peaceful
environment, is in the interest of Israel, as its security
can be achieved only through peace.
South Africa calls on both parties to return to the
negotiating table, as they know best the critical issues
that continue to divide them. Among other issues, those
relate to borders, settlements, water, Jerusalem,
security and refugees. The international community can
assist the parties only once they themselves resolve to
commit and show the political willingness to find a
lasting solution. Certainly, an imposed solution will not
work.
The blockade of Gaza continues to frustrate the
lives of the inhabitants of that territory and has
contributed directly to the increase in unemployment
and poverty, thus impacting negatively on people’s
livelihoods. The blockade has also resulted in delays in
the provision of humanitarian assistance, as the entry
of humanitarian agencies, such as the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the

20

Near East (UNRWA) and the United Nations
Development Programme, into Gaza has been limited.
We therefore call on Israel to end the blockade of
Gaza, which is illegal in terms of international
humanitarian law, including article 23 of the Fourth
Geneva Convention and myriad Security Council
resolutions.
Despite the many challenges facing UNRWA and
other United Nations agencies in Palestine, the
Organization continues to play a vital role in the
enhancement of the livelihoods of the Palestinian
refugees and people. South Africa continues to support
the Agency and its activities, including for this year. In
addition, in partnership with the India-Brazil-South
Africa trilateral mechanism, South Africa continues to
support Palestine, including by providing support for
projects in Gaza.
South Africa also condemns the continued
shelling of Gaza by Israeli forces and concomitantly
calls on the people of Gaza to refrain from the
indiscriminate firing of rockets into Israel. Recently,
the Secretary-General acknowledged that
“the situation in the Middle East is tense and is
likely to remain so, unless and until a
comprehensive settlement covering all aspects of
the Middle East problem can be reached”
(S/2010/607, para. 13).
In light of this observation, we call on the Council and
other stakeholders to accelerate efforts towards the
holistic resolution of the Middle East crisis, including
the Lebanese and Syrian tracks.
In conclusion, my delegation takes note of the
recent recognition of the State of Palestine by more
Members of the United Nations. We cannot avoid the
reality of an independent State of Palestine. Our
responsibility remains to ensure that it is viable,
contiguous, sustainable and in a position to exist
peacefully with its neighbour, the State of Israel.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I would like to join others
in thanking Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for
his briefing, and the Permanent Observer for his
statement.
For too long, the situation in the Middle East has
remained a matter of grave concern to the international
community. Today’s debate opens against the backdrop
of a deadlock in direct negotiations and a deteriorating
security situation in the region, as Mr. Pascoe reported

11-21051

S/PV.6470

this morning. Nevertheless, this debate affords us the
opportunity to take stock of the preceding year. In
doing so, we need to soberly reflect on the
circumstances that hindered the sustenance of the
resumed direct negotiations between Israel and
Palestine.
Our unequivocal message, today as always, is a
simple one. There should be an independent State of
Palestine existing side by side with a secure State of
Israel, free from threat and intimidation. I have no
doubt that the entire Council is united on this.
Speaking with one voice, it is important for the
Council once again to call on the parties to resume
direct negotiations without further delay on all the
permanent status issues, in particular borders, security,
the status of Jerusalem and the return of Palestinian
refugees.
Each of the parties can play an important role in
fostering peace. To this end, we call on Israel to take
concrete steps to freeze all settlement-related activities
in the West Bank and East Jerusalem as a confidencebuilding measure. The planned construction of 1,400
new settler homes and the approval two days ago by
the Jerusalem City Council of 122 housing units to be
built in East Talpiot and Pisgat Ze’ev in East Jerusalem
not only are provocative, but run counter to the
objective of building confidence. Indeed, such actions
provide fodder for resentment and increased violence.
In the same vein, the incursion yesterday by Israeli
tanks into northern Gaza, east of Beit Hanoun, which
resulted in the death of 23-year old Amjad al-Zaanein,
in retaliation for Palestinian militant attacks, was
unhelpful to the peace process.
The Palestinians also have a role to play in
building confidence. It is important for Palestinian
leaders to signal their readiness to return to the
negotiating table through enhanced efforts to forge
unity and deal with acts of militancy. Rocket attacks
and other harmful actions undermine peace and
security. As is well known, in this conflict such actions
have often attracted swift reprisals. We believe that the
prospect of a Palestinian State, recognized and
supported by the international community, should serve
as an incentive to all Palestinians to sheath their
swords and embrace the peace process. It is beyond
doubt that neither militancy nor military might will
resolve the lingering conflict.

11-21051

We call on Israeli and Palestinian leaders to
demonstrate in their words and deeds a strong desire to
re-engage in a speedy negotiated settlement of all the
core issues of the conflict. In addition, they must
recommit themselves to their obligations under the
Road Map. They should endeavour to overcome the
obstacles that have hindered the realization of a twoState solution, with Israel and Palestine living side by
side in peace within secure and recognized borders.
The international community, and more especially the
Quartet, should remain engaged and exert pressure on
the two parties to negotiate in good faith.
We commend Israel’s announcement last month
of further measures to ease the blockade on Gaza. We
hope that the time will come sooner rather than later
when the blockade will be lifted completely. In the
meantime, we urge the people of Gaza and other
stakeholders to utilize only legitimate channels to
transport persons, goods and materials out of the
territory in order to address Israel’s legitimate security
concerns. In this connection, we acknowledge the
efforts of the Palestinian Authority to address Israel’s
security concerns.
With regard to Lebanon, we want to stress the
need for calm and restraint. We call on the United
Nations and concerned parties to continue to support
the independence and territorial integrity of Lebanon.
We commend the Special Tribunal for Lebanon for its
work in very challenging circumstances. It is our
expectation that the Tribunal’s findings will provide a
good basis for justice, peace and stability to reign in
Lebanon. We commend President Michel Sleiman’s
resolute support for the independence and mandate of
the Special Tribunal. We underscore the need for
continuous dialogue amongst the parties to preserve the
stability of the country.
In the final analysis, achieving lasting peace in
the Middle East will depend not on bullets or
blockades, but on the courage and determination to
make painful sacrifices in support of peace. Lasting
peace requires accommodation and flexibility on both
sides to reach necessary compromises in the
negotiations. I hope that the parties can demonstrate
this spirit.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Lynn Pascoe for his detailed briefing. I also
thank the Permanent Observer of Palestine for his
remarks.

21

S/PV.6470

Since Israel’s decision not to renew the
settlement moratorium in September 2010, the
construction of Israeli settlements in the occupied
territories has gained considerable pace. This is not
only illegal, but also undermines the peace process,
poisons the political environment and potentially
exposes Israeli settlers to danger as tensions rise.
From a strategic point of view, the greatest
danger is that the accelerating pace of construction
risks rendering the two-State solution politically very
difficult to implement, if not impossible. It is true that,
in the past, Israeli populations have been withdrawn
from occupied land as part of agreements or unilateral
decisions by Israel. It is also true, however, that the
construction that has taken place in the occupied
territories in recent years tends to alter the very
demographic and social realities on the ground —
including in Jerusalem — and is therefore much more
difficult to reverse. Settlement activity must therefore
cease immediately and completely. We once again
reiterate our call on Israel to heed the unanimous call
of the international community in this regard.
We continue to support the efforts led by the
United States Administration and regional actors to
restore the peace process. We call on both parties, in
particular Israel, not to miss any opportunity to make
strides towards the resumption of substantive and
action-oriented negotiations. We know that requires a
great deal of political courage, as peacemaking quite
often involves high risks. There is, however, greater
risk and suffering in accepting a state of permanent
conflict or tension. The present hour demands nothing
less than Statesmanship. We fully concur with the
Secretary-General that peace and Palestinian Statehood
cannot be delayed further.
It was precisely with that in mind — that is, the
urgent need for fair and balanced negotiations — that
Brazil decided to recognize the State of Palestine based
on the 1967 borders. The decision does not represent a
loss of faith in a negotiated solution, and it should not
be construed as such, much less as an incentive to
unilateral moves. To the contrary, we all know that the
effective establishment of a functioning Palestinian
State cannot come about but through negotiations.
Brazil’s decision is therefore to be taken as a
contribution to a fair and balanced settlement between
the parties, one that can achieve the international
community’s common goal of two States living side by
side in peace and security within internationally

22

recognized borders. The Council has a key role to play
in that effort.
Brazil remains ready and willing to consider
ideas and initiatives to that end. One of them is the
draft resolution on the Israeli settlements in the
occupied territories that was put forward yesterday,
which has so far been sponsored by more than 120
delegations, including mine. Such a measure would
send the right signal to the parties that the Council and
the international community stand by fundamental
decisions and are serious in their attempt to help ensure
the long-term feasibility of the two-State solution.
We welcome the measures taken by Israel to ease
the blockade on the Gaza Strip — especially with
regard to exports of agricultural products, textiles and
other goods — as it will benefit the local economy and
generate badly needed jobs and income. We must all
continue to work with the Palestinians to turn this
overture into new development projects.
That is what we are trying to do bilaterally and
through the India-Brazil-South Africa (IBSA)
initiative, as was just mentioned by the Permanent
Representative of South Africa. Last November, the
IBSA Forum approved a project for the partial
reconstruction of the Red Crescent Al-Quds Hospital in
Gaza, with resources allocated from the IBSA Trust
Fund. But much remains to be done.
As we have said in the past, easing the blockade
is no substitute for fully lifting it. The population in
Gaza should not have to survive on international
assistance or be forced to live amid ruble. The ongoing
tensions all too often demonstrate that the collective
suffering imposed on Gaza’s entire population, apart
from being unacceptable, plays a questionable role as
part of an effective security strategy. We therefore
insist that freedom of movement for people and goods
can and should be ensured, while taking into account
Israel’s legitimate security concerns.
Also unacceptable is the launching of rockets and
mortars into southern Israel by militants in Gaza. They
tend to trigger corresponding Israeli reprisals, in the
form of air strikes and punitive incursions, thus
perpetuating a cycle of violence and suffering. We
continue to condemn all violence and provocation by
anyone.
Before concluding, let me add a few words on
Lebanon. We are following closely the situation in that

11-21051

S/PV.6470

country. We all realize the importance of Lebanon to
peace and stability in the Middle East. The
international community must come together in support
of dialogue and foster the spirit of reconciliation and
justice. We urge all political groups in Lebanon to
maintain calm, address their differences through
dialogue and political negotiations and abide by
relevant resolutions of the Security Council. It is time
to show their commitment to a viable future as a
nation, as well as to the right of their people to live in
peace and prosperity.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Like others have
done, I too would like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Pascoe for his comprehensive briefing, as well
as the Permanent Observer of Palestine for his
contribution to today’s debate.
The situation in the Middle East remains unstable
and very fragile. The protracted lack of progress on
almost every front is disconcerting, to say the least. As
has so often been stated in the Chamber, time is of the
essence.
The conflict has continued for more than 60
years. With the increasing problems faced by the
region, the sense of urgency has never been so acute.
We need strong political motivation and a spirit of
compromise from all sides, as well as the robust
involvement of the international community and its
main players to ensure the conditions and support
necessary for political solutions that will bring about
peace, stability, security and economic and social
progress to all parties in the region.
Portugal is deeply concerned about the situation
and, as a member of the European Union (EU), shares
the position that will be expressed by the EU’s
representative during this debate.
The situation in the occupied Palestinian territory
remains one of great concern, as does the impasse on
any serious and fruitful negotiations. We support
United States commitments and efforts to relaunch a
credible peace process that brings the parties to direct
negotiations. But we must recognize that an agreement
on all final status issues remains elusive. We know
what the basic ingredients for such an agreement are,
as well as the core issues that have to be negotiated.
What is lacking is the political will to address them.
On the other hand, developments on the ground
continue to seriously undermine confidence in the

11-21051

process, to thwart attempts at moving negotiations
forward and to erode the prerequisites of the two-State
solution, advocated not only by the international
community but by the parties themselves.
Building on occupied territory proceeds unabated,
as do demolitions and evictions, in violation of
international law and undermining the viability of the
Palestinian State. The recent partial demolition of the
Shepherd Hotel and the extension of Gilo are
particularly worrying in this context. Portugal deeply
regrets Israel’s decision not to extend the moratorium,
as requested by the international community, as well as
the resumption of settlement activity as soon as the
moratorium ended.
It is in that context that we must look at the draft
resolution submitted yesterday by Lebanon, with the
wide support of the Members of the United Nations.
Indeed settlements, including in East Jerusalem, are
illegal under international law and are an obstacle to
peace. We therefore once again call upon the
Government of Israel to reconsider its decision and to
abide by its international obligations and its
commitments under the Road Map, including
dismantling all outposts erected since March 2001. I
recall that the Fourth Geneva Convention applies to the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem.
Portugal condemns all actions that undermine
trust and opposes all unilateral actions that prejudge
the outcome of negotiations on permanent status
issues, including Jerusalem, which is called to be the
capital of two States. We recall that the annexation of
East Jerusalem is not recognized by the international
community.
Notwithstanding the easing of movement in
certain areas, of which we take positive note, many
obstacles continue to restrict or impede free movement
and access throughout the West Bank. In addition to
the difficulties they impose on daily life and the
unwarranted humiliations they often entail, they also
hamper the economic development of the West Bank.
Portugal also unequivocally condemns the
indiscriminate firing of mortars and rockets by
extremist groups in Gaza against civilian populations
in Israel, in direct contravention of international law,
and calls for their immediate halt. We are deeply
concerned about the escalation of these terrorist attacks
during the past month.

23

S/PV.6470

We also note with concern, and condemn, the
continued captivity of Staff Sergeant Shalit. We call for
his release. It is unacceptable that he continues to be
detained and denied humanitarian access. Portugal
fully supports the ongoing efforts to secure his
peaceful release.
Portugal takes note of some progress in the
situation in Gaza. The measures undertaken by Israel
are a step in the right direction. However, much more
needs to be done to enable the full economic recovery
of the Gaza strip, ensure the reconstruction of homes,
infrastructure and businesses and meet the
humanitarian needs of the people of Gaza. Exports,
which are a key component of Gaza’s recovery, remain
limited to a few shipments of agricultural goods.
Portugal therefore calls upon Israel to allow the
immediate and sustained opening of crossings for the
flow of humanitarian aid, commercial goods and
persons to and from Gaza, in accordance with
resolution 1860 (2009).
For the past 60 years, the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) has played, and continues to play, an
essential role in lessening the suffering of Palestinian
refugees. Portugal fully supports UNRWA and greatly
appreciates the dedication and commitment of its staff,
who work in circumstances that are most challenging.
Palestinian reconciliation is another issue that
sadly remains at an impasse. We commend and fully
support Egypt’s tireless efforts in this regard and call
upon our Arab partners and other parties in the region
to contribute positively to these endeavours.
Prime Minister Fayyad and his Government are
progressing
steadily
in preparing Palestinian
institutions for Statehood. We commend them for their
efforts and results. We recall the World Bank’s recent
assessment of the Palestinian Authority’s current
performance in institution-building and delivery of
public services.
But achievements on the institution-building
track need to be consolidated with solid advances on
the negotiation track if Palestinians are to continue to
have faith in the peaceful pursuit of their Statehood.
We therefore call upon Palestinian and Israeli leaders
to respond positively to efforts seeking the resumption
of meaningful negotiations on all core issues. We
encourage them to engage actively and constructively

24

in such an endeavour. The time has come for them to
show leadership, vision and courage.
As I said, the general outlines of a final
negotiated solution are well known. The relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Madrid terms of
reference, including land for peace, the Road Map, the
agreements previously reached by the parties and the
Arab Peace Initiative remain the basis of such a
settlement.
None of us can afford another missed
opportunity, adding to the list that goes from Oslo to
Annapolis, through Camp David and Taba. We urge the
parties not to waste any more time and encourage them
to build upon past negotiations during which a number
of concrete final status proposals were discussed.
The international community must remain
committed to assisting the parties in proceeding with
the bold and difficult decisions that await them.
Portugal looks forward to the active involvement of the
Quartet and to a fruitful and forward-looking discussion
at its next meeting, bearing mind the 12-month period it
set to reach a framework agreement.
Twenty years after Madrid, the peace we all
envision for the Middle East is a lasting and
comprehensive one that leads to the creation of a viable
Palestinian State and to the full integration of Israel in
its regional environment, along the lines set out in the
Arab Peace Initiative. Portugal therefore supports close
cooperation between the Quartet and its Arab partners.
It is time for the international community to fully
assume its responsibilities.
Allow me two words on the situation in Lebanon.
Recent developments in that country have once again
brought to the fore fears of renewed instability. The
Secretary-General has rightly emphasized the
importance of maintaining calm. Stability in Lebanon
is crucial to the whole of the region. We call upon all
Lebanese political forces to refrain from actions that
may escalate tensions and to seek a negotiated political
solution to the current situation.
We further reiterate our full support for the work
of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon, established at the
request of the Government of Lebanon with a clear
mandate from the Security Council. Its work proceeds
in accordance with the legal principles and standards
applied by all international tribunals.

11-21051

S/PV.6470

Portugal also reiterates its commitment to
Lebanon’s sovereignty and independence. We fully
support the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon,
in which we participate, and the active role it plays in
ensuring the full implementation of resolution 1701
(2006) and maintaining the calm along the Blue Line.
We call upon all parties to put an end to all violations
of that resolution.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I wish to thank
Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his
comprehensive briefing. I would also like to thank the
Permanent Observer of Palestine for his statement, to
which we listened very carefully.
The situation in the Middle East continues to be
difficult. The much-awaited resumption of talks in
September 2010 between Israel and Palestine lasted
only a few meetings. Since then, there has been
considerable erosion in mutual confidence between the
two parties, thereby undermining the peace process.
The events of the past few months have been
discouraging, with stalled talks, the resumption of
settlement activity and human suffering in Gaza. On
the positive side, in spite of the difficult situation in
Gaza, the economy there grew by 8 per cent in 2010.
The World Bank reported that, if the Palestinian
Authority maintains its current performance in
institution-building and public services, it will be well
positioned for the establishment of a State. Also, there
were fewer violent incidents in the 2010 than in
previous years.
Unless broken, the current impasse has the
potential of having a serious impact on the lives of the
people, potentially contributing more fuel to an already
combustible situation in the region. This should
therefore strengthen our resolve in seeking to achieve a
breakthrough in the current impasse so that both parties
return to talks.
India has a long-standing tradition of solidarity
with the Palestinian people. It was expressed recently
by our Prime Minister in his message on the occasion
of the International Day of Solidarity with the
Palestinian People. The Prime Minister reiterated
India’s unwavering support for the Palestinian people’s
struggle for a sovereign, independent, viable and united
State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
living within secure and recognized borders, side by
side and at peace with Israel, as endorsed in the Arab
Peace Initiative, the Quartet Road Map and relevant

11-21051

Security Council resolutions. Also, India has long
contributed to the capacity- and institution-building of
the Palestinian people with its material and technical
assistance programmes.
In this connection, I would also like to mention,
as did my colleagues from Brazil and South Africa, the
projects in which India has engaged with those
countries through the India-Brazil-South Africa (IBSA)
Forum. From the resources allocated from the IBSA
Trust Fund, we are undertaking the partial
reconstruction of the Al-Quds Hospital in Gaza and the
construction of an indoor multi-purpose sports complex
in Ramallah. We believe that such projects will be of
some value to the Palestinian people in improving their
health and recreational facilities.
We feel that genuine peace in the region requires
a resolution of other issues on the remaining tracks of
the Middle East peace process, including the
restoration of other Arab lands that remain under
occupation. Progress on the Lebanese and Syrian tracks
of the peace process are therefore critical for achieving
comprehensive and durable peace in the region.
We are closely monitoring the situation in
Lebanon, which is deeply worrying. The Special
Tribunal for Lebanon must be allowed to complete its
work. We call on all sides to resolve their differences
and maintain peace.
While that has been stated several times before,
and in many eloquent ways, this central truth bears
repetition: a just, fair, durable and credible solution to
this vexed problem can only come from meaningful,
sincere and results-oriented dialogue, a dialogue that is
essentially forward looking. For this, it is important
that the ongoing settlement activities by Israel cease
forthwith. I would also add that the settlements in the
occupied territories are illegal under international law.
We remain convinced that lasting peace in the region
will contribute to global stability and prosperity.
It is therefore critical for the international
community to work closely with the parties with a view
to encouraging them to resume direct negotiations. We
are hopeful that the talks and negotiations will soon
resume, leading to a comprehensive peace process for a
final resolution of the conflict.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

25

S/PV.6470

I would like to begin by thanking Mr. Lynn
Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
for his update on recent developments in the Middle
East. We also thank the Permanent Observer of
Palestine for his presence and for his contribution to
our debate.

We strongly condemn recent armed attacks on
civilians and wish to underline that civilian populations
must be protected. Therefore, we reiterate our call for
an immediate end to all violence and urge all parties to
exercise restraint and make every effort to avoid
further escalation.

Bosnia and Herzegovina reiterates that a
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East
can be achieved only on the basis of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Madrid principles, the
Road Map, the agreements previously reached by the
parties and the Arab Peace Initiative.

I take this opportunity to reiterate our strong
belief that the functioning of the national unity
Government in Lebanon is the best guarantee of
preserving stability and promoting dialogue in the
country. Hence, it is essential at this critical juncture
that Lebanese leaders do their utmost to prevent a
political crisis and find a negotiated solution to the
current situation.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is and will remain
committed to the two-State solution, with the State of
Israel and an independent, democratic, contiguous and
viable State of Palestine living side by side in peace
and security.
We do not recognize the annexation of East
Jerusalem and underline that the status of Jerusalem is
a permanent status issue that must be resolved through
negotiations between the parties. Jerusalem, the holy
city of the three great monotheistic religions —
Christianity, Judaism and Islam — should be the
symbol of peace, freedom of religious expression and
human rights. In that regard, we express our grave
concern at the prolonged and dangerous impasse in the
Middle East peace process, which has been aggravated
by the most recent incidents on the ground.
We must underline once again that all settlement
activities on occupied land are illegal under
international law and contrary to Israel’s obligations
under the Road Map. We also condemn the destruction
of the Shepherd Hotel and the planned construction of
new illegal settlements. These activities represent an
obstacle on the road to comprehensive peace. We
therefore call upon Israel to end all settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem.
With regard to Gaza, we note the increased flow
of food and consumer goods into Gaza. However, we
continue to call for the immediate, sustained and
unconditional opening of crossings for the flow of
humanitarian aid, commercial goods and persons to
and from Gaza, in accordance with resolution 1860
(2009). Israel’s security concerns, including those of a
complete stop to all violence and arms smuggling into
Gaza, must also be addressed.

26

As a matter of principle, we fully support the
work and independence of international criminal courts
and tribunals, including the Special Tribunal for
Lebanon. Moreover, we reiterate our call on all parties
not to interfere in the Tribunal’s work and not to
prejudge its outcome.
In conclusion, we would like to once again
emphasize our concerns at the current stalemate in the
peace process, which certainly cannot bring about the
positive environment necessary for long-term strategic
decision-making and lasting peace. At this critical
juncture, it is of utmost importance that the Israelis and
the Palestinians alike make the necessary decisions to
break the current impasse and return to direct talks as
the only way to secure a better future for their peoples.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): I have the pleasure to
address the Security Council today on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM). I would like to start
by expressing the Movement’s appreciation for the
briefing given today by Mr. Lynn Pascoe, UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs.
The Non-Aligned Movement believes that the
international community needs to work collectively
and expeditiously in order to uphold its long-standing
commitment to establishing an independent and viable
Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, by
comprehensively and successfully addressing the six
core final status issues.

11-21051

S/PV.6470

It is regrettable that all serious and credible
efforts exerted by international and regional parties,
including the Quartet, to ensure the continuity of direct
negotiations on the Palestinian track have failed. This
is due to the fact that Israel, the occupying Power,
continues to pursue its illegal settlement activities,
along with many other policies and practices that have
undermined all efforts to resume and advance the peace
negotiations to attain the two-State solution on the
basis of the 1967 borders.
The demolition by Israeli bulldozers of the historic
Shepherd Hotel in the Sheikh Jarrah neighbourhood of
occupied East Jerusalem on 9 January, carried out in
order to build a new settlement of 20 units in the heart
of the city, is yet another clear sign of Israel’s
persistence in continuing its settlement policies, which
endanger the peace process.
At the same time, the international community
has continued to witness the issuing of additional
home-demolition orders in occupied East Jerusalem,
the establishment of thousands of settlement units at an
unprecedented pace since Israel failed to renew the socalled unilateral freeze on settlement activities at the
end of September 2010, and the revocation of
residency rights of yet more Palestinian Jerusalemites,
including elected Palestinian Legislative Council
representatives. These are clear signs of Israel’s
continuation of its unlawful attempts to alter the
geographic and demographic composition of the
occupied Palestinian territory, in particular East
Jerusalem, which remains and will continue to remain
rejected and unrecognized by the international
community.
It is abundantly clear that the statements of
condemnation by the international community have not
deterred Israel from its blatant defiance of international
legitimacy. The Non-Aligned Movement therefore
reiterates its call on the Security Council to be resolute
in demanding that Israel exercise the necessary
political will to achieve peace, including by respecting
all terms of reference of the peace process and abiding
by its legal obligations under the Fourth Geneva
Convention, relevant United Nations resolutions, the
principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Road Map. Israel must completely freeze all
settlement activities and fully respect the international
consensus on that issue, including the calls from NAM,
the United Nations, the European Union, the Quartet

11-21051

and almost all international and regional bodies and
actors.
The Non-Aligned Movement also strongly
condemns the continued imprisonment of nearly
10,000 Palestinians in Israeli jails and other detention
facilities, where ill-treatment and torture are widely
used. The Movement commends international efforts to
shed light on that issue, including through the
convening by the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People of the
upcoming United Nations International Meeting on the
Question of Palestine, to be held on 7 and 8 February
in Cairo on the specific theme “The urgency of
addressing the plight of Palestinian political prisoners
in Israeli prisons and detention facilities”. It is the
conviction of the members of the Movement that those
prisoners, who include children and women, should be
immediately released and that proper international
inspections of their current condition should be a
priority for the Security Council, human rights organs
and the international community at large.
The situation in the Gaza Strip also remains
among the Non-Aligned Movement’s top priorities.
The Movement reiterates that the unacceptable and
unsustainable situation of Gaza has to come to an end.
This unresolved crisis continues to have serious
repercussions on the universal efforts to promote peace
and continues to inflict deep suffering on the
Palestinian civilian population in Gaza. The NonAligned Movement emphasizes the need to compel
Israel to lift fully its illegal blockade, in accordance
with its obligations under international law,
international humanitarian law, human rights laws,
Security Council resolution 1860 (2009), General
Assembly resolution ES-10/18 and other relevant
United Nations resolutions.
Furthermore, the Movement emphasizes the
urgent need for the reconstruction of Gaza and calls on
Israel to alleviate the suffering of the Palestinian
people by opening all of its crossing points with Gaza,
allowing the import of essential reconstruction
materials, including those necessary for the longoverdue reconstruction of United Nations facilities and
schools of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), and to allow the free and unconditional
movement of people and goods. We reiterate the
importance of ending the blockade of Gaza and stress
the need to empower UNRWA with all necessary

27

S/PV.6470

financial and human support to undertake its mission
effectively.
The Non-Aligned Movement stresses that serious
and genuine negotiations can be conducted only when
Israel completely freezes its illegal settlement activities
in the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967,
including East Jerusalem. Israel’s continuous
expansion of settlement activities constitutes a serious
violation of all its international obligations and
destroys the mutual trust and confidence critical to
final status negotiations. The Non-Aligned Movement
reiterates its demand that Israel immediately cease all
settlement activities and stop all actions that may
prejudge the outcome of the final status negotiations.
There is unanimous conviction that it is
imperative that Israel respect its obligations if direct
negotiations are to be resumed towards achieving the
two-State solution on the basis of resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002), 1515 (2009) and
1850 (2008); the Madrid terms of reference, including
the principle of land for peace; the Arab Peace
Initiative and the Road Map. The international
community must exert all efforts needed in order to
stop all settlement activities immediately and start final
status negotiations to establish an independent and
viable Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as its
capital.
The massive number of Non-Aligned Movement
sponsors of the draft resolution officially submitted by
Lebanon to the Security Council calling for the
immediate cessation of all settlement activities in the
occupied Palestinian territory, as outlined in the letter
dated 18 January 2011 addressed by the Chair of the
Coordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned Movement to
the President of the Security Council, is a clear
reflection of the international support for the draft
resolution and for the positive effect of its adoption by
the Security Council in advancing the cause of peace in
the Middle East. The Non-Aligned Movement therefore
hopes that the Security Council will unanimously adopt
this draft resolution soon.
Turning now to Lebanon, NAM condemns
Israel’s ongoing violations of Lebanese sovereignty
and the recurrence of serious breaches to resolution
1701 (2006). The Movement calls on the concerned
parties to fully implement resolution 1701 (2006) in
order to end the current fragility and avoid the
recurrence of hostilities.

28

Concerning the occupied Syrian Golan, the
Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms that all measures
and actions taken or that will be taken by Israel, the
occupying Power, to alter the legal, physical and
demographic status of the occupied Syrian Golan, as
well as the Israeli measures to impose jurisdiction and
administration there, are null, void and have no legal
effect. The Non-Aligned Movement demands that
Israel abide by resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw
fully from the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of
4 June 1967, in implementation of resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973).
In my national capacity, let me express Egypt’s
since appreciation for the expressions of support to the
countries of the Middle East and the generous call we
heard today for the provision of help to countries in our
region in their efforts to combat terrorism. Terrorism is
the correct characterization of the deplorable incidents
that recently struck our country and others in the
region.
However, I would like to stress here that such
terrorist attacks are not limited only to the Middle East
and do not distinguish between majorities and
minorities; they are directed against the entire unity
and fabric of the societies they target, including in my
country. Therefore, while we appreciate the positive
remarks made at the time about the rich cultural and
human nature of civilization in the Middle East, our
region totally rejects any characterization of these
latest incidents as attacks against minorities, as Arab
societies are, on the whole, based on the values of
unity, coexistence and tolerance, and prize the diversity
of our societies to achieve a better future for our
peoples. This is the spirit of the resolution adopted
today in the League of Arab States at the summit level.
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan)
(spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. We
trust that your expertise and wisdom will guarantee the
success of the Council’s work this month.
We would also like to express our appreciation to
your predecessor, Ms. Susan Rice, Permanent
Representative of the United States of America to the
United Nations, for her effective management of the
work of the Security Council last month.
(spoke in English)

11-21051

S/PV.6470

In its advisory opinion of 9 July 2004 relating to
the Legal consequences of the construction of a wall in
the occupied Palestinian territory (see A/ES-10/273)
the International Court of Justice recalled, in
paragraphs 74 to 76, the position of the Security
Council in respect of the city of Jerusalem. The Court
noted specifically in paragraph 75 how the Council, in
resolution 298 (1971), advanced
“all legislative and administrative actions taken
by Israel to change the status of the City of
Jerusalem, including expropriation of land and
properties, transfer of populations and legislation
aimed at the incorporation of the occupied
section, are totally invalid and cannot change that
status”.
The actions undertaken by Ateret Cohanim last
week in demolishing the Shepherd Hotel cannot
therefore, as much as Ateret Cohanim may seek
otherwise, change the legal status of East Jerusalem as
occupied territory or, to put it more succinctly, cannot
turn it from territory that is not Israeli into territory
that is. However strenuously it may justify its actions
in supporting the settler agenda, the Israeli
Government is virtually alone in the world in
recognizing these actions by Ateret Cohanim and other
groups, like El Ad, to be lawful under, it would have us
believe, a combination of Israeli military and
administrative law.
And yet the applicable law in respect of the
exercise by Israel of military control over the occupied
Palestinian territory is clear: it is not Israeli law that
reigns supreme there, but international humanitarian
law applicable to all high contracting parties as well as
obligations that are ergo omnis. Israel’s administrative
and military regulations insofar as the West Bank is
concerned must therefore be utterly consistent with the
Fourth Geneva Convention, and its control guided
strictly by its obligations as the occupying Power.
The position of the International Court of Justice
on this very last point is unambiguous. It maintained in
paragraph 78 of its 2004 opinion that
“The territories situated between the Green Line
… and the former eastern boundary of Palestine
under the Mandate were occupied by Israel in
1967 during the armed conflict between Israel
and Jordan. Under customary international law,
these were therefore occupied territories in which
Israel had the status of occupying Power.

11-21051

Subsequent events in these territories … have
done nothing to alter this situation. All these
territories (including East Jerusalem) remain
occupied territories and Israel has continued to
have the status of occupying Power.”
It also merits noting that there are no territorial
exceptions to this finding: all of the territory of the
West Bank, as described by the Court, is considered
occupied. A closer reading of resolution 242 (1967)
also bears this point out, as we explained before the
Court on 24 February 2004. In his oral submission, the
late Sir Arthur Watts Q.C., counsel for Jordan, noted
how resolution 242 (1967) “affirmed unanimously the
principle of Israel’s withdrawal of its armed forces
from the territories occupied in the recent conflict”.
That meant, and could only mean, territories on the
non-Israeli side of the Green Line.
Thus the Green Line is the starting line from
which is measured the extent of Israel’s occupation of
non-Israeli territory. Having originated in 1949 as an
armistice line, it became in 1967 the line to the Israeli
side of which Israel had to withdraw its forces and on
the non-Israeli side of which territory was occupied by
Israel. It is also perhaps worth recalling that in
negotiating what became resolution 242 (1967), the
principle interlocutors reached the understanding that
there would be a withdrawal from all non-Israeli
territory, with only minor reciprocal border
rectifications.
For decades, Israel has been settling on territory
that does not belong to it, against the wishes of the
Palestinian people, to whom the territory does belong
and who yearn for their freedom. While it is now
readily accepted, the settlement policy can only be
undone through a negotiated agreement between the
Palestinian Authority and the Israeli Government. For
the latter to offer to hold talks with the Palestinian
President while simultaneously allowing groups like El
Ad and Ateret Cohanim to continue their usurpation of
Palestinian lands under the veil of Israeli law, the very
imposition of which is ultra vires, is contemptible and
not becoming of a people who themselves have
historically suffered greatly at the hands of others.
That settlement building has continued unabated
over many years is true, notwithstanding the rising
chorus of indignation on the part of the international
community towards it. Yet there was hope that
comprehensive peace could be secured before it was

29

S/PV.6470

foreclosed altogether by the growth in the number of
settlements. That hope is being extinguished fast.
Why? Because even if its legal status cannot be
changed, so near are we to seeing East Jerusalem
sealed off from the rest of the West Bank, from the
cumulative effect of both the separation wall and the
actions of the settler movement — all supported by the
Israeli Government — it will shortly simply not be
believable to us that any future Israeli Government
could reverse it.
For even if there were to be a peace deal struck
between Israel and the Palestinian Authority requiring
Israel to cede East Jerusalem, will there be an Israeli
Government willing to implement such a deal and be
prepared to go to war with its settler community over
the latter’s increasingly entrenched position in East
Jerusalem, no matter what other occupied territories
Israel has withdrawn from in the past? And if there
were to be no negotiated settlement over Jerusalem
because the settler organizations will have rendered the
point moot through their actions, then the peace we all
desire — a comprehensive, just and durable peace —
will have been murdered by an avoidable circumstance;
and Israel will be alone to chart an impossible course
for itself in de facto control over an Arab population
soon to be in the majority.
If those individuals on the right in Israel believe
in more noxious measures for addressing the reality
soon to be staring them in the face, the international
community, specifically the International Criminal
Court, will possibly have a say in the matter too.
The actions of the settler movement in the
occupied Palestinian territory must therefore be stopped.
And the deep suffering of the Palestinian people must be
brought to an end through the establishment of their
own State on the basis of the 4 June 1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side with
Israel in peace and security.
When the Security Council held its first meeting
on 17 January 1946, the very horrors of the Second
World War, including the Holocaust, were freshly in
the mind of its members. If there was one objective it
had to fulfil in the future, it was to preclude the
recurrence of the sort of wars that left much of the
world in ruin twice in the twentieth century. Sixty-five
years and two days later, that objective remains as
relevant as ever. The Council must therefore show
itself strong enough to diffuse and overcome those

30

spinning winds that, through their centrifugal forces,
will draw countries — indeed whole regions — into a
single colossus of an emergency quite beyond anything
we see today. A single violent shock in the heart of
Jerusalem could, for example, achieve this on its own.
For the Council to simply wait for it to occur is hardly
adequate preparation for what gigantic consequences
will surely flow from such a transformational event.
The Israelis will occasionally say to us that
resolving the conflict is less a matter of law than
psychology. Given the rhythms and the very real
traumas of Jewish historical experience, they are
cautious about placing their trust in anybody, let alone,
they say, in us, the Arabs. Perhaps we must concede
that we could have done more to better understand this
point — done more to develop greater trust by, inter
alia, better explaining the terms of the Arab Peace
Initiative to the Israeli public.
On the other hand, the actions of States must also
be guided by the rules, which the Council itself must
uphold. Our deep opposition to the policy of settlement
building and our repeated strong condemnation of it,
which we reiterate today, is not founded on some form
of primordial enmity or bigotry towards the Jewish
people. Any assertion to that effect is itself thoroughly
distasteful to us. What it is built on is the continuing
three-decade-long
violation
of
international
humanitarian law, as confirmed by the International
Court of Justice. In paragraph 120 of its 2004 advisory
opinion (see A/ES-10/273), the International Court of
Justice held that,
“As regards these settlements, the Court
notes that Article 49, paragraph 6, of the Fourth
Geneva Convention provides: ‘The Occupying
Power shall not deport or transfer parts of its own
civilian population into the territory it occupies.’
That provision prohibits not only deportations or
forced transfers of population such as those
carried out during the Second World War, but also
any measures taken by an occupying Power in
order to organize or encourage transfers of parts
of its own population into the occupied territory.
In this respect, the information provided to the
Court shows that, since 1977, Israel has
conducted a policy and developed practices
involving the establishment of settlements in the
Occupied Palestinian Territory, contrary to the
terms of Article 49, paragraph 6, just cited.”

11-21051

S/PV.6470

The Court continued:
“The Security Council has thus taken the view that
such policy and practices ‘have no legal validity’.
It has also called upon ‘Israel, as the occupying
Power, to abide scrupulously’ by the Fourth
Geneva Convention and: ‘to rescind its previous
measures and to desist from taking any action
which would result in changing the legal status and
geographical nature and materially affecting the
demographic composition of the Arab territories
occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem and, in
particular, not to transfer parts of its own civilian
population into the occupied Arab territories’
(resolution 446 (1979) of 22 March 1979).”

11-21051

The Court went on to remind us that the Council
reaffirmed its position in resolutions 452 (1979) and
465 (1980). The Court concludes that
“the Israeli settlements in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory (including East Jerusalem)
have been established in breach of international
law.”
The President: There are still a number of
speakers remaining on my list for this meeting. I
intend, with the concurrence of the members of the
Council, to suspend the meeting until 2.30 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.20 p.m.

31
