s

UNITED
NATIONS

Security Council

Distr.
GENERAL
S/22746
28 June 1991
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

· Following consultations with the members of the Security Council, the
President of the Council made the following statement, on behalf of the
Council, at its 2996th meeting on 28 June 1991, in connection with the
Council's consideration of the item entitled "The situation between Iraq and
Kuwait":
"The members of the Security Council have learnt with grave concern
of an incident which occurred today when the Iraqi military authorities
denied a joint IA.EA/Special Commission Nuclear Inspection Team immediate
and unimpeded access to a site designated for inspection by the Special
Commission under paragraphs 9 and 13 of Security Council resolution
687 {1991). In the course of this incident, the Iraqi military did not
comply with a request by the Acting Chief Inspector that there should be
no movement of transport or equipment pending inspection. The Iraqi
military fired small arms into the air when members of the Team were
endeavouring to photograph loaded vehicles leaving the site. This
incident followed earlier incidents Oll 23 and 25 June 1991 when the Iraqi
military authorities denied the Nuclear Inspection Team access to certain
facilities at another designated site.
"On 26 June 1991, the Security Council held a meeting to consider
the incidents of 23 and 25 June at which time the Permanent
Representative of Iraq confirmed that Iraq had accepted Security Council
resolution 687 {1991) and was doing its best to implement all the
requirements and obligations imposed on it by the resolution. He further
asserted that Iraq was cooperating with all United Nations missions,
including the Special Commission. The President subsequently conveyed
the Council's serious concern regarding the incidents to the Government
of Iraq.
"The members of the Council strongly deplore the incidents of 23, 25
and 28 June, and in this connection condemn the conduct of the Iraqi
authorities. All these incidents constitute flagrant violations of
Security Council resolution 687 (1991) and of the undertakings contained
in the exchange of letters between the Secretary-General of the United
Nations and the Foreign Minister of Iraq governing the status, privileges

91-21577

2452h (E)

I • ••

S122746
English
Page 2

and immunities of the Special Commission and of the Inspection Teams
mandated under the Security Council resolution.
Furthermore, these
incidents demonstrate Iraq's failure to abide by its solemn undertakings
to comply with all the provisions of Security Council resolution
687 (1991).
"The members of the Security Council have decided to ask the
Secretary-General to send a high-level mission to Baghdad immediately to
meet with the highest levels of the Iraqi Government to convey the
Council's urgent demand for unequivocal assurances that the Government
will take all necessary measures to ensure that no hindrances are placed
in the way of the discharge of the Special Commission's mandate and that
it will accord full cooperation, including immediate and unimpeded
access, to the inspection teams in compliance with Iraq's obligations and
commitments vis-a-vis the United Nations and the IAEA. The members of
the Council have also stressed that the Government must furnish the
high-level mission with unconditional guarantees for the safety and
security of all personnel engaged in the performance of functions in
connection with Security Council resolution 687 (1991). The mission,
composed of the Director-General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), the Executive Chairman of the Special Commission and the
Under-Secretary-General for Disarmament Affairs, will depart New York
this evening, 28 June 1991 •
.. At this time, the members of the Council call upon Iraq to grant
the IA.EA/Special Commission Nuclear Inspection Team currently in Iraq
immediate and unimpeded access to the objects which the Team had
endeavoured to inspect on 28 June 1991 and any other site deemed
necessary.
"The members of the Security Council request the high-level mission
to report to it at the earliest opportunity, through tr.e
Secretary-General, on the results of its meetings with the highest levels
of the Iraqi Government and, in particular, on such further undertakings
by the Government to ensure compliance at all levels, including local
military and civilian authorities, with Iraq's obligations under Security
Council resolution 687 (1991).
"The members of the Council wish to make it clear that the Council
remains seized of this matter and that any recurrence of non-compliance
would have serious consequences.
"The members of the Council reiterate their views expressed in
resolution 687 (1991) of the threat that all weapons of mass destruction
pose to peace and security in the Middle East and of the need to work
towards the establishment in the Middle East of a zone free of such
weapons."
