General Assembly-Tbirty-folll1b Session

48

Expressing its disappointment that the purposes and
objectives of the Decade have not been realized,
Deeply concerned at the fact that a substantial part
of world resources, material as well as human, continues
to be wasted on armaments with detrimental effect on
international security and on efforts to achieve the new
international economic order,
Bearing in mind the preparations for the international
development strategy for the third United Nations development decade,
Stressing again the close relationship between disarmament and development,
Convinced that effective disarmament measures should
release resources from the unproductive arms race for
economic and social programmes, in particular for international economic co-operation,
1. Decides to declare the decade of the 1980s as the
Second Disarmament Decade;
2. Directs the Disarmament Commission, at its substantive session of 1980, to prepare elements of a draft
resolution entitled "Declaration of the 1980s as the
Second Disarmament Decade" and submit them to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session for consideration and adoption;
3. Determines that the draft resolution should embody, inter alia, an indication of targets during the Second Disarmament Decade for accomplishing the major
objectives and goals of disarmament, as well as ways
and means of mobilizing world public opinion in this
regard;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to seek the views
and suggestions of Member States and of relevant
specialized agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency on possible elements in the declaration of
the 1980s as the Second Disarmament Decade;
5. Calls upon the Secretary-General to give all
necessary assistance, including the preparation of a working paper, to the Disarmament Commission in implementing the present resolution;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fifth session an item entitled "Declaration of
the 1980s as the Second Disarmament Decade".
97th plenary meeting
11 December 1979
34/76.

Implementation of the Declaration on the
Denuclearization of Africa
A
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE DECLARATION

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa10 adopted by the Assembly of Heads of
State and Government of the Organization of African
Unity at its first ordinary session, held at Cairo from
17 to 21 July 1964,
Recalling its resolutions 1652 (XVI) of 24 November 1961, 32/81 of 12 December 1977 and 33/63 of
14 December 1978, in which it called upon all States to
consider and respect the continent of Africa, comprising
the continental African States, Madagascar and other islands surrounding Africa, as a nuclear-weapon-free zone,
10 Official

Records of the General Assembly, Twentieth Session, Annexes, agenda item 105, document A/5975.

Recalling also that in its resolution 33/63 it vigorously condemned any attempt by South Africa to introduce in any way whatsoever nuclear weapons into the
continent and demanded that South Africa should forthwith refrain from conducting any nuclear explosion on
the continent of Africa or elsewhere.
Noting with concern that South Africa has persistently
refused to conclude adequate and comrrehensive safeguards agreements with the lntemationa Atomic Energy
Agency with a view to preventing the diversion of nuclear materials from peaceful uses to the manufacture of
nuclear weapons and other nuclear explosive devices,
Alarmed by the report that, having bluntly and persistently refused to renounce the acquisition of nuclear
weapons, South Africa may have detonated a nuclear
explosive device,
Convinced that such a situation constitutes a grave
danger to international peace and security and a particularly dangerous threat to the security of African States,
Recalling its decision, taken at the tenth special session, that the Security Council should take appropriate
effective steps to prevent the frustration of the decision
of the Organization of African Unity for the denuclearization of Africa, 11
Noting with appreciation the report of the United Nations Seminar on Nuclear Collaboration with South
Africa, held in London on 24 and 25 February 1979, 12
Expressing its indignation that some Western countries
and Israel have continued to collaborate with South
Africa in the form, inter alia, of uranium extraction and
processing, supply of nuclear equipment, transfer of technology, provision of training and exchange of scientists
and external financial support for its nuclear programme,
Noting with satisfaction the resolution adopted by the
Council of Ministers of the Organization of African
Unity at its thirty-third ordinary session, held at Monrovia from 6 to 20 July 1979, 18 by which the Council
took further steps towards the implementation of the
Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa,
1. Strongly reiterates its call upon all States to consider and respect the continent of Africa, comprising the
continental African States, Madagascar and other islands
surrounding Africa, as a nuclear-weapon-free zone;
2. Vigorously condemns the reported detonation of
a nuclear device by South Africa;
3. Reaffirms that the nuclear programme of the racist regime of South Africa constitutes a very grave danger
to international peace and security and a particularly
dangerous threat to the security of African States, and
increases the danger of the proliferation of nuclear
weapons;
4. Condemns any nuclear collaboration by any
State, corporation, institution or individual with the
racist regime of South Africa since such collaboration
frustrates, inter alia, the objective of the Organization
of African Unity to keep Africa a nuclear-weaponfree zone;
5. Calls upon such States, corporations, institutions
or individuals, therefore, to terminate forthwith such
nuclear collaboration between them and the racist r~gime
of South Africa;
6. Requests the Security Council to prohibit all
forms of co-operation and collaboration with the racist
regime of South Africa in the nuclear field;
11 Resolution S-10/2, para. 63 (c).
12 See Official Records of the Security Council,

Thirty-fourth
Year, Supplement for January, February and March 1979, document S/13157.
13 A/34/552, annex I, resolution CM/Res.718 (XXXIII).

49

III. Relolullom adopted on tlle reportll of the Flnt Committee

7. Requests the Security Council to institute effective enforcement action, bearing in mind the recommendations of the United Nations Seminar on Nuclear
Collaboration with South Africa,1• against the racist
r6gime of South Africa, so as to prevent it from further
enclan,ering international peace and security through its
acquisition of nuclear weapons;
8. Demands that South Africa submit all its nuclear
installations to inspection by the International Atomic
Energy Agency;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to render all
necessary assistance to the Organization of African Unity
towards the realization of its solemn Declaration on the
Denuclearization of Africa;
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fifth session the item entitled "Implementation
of the Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa".
97th plenary meeting
11 December 1979

B
NUCLEAR CAPABILITY OF SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Deeply alarmed at the report that South Africa may
have detonated a nuclear explosive device in September 1979,
Recalling its decision 34/404 of 26 October 1979,13
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General,16
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for the action taken by him in pursuance of General
Assembly decision 34/404;
2. Appeals to all Member States in a position to do
so to provide all relevant information at their disposal
to the Secretary-General;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to follow the situation closely and in the light of further relevant information to be submitted by Member States;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General to prepare, with the assistance of approt>riate experts,1 7 a
comprehensive report on South Afnca's plan and capability in the nuclear field and to submit the report to
the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session.
97th plenary meeti'ng
11 December 1979

34 /77. Establlshment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone
in the region of the Middle East
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3263 (XXIX) of 9 December 1974, in which it overwhelmingly commended the
idea of the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone
in the region of the Middle East,
Recalling also its resolution 3474 (XXX) of 11 December 1975, in which it recognized that the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East
enjoyed wide support in the region,
1' See Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-fourth
Year, Supplement for January, February and March 1979, document S/131S7, sect. VII.
13 For the text of the decision, see sect. X.B.1.
16 A/34/674 and Add.I.
17 Subsequently referred to as the Group of Experts on South
Africa's Plan and Capability in the Nuclear Field.

Bearing in mind its resolution 31/71 of 10 December 1976, in which it expressed the conviction that progress towards the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free
zone in the Middle East would greatly enhance the cause
of peace in the region and in the world,
Considering its resolution 32/82 of 12 December
1977, in which it expressed the conviction that the development of nuclear capability would further complicate
the situation and immensely damage the efforts to create
an atmosphere of confidence in the Middle East,
Guided by the relevant recommendations in the Final
Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General
Assembly, dealing with the establishment of a nuclearweapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East,18
Recalling also its resolution 33/64 of 14 December 1978,
Recognizing that the establishment of a nuclearweapon-free zone in the Middle East would greatly enhance international peace and security,
1. Urges all parties directly concerned seriously to
consider taking the practical and urgent steps required
for the implementation of the proposal to establish a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and, as a means of promoting this objective,
invites the countries concerned to adhere to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons;19
2. Invites those countries, pending the establishment
of such a zone in the Middle East and during the process
of its establishment, to declare solemnly that they will
refrain on a reciprocal basis from producing, acquiring
or in any other way possessing nuclear weapons and nuclear explosive devices;
3. Calls upon those countries to refrain, on a reciprocal basis, from permitting the stationing of nuclear
weapons on their territory by any third party and to
agree to place all their nuclear activities under International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards;
4. Further invites those countries, pending the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle
East and during the process of its establishment, to declare their support for establishing such a zone in the
region consistent with paragraphs 60 to 63, in particular
para~aph 63 (d), of the Final Document of the Tenth
Special Session and to deposit those declarations with the
Security Council for consideration as appropriate;
5. Reaffirms again its recommendation to the nuclear-weapon States to refrain from any action contrary
to the spirit and purpose of the present resolution and
the objective of establishing in the region of the Middle
East a nuclear-weapon-free zone under an effective system of safeguards and to extend their co-operation to
the States of the region in their efforts to promote these
objectives;
6. Renews its invitation to the Secretary-General to
continue to explore the possibilities of making progress
towards the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free
zone in the region of the Middle East;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fifth session the item entitled "Establishment of
a nuclear-weapon-free zone 'in the region of the Middle East".
97th plenary meeting
11 December 1979
1 s Resolution S-10/2 para. 63 (d).
19 Resolution 2373 (XXII), annex.
