S/PV.8007

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8007th meeting

Thursday, 20 July 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Liu Jieyi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Moustafa
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Biagini
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-22286 (E)
*1722286*

S/PV.8007

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security caused
by terrorist acts
The President (spoke in Chinese): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2017/615, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Ethiopia, France, Italy, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Senegal, Sweden, Ukraine, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Egypt,
Ethiopia, France, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Russian
Federation, Senegal, Sweden, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Uruguay
The President (spoke in Chinese): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2368 (2017).

20/07/2017

intense pressure. But even as it is losing ground in Syria
and Iraq, the threat that it represents is far from over.
ISIS will continue looking to spread its ideology and
radicalize new groups around the world. It will create
new offshoots in new places; fighters who trained with
ISIS in Syria are now starting to return home.
The Security Council has to show that it can
adapt to such changing threats, and that is the goal of
the resolution we have adopted today. Its provisions
recognize the importance of focusing not just on ISIS
but also on its affiliates, wherever they may emerge. We
have also redoubled our commitment to enforcing these
measures. The resolution urges for more international
cooperation in cutting off terrorist funding, preventing
terrorists from travelling and stopping such groups
from acquiring arms. In order to help ensure that those
sanctions are being fully and fairly implemented, we
have reaffirmed our support to the Analytical Support
and Sanctions Monitoring Team of the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and
associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities and to its Ombudsperson. In another important
step, in today’s resolution the Security Council
added eight new individuals and entities to the 1267
Committee’s sanctions list. They include ISIS leaders
in South-East Asia, foreign fighters from the Caucasus,
illicit money exchange businesses and ISIS-affiliated
terrorist groups in Syria, and there will be more
designations to come.

Ms. Sison (United States of America): With today’s
adoption of resolution 2368 (2017), the Security Council
is taking another important step towards helping to
defeat the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) and
Al-Qaida. We thank the other sponsors of the resolution
for their support.

In order to make the best use of this tool, the
Security Council should regularly add to the sanctions
list the names of any new ISIS- or Al-Qaida-affiliated
individuals or groups, wherever they may be in
the world. But while implementing the sanctions is
essential, it is only one part of a broader strategy for
defeating ISIS and the violent, extremist ideology that
feeds it. All States Members of the United Nations
should work together to prevent groups from declaring
allegiance to ISIS and becoming one of its affiliates. We
must mobilize action to address the issue of former ISIS
fighters who return or relocate to other countries. We
cannot allow them to become a new threat elsewhere.

There is no higher priority for the United States,
which is why we are leading a 72-member coalition that
is making great strides in liberating territory from the
grip of ISIS. The United States has been supporting the
Iraqi Government in its effort to push ISIS out of Mosul,
and ISIS’s last strongholds in Syria are coming under

And we must do more, especially here at the United
Nations, to help countries prevent and counter violent
extremism before it takes root. In order to do so, it is
essential that we build strong partnerships with civil
society, faith leaders, youth and local communities.
ISIS, along with similar groups, threaten not just our

I shall now give the floor to those members of
the Council who wish to make statements following
the voting.

2/7

17-22286

20/07/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

security, but also our values, such as tolerance, human
dignity and freedom. For that reason, in every region
of the world, people of all faiths have come together to
condemn terrorism. The United States will continue to
lead that effort. Today’s unanimous vote reinforces the
global resolve to defeat terrorism wherever it is found.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation supported resolution
2368 (2017), on sanctions related to the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and Al-Qaida. Taking into
account the unprecedented magnitude and scale of the
threats to international relations from those groups,
we concur with our colleagues from the United States.
Today yet another important step has been taken towards
strengthening the counter-terrorism regime. Now all
States, without exception, are called upon to fully and
conscientiously comply with the provisions of today’s
key resolution. There can be no double standards.
We are deeply troubled by the fact that, due to
the positions of some delegations, Council members’
concerns were not fully taken into account in reaching
agreement on the adoption of a text on such a key issue
as jointly combating terrorism. I am chiefly referring
to the Russian proposal to impose a comprehensive ban
on any trade and economic links with any territories
under ISIL control. We must bear in mind that terrorists
deal with wide-ranging, cross-border smuggling in
hydrocarbons and other goods. Illegal business provides
them with tens of millions of dollars in revenue on
a monthly basis. That revenue is used to purchase
munitions and weapons, which makes it all the more
difficult to apply coercive measures against them. We
firmly advocate that we continue to such measures, as
well as other others, in order to ensure a full financial,
material and technical isolation of terrorist groups.
We are equally confounded by the fact that the
text does not include a reference to Article 103 of the
Charter of the United Nations, which is something that
we insisted upon. Article 103 refers to the primacy
of the Charter over other international treaties. The
relevance of such a reference based on the need to
enhance the authority of the Security Council’s binding
decisions with regard to sanctions and to ensure that
they are fully implemented nationally by all branches
of Government. Our firm position is that we must
ensure full and complete compliance with the Charter.
Without that, it will be impossible to ensure the
integrity of the sanctions regime. We firmly believe
that, in order to make consistent progress in combating

S/PV. 8007

terrorists, we need to genuinely dovetail the efforts of
all stakeholders. Therein lies the sole way of ensuring
a full and definitive end of the terrorist threat to global
stability. We stand ready to engage in collective efforts
to that end.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): Ethiopia welcomes the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2368 (2017), on
the review of the sanctions regime on Al-Qaida and
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) under
resolution 2253 (2015). I would like to express my
appreciation to the penholder for successfully steering
the review process, and to the members of the Council
for their flexibility. We are pleased to have co-sponsored
the resolution.
Ethiopia finds itself in one of the most volatile
regions of Africa, which is facing increasing levels
of terrorism and radicalization. Therefore, Ethiopia is
firmly committed to combating the scourge of terrorism
in order to ensure its own peace and security in the
region, where Al-Shabaab and other terrorist groups
affiliated with ISIL and Al-Qaida are very active.
Ethiopia recognizes that its fight against terrorism
cannot be effective without forging the required
regional and international cooperation. In the light of
that, sanctions are indeed one of the most important
tools at the disposal of the Security Council in the fight
against terrorism. That is why the sanctions regime
against ISIL and Al-Qaida remains very important.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/467),
as well as the reports of the Monitoring Team, have
highlighted the impact of resolution 2253 (2015) with
regard to the criminalization of terrorism, financing,
measures taken to freeze the assets of those supporting
terrorist organizations or individual terrorists, increased
integration of financial intelligence into counterterrorism work, raising and moving funds, as well as
other matters related to the fight against terrorism.
In that connection, we consider vital the inclusion
in resolution 2368 (2017) of the issue of addressing
foreign terrorist fighters and returnees, language
against terrorism financing, updated language on the
work of the Ombudsperson, all while recalling recent
Council resolutions and their transitory provisions,
which have strengthened the sanctions regime. We
believe that, if the resolution is properly implemented,
it would definitely serve as a very good tool in the fight
against ISIL, Al-Qaida and their affiliates. We hope
that it will contribute to promoting international peace
and security.

17-222863/7

S/PV.8007

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Mr. Bessho (Japan): Japan welcomes the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2368 (2017), which
we co-sponsored. I would like to express my gratitude
to the United States for taking the lead on drafting this
important resolution.
We have witnessed a large number of terrorist
attacks around the world since the adoption of
resolution 2253 (2015), in December 2015, and tactics
are evolving. It was clear that we had to step up our
measures by reviewing resolution 2253 (2015).
There are a number of new paragraphs in today’s
resolution that address recent terrorist trends. I would
especially like to highlight paragraph 39, on returning
and relocating foreign terrorist fighters, and paragraph
36 on passenger name records (PNR). While the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant is experiencing military
setbacks in Iraq and Syria, their threat is spreading
globally. Foreign terrorist fighters are returning to their
countries of origin and transiting through, travelling to
or relocating in other Member States.
For example, as the Secretary-General’s report
of 31 May (S/2017/467) indicates, the threat level has
intensified in South-East Asia due to returnees and
relocating fighters going to the region. Given the
global nature of the phenomenon, all Member States
must enhance their measures against returning and
relocating foreign terrorist fighters. In addressing the
issue, we must bear in mind that the tactics of foreign
terrorist fighters are evolving, including through
the use of broken travel techniques. Passenger name
records are one effective measure to detect foreign
terrorist fighters. Today’s resolution is the first to call
upon Member States to use and develop PNRs. Such
documents include passengers’ booking information,
including itineraries, the names of traveling companions
and payment methods. By analyzing PNRs, we can
uncover suspicious travel patterns, the flow of terrorist
actors and funds and, ultimately, terrorist networks.
I stress the importance of PNRs and encourage all
Member States that have not yet done so to employ
PNR systems as soon as possible. To my knowledge,
only 15 of the 193 Member States have introduced PNR
systems thus far.
In conclusion, I stress the importance of moving
from adoption to implementation. Japan is always
ready to work closely with other countries to enhance
their capacities in this area. We must unite against the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and other terrorist
4/7

20/07/2017

groups by implementing today’s resolution, as well
as related resolutions, in order to further enhance our
counter-terrorism measures.
Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic):First of
all, I would like to thank the delegation of the United
States for its efforts to facilitate negotiations on the
very important resolution that we have just adopted,
resolution 2368 (2017). In our opinion, it is one of the
Security Council’s most important resolutions with
regard to combating terrorism. It goes without saying
that the resolution contains very substantial provisions,
such as those, for example, that are linked to the
sanctions imposed upon Da’esh and Al-Qaida, as well
as on individuals, groups, entities and institutions that
are affiliated with those groups. Moreover, we also note
the significant paragraphs that commit all countries to
prevent the financing of terrorism and the provision of
arms and any other support intended for terrorist ends.
We would like to confirm very briefly two very
important points.
First, it is crucial that our efforts to combat terrorism
be successful. We must adopt a global approach based
on combating terrorism, wherever it is found, and tackle
its root causes without any exception.
Secondly, we reiterate that, since we joined the
Security Council, we have noted that its resolutions,
especially with respect to combating terrorism. It is
critical for the Security Council to hold countries
that do not respect its resolutions accountable. It is
inadmissible and irrational for the Council to discover
that, after adopting resolutions that establish a legal
and operational framework for combating terrorism,
regimes or groups in small countries undermine and
destroy that framework. Those regimes continuously
and flagrantly violate the Council’s resolutions without
any fear of being held to account. They continue
to finance terrorism, provide arms and safe havens
to terrorists.
In that regard, I need only cite as evidence the
regime of Qatar, which has embraced a policy that
favours terrorism. That regime has financed terrorism,
provided arms to terrorists, given them refuge and
incited terrorism, whether in Libya, Syria, Iraq or in
other countries. That is the policy of the Qatar regime,
which has already violated the Council’s resolutions and
believes that economic and political interests will shield
it from accountability vis-à-vis the Security Council. It
is actually a shameful situation that cannot be allowed
17-22286

20/07/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

to continue. It is inconceivable to witness the silence
and absence of political will pn that account shown by
members of the Council, whose resolutions must be
effective, for which it must work to end all violations.
In conclusion, I reaffirm that Egypt will always
respect its commitments. We will always be at the
forefront of the fight against terrorism, while respecting
international law, human rights and the rule of law.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2368
(2017) and thanks the United States for introducing
the resolution and for facilitating the important work
carried out during negotiations. Last Friday, my
country commemorated the one-year anniversary of
the tragic attack that occurred in Nice on 14 July 2016,
which claimed the lives of 86 individuals of various
nationalities. That memory, as well as the many other
recent terrorist attacks throughout the world, remind
us of the extent to which we must remain united and
determined in our struggle against terrorists, who seek
to destroy our way of life and freedom.
The work of the international community
against Da’esh is showing results, and that is worth
underscoring. On the ground, Da’esh has continued
to suffer considerable losses in Iraq and Syria. The
victory of Iraqi forces in Mosul is underway. That is a
major turning point in the development of the conflict,
while in Raqqa the battle continues to deprive that
group of a safe haven there. Of late, Da’esh has actually
attracted fewer foreign terrorist fighters, which is also
of key importance.
However, as we know, sometimes all it takes is one
individual to carry out a terrorist attack. Such a threat
remains complex and multifaceted. We must therefore
continue to take measures commensurate with the
threat with which we are faced. That means that we
must continue to take action in several areas. Combating
propaganda and radicalization disseminated over the
Internet, blocking the financial sources used by terrorist
groups and preparing for the return of foreign terrorist
fighters are three top priorities, without exception, in
that context.
Resolution 2368 (2017), which we just adopted
today, allows us to update the sanctions regime against
Da’esh and Al-Qaida, so as to better take into account
the development of the threat and revise our priorities,
taken as whole. The resolution — and I would like to
highlight this point — is a critical step in our shared

S/PV. 8007

struggle against terrorism, which must, more than ever,
unite us.
Rest assured of the full commitment of France in
the struggle against terrorism in general and against
Da’esh, in particular.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): Like others, I would like
to thank the United States for introducing resolution
2368 (2017) today, which improves the tools at the
disposal of the international community in combating
international terrorism.
Sweden welcomes the unanimous adoption of
today’s resolution and the substantive updates to the
sanctions regime. As the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL)/Da’esh and Al-Qaida develop new
strategies and adapt to a changing landscape, the
sanctions regime must be adjusted so as to effectively
counter the threat posed by those groups. In particular,
we welcome the substantive additions with regard to
trafficking in persons, while linking the sanctions
regime to landmark resolution 2331 (2016). Once again,
the Security Council has reaffirmed its intention to
consider targeted sanctions for individuals and entities
that are associated with ISIL or Al-Qaida and involved
in trafficking in persons in areas affected by armed
conflict and in sexual violence in conflict.
The Office of the Ombudsperson is a demonstration
of the Council’s commitment to fulfilling due-process
requirements, and the Office is essential to the
effectiveness of the sanctions regime. We wish, in that
connection, to take this opportunity to congratulate
the Ombudsperson, Catherine Marchi-Uhel, on her
important appointment as Head of the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011, and thank her for her outstanding work. We ask
the Secretary-General and the Secretariat to facilitate a
swift transition.
Mr. Biagini (Italy): Italy welcomes the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2368 (2017), which
it co-sponsored. The resolution is aimed at updating
and expanding the international legal framework for
the sanctions regime against Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL)/Al-Qaida. Its implementation is now
paramount. The sustained military pressure on Da’esh,
as well as the depletion of its financial resources, has
diminished but not taken away the group’s ability to

17-222865/7

S/PV.8007

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

fund its supporters outside the conflict zone and to
carry out attacks on civilians. ISIL can still rely on
diversified sources of financing and has drawn income
from, inter alia, antiquities smuggling, the exploitation
of mineral resources and human trafficking.
Since resolution 2253 (2015) was adopted, the global
nature of the threat posed by terrorists has changed
and the international community has been confronted
with new challenges, including the increasing flow
of returning foreign terrorist fighters, the misuse of
the Internet and social media by terrorists and the
exploitation of human trafficking networks. The new
resolution acknowledges and tackles this evolving
scenario, which requires a coordinated response by
the international community. The United Nations must
spearhead the efforts for enhanced cooperation.
In an effort to address and detect the flow of
foreign terrorist fighters, some States have adopted
and put in place the Advanced Passenger Information
and Passenger Name Records tools. These tools are an
important means to rein in thr movements of terrorists
and recruiters more effectively, and we encourage
Member States that have not yet done so to take the
necessary steps to develop them. Member States have
also taken concrete steps to strengthen their relationship
with the private sector with a view to responding
to terrorist use of information and communication
technologies. These public-private partnerships are of
paramount importance, not only in countering terrorism
financing, but also in detecting and removing terrorist
contacts on line.
With regard to the growing concern that terrorists
could benefit from trafficking in persons, we regret
that it was not possible to have more stringent language
in the resolution, stressing the exploitation of human
trafficking networks in conflict zones and the potential
nexus between that heinous practice and the financing
of terrorist organizations.
It is still imperative for the international community
to put into place an effective and coordinated response
to the terrorist threat for the purpose of eliminating
any gaps. It remains crucial to enhance cooperation
within and between public sector agencies, both
domestically and internationally, and to empower
financial intelligence units, law enforcement and
intelligence services to improve the exchange of
relevant information in a timely manner. Italy is
strongly committed to providing international judicial
6/7

20/07/2017

and law enforcement cooperation in the framework of
transnational investigations.
Let me conclude by reiterating Italy’s strong
appreciation of the work conducted by the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team and of
the significant role played by the Office of the
Ombudsperson in its efforts to guarantee due process
and transparency.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): Senegal
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2368 (2017),
which we had the honour of co-sponsoring. I would
therefore like to thank and congratulate the delegation
of the United States of America on its leadership in the
consultations and the other members of the Council for
their contributions, which have enriched the text that
we have just adopted, with its 105 paragraphs and 3
annexes that expand the scope and the field of action of
the fight against terrorism.
The resolution refers, under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations, to numerous and complex
measures to be implemented in the fight against the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, Al-Qaida and
individuals, groups and entities that are directly or
indirectly related to them. Whether it be on the dark
net or the stony ground of the Sahel, the fight against
terrorism requires means, technique, coordination and
partnership. That is where international cooperation
must be intensified in order to help the least privileged
States and regions to better understand the complexity
of the fight against terrorism and thereby help them
become more effective in our common struggle.
Within a context where the international community
must more than ever face the problem of the return of
foreign terrorist fighters, the resolution strengthens
the provisions to fight that pernicious phenomenon.
That is the rationale for the support given by Senegal
during the consultations, keeping in mind the scope and
intensity of the phenomenon in Africa — from the Horn
of Africa to the Sahel, including the Lake Chad basin
and the Maghreb.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2368 (2017), which extends the United
Nations sanctions against Da’esh and Al-Qaida.
This adoption comes at an important moment in the
international community’s battle against Da’esh. The
liberation of Mosul after a long-fought campaign
represents a vital milestone in the battle against Da’esh
17-22286

20/07/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

in Iraq. I want to pay tribute to the bravery and sacrifice
of the Iraqi forces that made this possible. In Syria,
operations against Raqqa have begun, and it is only a
matter of time before Da’esh see its so-called caliphate
crumble. But as we heard from Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs Feltman in his briefing to
the Council last month (see S/PV.7962), now is not the
time for complacency. Instead, we must remain vigilant
and resolute.
The fight against Da’esh will not end in Iraq and
Syria. Even as we defeat them there, we must actively
confront the threat that Da’esh, Al-Qaida and their
affiliates pose in other parts of the world. And that
is why United Nations sanctions remain an important
tool, and why the United Kingdom welcomes the
adoption of this resolution. It tightens our stranglehold
on those groups and ensures that our measures are
fit for purpose. In particular, we welcome the eight
new designations adopted today. These designations
include terrorist outfits, money-laundering companies,
terrorist leaders and foreign terrorist fighters. The
diversity of those fighters — from Syria, Iraq, Russia
and Indonesia — really underscores that this is a global
threat that requires a global response.
The United Kingdom continues to work with its
partners, not just on sanctions, but in all our efforts to
counter the terrorist threat. That means bringing Da’esh
to justice, shutting down terrorist financing, managing
the risk posed by foreign terrorist fighters and tackling
extremism on line. This is a fight for the long haul, but
together we will defeat the scourge of terrorism and our
collective values will prevail, and the resolution that we
have adopted today is a vital part of that effort.
The President (China) (spoke in Chinese): I shall
now make a statement in my national capacity.
China welcomes the unanimous adoption by the
Council of resolution 2368 (2017). Terrorism is the

S/PV. 8007

common enemy of humankind. China supports the
international community in coordinating its activities
and in adopting to an integrated and effective approach
to enhance cooperation against terrorism, especially
the use of the Internet by terrorists to spread, incite and
organize terrorist activities, terrorist financing and the
return of terrorist fighters.
In the realm of counter-terrorism, we must
adhere to uniform standards, fully leverage the
leading role of the United Nations and the Security
Council and enhance international coordination
effectively. The Committee established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida,and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities is an
important counter-terrorism mechanism of the United
Nations and the Security Council. China supports the
Committee in enhancing communications with the
countries concerned and in strengthening cooperation
with regional and subregional counter-terrorism
mechanisms, in accordance with the mandate given
to it by the Council. The Committee must constantly
improve its work effectiveness so that it can make
a greater contribution to advancing the counterterrorism cause.
We also hope that Member States and the Secretariat
will strictly comply with the relevant resolution and the
Committee’s rules of procedure, and continue to support
and cooperate with the Committee in its work so that,
together, we can defend the authority and effectiveness
of the sanctions regime.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

17-222867/7
