A/58/847–S/2004/512

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
24 June 2004
Original: English

General Assembly
Fifty-eighth session
Agenda items 131 and 132

Security Council
Fifty-ninth year

Financing of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Genocide and Other
Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens
Responsible for Genocide and Other Such
Violations Committed in the Territory of
Neighbouring States between 1 January and
31 December 1994
Financing of the International Tribunal for
the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991

Identical letters dated 24 June 2004 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the General Assembly and the
President of the Security Council
I wish to apprise you of the serious financial situation which continues to
plague both the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, owing to the failure of Member States
to pay their assessed contributions in full and on time. Notwithstanding approval of
the budgets of the Tribunals by the General Assembly, the cash position of the
International Tribunals for Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia has continued to
deteriorate, as contributions continue to fall short of assessments. At the end of
2002, the Tribunals had had a small cash deficit. At the end of December 2003, there
were still 111 Member States which had unpaid contributions totalling over $88
million for the two Tribunals and by the end of May 2004, the situation had
worsened further, thereby threatening the future work of the Tribunals.
In this connection, in August 2003, the Controller addressed a letter to each
Permanent Representative of all those Member States which had not paid their
04-40313 (E) 240604

*0440313*

A/58/847
S/2004/512

assessed contributions for the two Tribunals, advising that as the cash available for
the Tribunals had run out, the Secretariat was forced to resort to borrowing from
closed peacekeeping missions. In December 2003, in the absence of improvement in
the financial situation, I personally wrote to the Heads of State of those Member
States which still had outstanding contributions to the budget of both Tribunals,
highlighting my concerns over the impact that such a continuing situation might
have on the ability of the Tribunals to implement their completion strategy.
In the light of the worsening situation with outstanding assessed contributions
of 146 Member States totalling $152 million as at 31 May 2004, the Controller
wrote again on 16 June to the Permanent Representatives of all Member States
requesting advice from those whose assessed contributions are outstanding when
those contributions might be forthcoming. At the same time, effective May 2004, the
Organization had taken steps to freeze recruitment and scale down operations.
Unless Member States make significant new payments for the Tribunals in the very
near future, further steps will be necessary. I cannot overemphasize the magnitude of
the financial crisis facing the Tribunals or the importance of Member States meeting
their financial obligations.
As the President of the International Tribunal for Yugoslavia has already
indicated in his letter to the Security Council on 21 May 2004 (S/2004/420), the
actions taken to date to address the continuing serious financial difficulties faced by
the Tribunals present a clear and present danger to the accomplishment of the daily
work of the Tribunal, its ability to meet the goals of the Completion Strategy and the
integrity of ongoing trials and proceedings. Further, it is my view that the serious
financial situation plaguing the Tribunals will call into question the credibility of the
United Nations, notably its commitment to bring to trial those responsible for
serious violations of international humanitarian law both in Rwanda and the Former
Yugoslavia.
I should be grateful if you would bring this letter to the attention of the
members of the General Assembly and the Security Council by circulation of it as a
document of the Assembly and the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

2
