United Nflltions

329th

GENERl'L
ASSEMBLY

PLENARY MEETING
Tuesday, 20 March 1951, at 3 p.m.

FIFTH SESSION
Lake Success, New York

Official Records

CONTENTS
Page

Tribute to the memory of Mr. R. G. Riddell, permanent representative of
·.. 709
Canada to the United Nations
Place of meeting of the sixth session of the General Assembly; note by the
710
Secretary-General (A/1788/Rev.1)
President: Mr. Nasrollah ENTEzAM (Iran)

Tribute to the memory of Mr. R. G. RiddeD,
permanent representative of Canada to the
United Nations

1. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): It
is my sad duty to announce the death of our distinguished friend and colleague Mr. Riddell, permanent
representative of Canada. We all knew his great
qualities and the devotion with which he served his
country and the cause of the United Nations. I myself
had the privilege of getting to know him well when
he was working with us in the Group on Cease-Fire
in Korea. I:Iis frankness, his modesty, his intelligence
and his untiring efforts gained the confidence, admiration and affection· of all his colleagues. His death
deprives the United Nations of a devoted servant and
us all of a great friend.
2. I am sure that I am voicing the unanimous feeling
of the General Assembly when I express our deep
sympathy with Mrs. Riddell and her children, the
Canadian Government and the Canadian delegation. I
would ask them to believe that we join sincerely in
their sorrow.
.
3. I call upon the members of the Assembly to observe
one minute's silence i~ memory of Mr. Riddell.
The representatives observed one minute of silence.
4. Mr. HILL (Australia) : The Australian delegation
wishes to join with the President in expressing its
sympathy to the Canadian delegation for Mr. Riddell's
sudden and tragic death. We all knew Mr. Riddell
extremely well and admired his many fine qualities,
which will be greatly missed in the United Nations.
5. On behalf of the Australian Government, of the
Australian delegation and of its acting permanent
representative, Mr. Shann, who is today attending Mr.
Riddell's funeral in Ottawa, I wish to convey our deep
feeling of sympathy to the Canadian delegation.

6. Sir Gladwyn JEBB (United Kingdom); I am sure
that all members of the General Assembly will wish
to associate themselves with the tributes which the
President a~d the representative of Australia have already paid to our late friend and colleague, Mr. Riddell.
It is a tragedy indeed that as young and brilliant an
official should have been taken from us so unexpectedly.
7. Our sympathy goes out to his widow and his family
and indeed to the Canadian delegation which has been
deprived of one of its most able servants. Mr. Riddell
was an outstanding figure at Lal<:e Success. His influence was always exerted on the side of wisdom and
moderation. We are all the poorer for his loss.
8. Mr. LACOSTE (France) (translated from
French): The French delegation would not like to let
this occasion go by without publicly expressing its great
sorrow on learning of the sudden death of the head
of the Canadian delegation. It held Mr. Riddell in
very high esteem. He was outstanding in the activities
of several of the most important organs of the United
Nations. His death is a great loss to us. May I add
that I was bound to him by personal friendship, and
it is not without emotion that I remember that I shall
not see him again.
9. I ask Mrs. Riddell, the Canadian Government a::.d
the Canadian delegation to regard my words as an
expression of the profound sympathy of the French
delegation and of myself in particular.
10. Mr. GROSS (United States of America): On
behalf of the delegation of the United States I should
like to pay tribute to Mr. Riddell. We think that the
close ties which bind the United States and Canada
were reflected in the relationship between Mr. Riddell
and those of us in the United States delegation who
had the honour to work closely with him.
11. We who knew him, respected and loved him very
much, because of the person that he was and because

709

710

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plellary Meetings

of the devotion which he always showed to the work
in whkh he was engaged and in which we were delighted and honoured to work with him.
12. Mr. JORDAAN (Union of South Africa): I too
should like to join the President in paying tribute to
the memory of our colleague, Mr. Riddell. Not only
have we lost a colleague, we have lost a friend. Therefore, on behalf of the South African delegation, I should
like to express our sincerest sympathy to his family,
to the Canadian Government and to the Canadian
delegation here.
13. Mr. DAYAL (India): On behalf of the Indian
delegation, I should like to express our deep sense of
sorrow at the sad and untimely death of Mr. Riddell.
It is particularly tragic that a c~eer so young and
promising should have been cut short so prematurely.
For myself, the loss has been very painful as Mr.
Riddell and I were colleagues together at Oxford some
fifteen years ago.
14. My delegation would like to join with the members present in expressing its deepest sympathy to
Mrs. Riddell in her great loss.
15. Mr. SCHNAKE VERGARA (Chile) (translated from Spanish): My delegation associates itself
with the statements of other delegations on the death of
our colleague, the representative of Canada.
1.6. We shall always remember his spiritual and intelletC:tual qualities and his warm friend'~ness, and wish
to extend our heartfelt condolences to the Canadian
delegation.
17. Mr. CARTER (Canada): On behalf of the
Canadian Government and the Canadian delegation I
wish to say a few words in reply to the kind statements
of sympathy which have been made by the President
and by so many representatives regarding the loss of
Mr. Riddell. I wish to assure those who have spoken
here or who have written to our delegation that arrangements will be marte to transmit their remar!<s and
their messages to Mrs. Riddell and her family. I know
that the messages will be a source of comfort to them.
18. I can only add that we on the staff of the Canadian delegation have no words to express our sense of
loss in regard to one who was both a personal friend
to us and an inspiring public servant of our country.
Again I wish to thank bvth those who have expressed
their kind sentiments in statements and those who
have written to us.

Place of meeting of the sixth session of the General Assembly: note by the Secr~ta,ry-General
(A/1788/Rev.l)
19. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The delegations will have received the letter the French
delegation addressed to the Secretary-General and to
me. It appears in document A/1788/Rev.l.
20. As there was no draft resolution before the Sencral
Assembly, I have taken the liberty of submitting a
draft [A/1790] which is obviously only a suggestion
and subject to all the amendments that the Ansemhly
may decide upon. Before opening the discussion on
the draft, I call upon the representative of France, who

wishes to give some additional explanations on the
subject matter of the letter.
21. Mr. LACOSTE (France) (translated from,
French): I have asked to speak for a few moments
at the beginning of this discussion on the question of
the place of meeting of the sixth session of the General
Assembly in order to make some comments on the
letter I addressed last Saturday, 17 March 1951 on
that subject, to both the Secretary-General and the
President.
22. Those comments are particularly necessary because
some errors crept into the English version of the document as originally distributed. I asked the Secretariat
to issue a corrigendum and I thank it for having done
so. It was only yesterday afternoon that I discovered
the errors in the original translation. In the meantime
some inaccurate ideas had inevitably entered the minds
of a number of delegations and had been published in
the Press. It is important that such notions should
be corrected.
23. As the Assembiy well knows, various considerations prevented the French Government from giving a
definite reply, as promptly as it would have liked, to
the Assembly's expressed wish that its sixth session
should be held in France, and preferably in Paris. ,The
reason was not only the circumstances of French internal politics, although these circumstances were such
that- the French Government would have preferred, in
principle, that the Assembly should not be held in Paris
this year. The government's main concern-and I am
sure that the Assembly will fully appreciate it-was
not to undertake for a second time, as it had to do in
1948, the considerable and v~ry expensive task of preparing temporary facilities for a session of the Assembly
lasting a few weeks or at most a few months. Hitherto
the primary task of reconstrudion, made necessary by
the terrible devastation suffered in French territory
during the last war, has prevented my govc::rnment from
erecting in Paris or near--by permanent buildings espe··
cially suited to national or international congresses or
conferences of a political, economic, social, scientific or
other charncter.
24. Even if my government had been in a position to
decide to begin constructing a permanent building as
soon as the .Assembly expressed its desire to meet in
Paris this autumn, it would not have been sufficient
time-by a long way-to accomplish such a task satisfactorily. That is why it asked for all other possibilities
to be considered first, in the hope that the Assembly
might realize its desire to hold its sixth session in
Europe, but in another city among those which had
been contemplated-Edinburgh or Geneva, for example
-without the French Government being again obliged
to resort to makeshift arrangements, with all the cost
and inconvenience-partly to no purpose-which inevit'.bly results from such a procedure.
25. However, when it became clear that no other
choice was possible-as the Secretary-General, in particular, had found after his last transatlantic trip-and
when the Assembly once again expressed its desire to
hold the next session in Europe, the French Government, taking also into account the wishes of many
groups in its legislative bodies to meet the General

329th Meeting-20 March 1951
Assembly's request, decided to reply favourably and
to welcome the Assembly to Paris for the duration of
the sixth session.
26. That is the exact meaning of the first paragraph
of the letter which I addressed on 17 March 1951 to
the Secretary-General and to the President. The simple
words I used say nothing else and express the realities
of a situation familiar to everyone here. For the reasons
I have just given there could be no question of the
French Government "inviting" the Assembly. If the
French Government had itself been inviting the Assembly, it would not have waited until this very late
hour. And, as I said in the third paragraph of my
letter, it would not have asked the United Nati:ms to
lighten the burden the French Government will have
to bear if the Assembly finally decides to go to Paris.
27. The second paragraph of my letter points out that
the French Government is obliged to make its willingness to receive the Assembly dependent on two
conditions.
28. The first is that the sixth session in Paris should
not open earlier than 6 November. The reason for this
is obvious: we are now in the second half of March
and all the arrangements have still to be made. If the
representatives will reflect on what organizing a session
of the Assembly involves-even in Paris, a city with
so many resources and which had experience of it as
recently as 1948-they will all, I think, understand that
it is not unreasonable to ask for less than eight months
to fulfil the task. For it goes without saying that if
Paris is to be the Assembly's host in 1951, it wishes to
discharge that duty fittingly.
.
29. I think that the second condition is also very
natural. If the French Government is to ~ndertake the
trouble and expense to which I have just referred, at
least the fruit of its efforts should be used to the full.
It would be quite unreasonable if, after doing so much,
and having had so much done, to hold the session in
Europe, the Assembly were to split the session in two
and go elsewhere, even to New York, to finish what it
had begun in Paris. That is why I wrote that, if the
Assembly had not finished its work before Christmas
of this year, the French Government would expect the
session to continue in Paris until the end, until January
1952 and, if necessary, until February.
30. I now come to the third paragraph of my letter,
which also expresses a simple idea: although the French
Government gladly bows to the wish the Assembly has
expressed to it and appreciates its great significance,
it is obliged to take into account. the exceptionally heavy
financial burdens which various circumstances impose
upon it at the present time.. I shall refer 0!11y to one
among many, the one 1. have alre~dy ment~oned, and
that is the problem of reconstructIOn. Whl1e, thanks
to enormous efforts, ~. great part of the task has
already been accomplished in the field of public works,
and especially in regard to transport (bridges, .roa~s,
viaducts, harbours, ete.), the French economy 1S st111
faced with a htwendous housing problem. The Assembly wi1.l understand that the French Government is
very anxious not to div.ert too great sums. from. that
work. That is the mean10g of the sentence 10 wh1ch I
said that the French Government would be constrained
to count on the co-operation and under8tanding of the

711

United Nations for a substantial lightening of its burdens when the agreements on the organization of the
sixth session of the Assembly in Paris are drawn up.
31. In that connexion, ancl in order to answer some
questions the Sect\;tary-Gene~al. asked me, I should
like to add the following information which I requested
from my government alld have received since I wrote
my letter of 17 March. The French Government would
like the United Nations to make its financial contribution out of the credits the Assembly has already voted .
upon. As to the amount of the contributiori, the French
Government proposes that the Secretary-General should
decide on the matter at the appropriate time.
32. Finally, I should like to add to the preceding
explanations some information I have just received on
the arrangements the French Government intends to
make to receive the Assembly this autumn. I think it
will be of interest to the Assembly and it will usefully
supplement the information I have already been able
to g5ve on the extent of the work that is to be done.

33. In 1948 it was possible to use the museum halls
of the Palais de Chaillot, which had not yet been restored. This year new buildings will have to be erected
in the Trocadero Gardens. This shows again how
necessary is the time th~~ the French Government
has requested'. The general arrangements nC\w contemplated will nevertheless be about the same as in 1948. 1.
Plenary meetings will be held in the theatre of the 1
Palais de Chaillot, but Committees and Secretariat
offices will not be in the museums, but in temporary
buildings erected in the Trocadero Gardens and con- .
nected with the Palais. Thus there will be a connected
whole, which will be more convenient than in 1948 and l
all the Assembly's activities will be concentrated at 1
the same point and in the same area as during the !
third session.
.
1

I

!

34. Tha'c js all I wished to say to give the Assembly 1
as complete information as I can at the present time 1
on the question with which it is deaiing today.
.

I

35. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): .
the draft resolution to which I have referred will be
distributed shortly. Meanwhile, I should also like to
add a few words of explanation myseif.
36. In my opinion it was not necessary for the General
Assembly to adopt another resolution since its resolution of 14 December 1950 [resolution 497 (V)] remains in effect. The reason I have taken the liberty
of proposing another draft resolution is that the sixth
session of the General Assembly must not meet before
6 November, in accordance with the French Government's request. However, rule 1 of the rules of procedure lays down that "the General Assembly shall meet
every year in regular session commencing on the third
Tuesday in September". A General Assembly resolution is needed to meet that point.
37. At the same time I should like to explain how the·
Secretariat proposes to offer financial assistance to th~
French Government when it diecusses the sixth session.
It will be stated that' this help must not go b.;;y\)nd
the credits already approved. That, in brief, is the
purpose of the draft resolution which will be submitted
to you in a moment.

712

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

38. A number of delegations have asked to speak. If
they wish to do so before receiving the text of the draft
resolution, I shall be glad to call upon them.
39. IVlr. GRAFSTROM (Sweden): The Swedish
delegation voted against Europe as the site of this
year's session of the General Assembly. We did so
solely for reasons of economy when it was explained
to us, first, that facilities for holding a session in New
York would be available, and, second, that transfer to
Europe would involve considerable extra expense.
When the decision to go to Europe was taken by the
General Assembly last December, the Assembly was
obliged to appropriate an additional $1,700,000 in this
year's budget to provide for the extra cost.
40. We all know from our last meeting [328th meeting] of the difficulti'es encountered by the SecretaryGeneral in his endeavours to find a suitable European
site for this year's session. The French Government,
after having given the matter long and careful consideration, has now welcomed us to Paris. However,
the French Government, for reasons, I am sure - and
I want to stress this point - which are fully understood
and appreciated by all of us, has attached one very
important condition to its invitation. We are informed
that the Fre!1('h Government will not be able to receive
the General Assembly before Tuesday~6 November.
The condition thus attached to the~nly European
alternative before us has, in the opinion of my delegation, created an entirely new situation which makes it
necessary for us to review carefully the decision taken
in December.
41. I suppose it is true that rule 1 of our rules of
procedure, whicn sets forth the third Tuesday in September as our opening date, does not in itself create
an insuperable obstacle. We are masters of our own
proced1..tre. But let us think of the practical inconveniences linked with a decision to postpone the opening
of our work for almost seven weeks. This year, the
General Assembly, due to unforeseen and unavoidable
circumstances, has dragged out to an extent which will
hamper the ordinary year-round activities of our Organization. Would we be justified in repeating that
state of affairs this year without any unforeseen or
unavoidable circumstances being present? I think the
answer is clear.
42. We must not forget either that many delegations
will find it extremely difficult to keep a sufficient number of representatives avaHable for the different committees if the session is split in two - and the session
will pe split up by Christmas and the New Year if we
decide to go to Paris in November.
43. In view of what I have said I express the hope
that the General Assembly will give the most careful
consideration to the grave inconveniences of a practical
nature entailed in holding a session in Paris this year.
44. Mr. VON BALLUSECK (Netherlands) : Before
stating the views of my delegation on the matter that
is to be decided today, r should like to express our
deep appreciation for the welcome the French Government has extended so generously, and, I may add, so
valiantly, to the General Assembly.
45. As we know, the French Government at a previous stage had not felt that it was in a position to

invite the General Assembly to hold its sixth session
in France - and one can 'I" 'ell understand the dif.£culties
facing any government when it comes to extending
such an invitation. It is indeed no small matter to
provide the costly facilities necessary for such a large
body as the General Assembly meeting away from its
own headquarters.
46. However, France has now d~cided that under
certain conditions it will be able to receive the General
Assembly in its splendid capital, and my delegation
wishes to thank the French Government, through its
distinguished representative here, for what it i~ now
offering us. Those who took part in the third session
in Paris will always retain a very happy and grateful
memory of the wn y in which they were received and
of the excellent facilities placed at their disposal. We
are cDnvinced t.hat, if it should be decided to hold the
next session in. Paris, the participants may again anticipate a very pleasant stay, thanks to the traditional and
gracious hospitality of the government and the people
of France.
47. Notwithstanding all this, I now wish to state the
reasons for which my delegation feels that it cannot
vote in favour of accepting an invitation to meet in
Paris in the autumn of this year. I do not intend to
reopen a discussion on the general question whether
or not the coming session should take place in Europe,
but I want to point out that we are in fact confronted
with a situation which differs considerably from that
to which the previous decision referred. This new
situation arises from three points mentioned in the
letter from the acting representative of France.
48. I do not wish to be misunderstood; it is not my
intention to raise objections to any of those three points
in themselves, which in the circumstances ~eem to be
entirely understandable and· entirely justifiable, but
they only confirm my delega.tion in the attitude which
it had taken previously.
49. A decision to begin tr..~ session on or after 6
November will inevitably mean that the General Assembly will not be able to finish its work hefore Christmas nor before· the end of the year, even if it were
possible to shorten the duration of the session by holding more meetings daily and by working longer hours,
as less time would be spent in daily travelling than
is the case when our meetings are held in Lake Success.
Even then my delegation feels that it would be much
too optimistic to expect· the completion of our tasks
in about six weeks. The session will undoubtedly extend, therefore, into the New Year and will probably
last until well into February. That means that much
time ~nd money will be wasted on account of a Christmas and New Year recess.
50. In this connexion, I should like to be informed
on the way in which the rule concerning travelling
expenses for delegations to the General Assembly
should be interpreted. For instance, would an extra
trip be paid for in certain cases and what would be
the financial implications involved?
51. Furthermore, I presume that, as a consequence,
it would be necessary to postpone the session of the
Economic and Social Council, which might not be able
to meet before the month of March. This in turn will

329th Meeting-20 March 1951
affect the whole calendar of meetings, not only of the
United
Nations but perhap& also of the specialized
.
agencies.
52. There is another matter to whiLt I desire to refer.
As the final decisions with respect to the budget cannot
be taken before the General Assembly has finished
or virtually finished its business, it is clear that whatever budget the Fifth Committee might be able to study
before the end of the year, and whatever decisions
might be taken in that respect by the General Assembly,
would only cover part of the expenses for 1952, and
it would be necessary to vote an additional budget
at the end of the session.
53. In connexion with the last paragraph of the letter
from the representative of France, my delegation would
wish to be informed of the entire extra cost involved
in holding the 1951 General Assembly away from Headquarters on the basis of the proposai now before us.
If the amount appropriated in December would still
have to be increased, as I expect will be the case, the
General Assembly will have to study revised estimates
so as to have quite exact information on the financi~l
implications of the decision to be taken. I feel that It
would be desirable to request the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, which I
understand is meeting at present, to examine the estimates and submit a report thereon.
54. Furthermore, I should like to hear from the Secretary-General whether the additional sums, if !leCessary,
.would be covered by the terms of the resolutlOn on the
use of the Working Capital Fund for unforeseen and
extraordinary expenses [resolution 473 (V)]. If the
Working Capital Fund is to be used for this purpose,
we should realize fully that such heavy inroads are
already anticipated upon this Fund that its use has had
to be strictly limite~ to a number of purposes, s1;1ch ;;s
assistance to Palest10e refugees and reconstructlOn m
Korea. We feel that it would be undesirable and
dangerous to deplete the fund still more, especially for
a purpose which in the view of my delegation, does
not fall under essential and urgent activities of the
United Nations.
55. In conclusion, we feel that the proposed change
in the opening date so greatly affects the picture which
the General Assembly had before it when it took its
decision in December 1950, that there would be every
reason to reconsider the matter. In any case, my delegation will have to vote against accepting the gracious
welcome so valiantly extended to us by the representative of .France. Our former objections to a meeting
of the General Assembly away from Headquarters were
based upon our general point of view that, on accotlnt
of the serious financial and administrative implications, .
such a meeting could only be justified for very worthy
reasons and as an exceptional measure. Those objections still stand and are reinforced by the new factors
with which we are now confronted. We feel that there
is but one decision which the General Assembly would
be justified in taking and that is not to meet in Paris
but at Headquarters where sufficient facilities are
available.
56. Mr. BOKHARI (Pa1dst~n); I am sure that the
French Government is entitled to our gratitude for the
welcome it has offered to the sixth session of the
.

713

General Assembly. I think it was very clear from the
explanation given by Mr. Lacoste that that welcome,
although very gracious indeed, was not offered by the
French Government on its own initiative but in response
to the desires of a large nnmber of people who insisted
on being the guests of the French Government. We
know that the French Government has been very hospitable and is prepared to be hospitable again, but I
think it was not difficult to read in Mr. Lacoste's speech
a certain amount of embarrassment which was felt by
the French Government at the considerable handicaps
it faced in accommodating the General As.sembly ?u;i~g
a very important post-war reconstru.ctlOn penoo. 1n
France.
57. My delegation voted last December [324th .me~t­
ing] against a similar resolution to hold the seSSlOn In
Europe and I am afraid that my delegation ~i11 be
obliged to vote against the present draft ~eSOI?t1011 as
well; in its opinion, with much added jusbficatlOn. '!le
realize now that it is impossible to hold the seSSlOn
before 6 November and the disadvantages of that fact
in respect of dislocation not only of the se~sion itself
but of the programmes and schedules of other bodies
of the United Nations, have been noted.
58. We are not convinced that the last paragraph of
the draft resolution before us is quite as innocuous as
it sounds because if you take into account the last
sentence, ~hich provides for additional funds 'Yhich are
unknown at the present time, we shall ?e votlng for a
resolution the full consequences of which cannot yet
be foreseen.

59.

I do not think it is fair to ask the General Assembly to vote on an item of expenditure whose: magnitude
is not known at the present moment. It IS perfectly
obvious that inroads will be made upon the funds of the
General Assembly, diverting them from causes· which
are more worthy, especially in view of the fact that
we are not convinced that there are any sound reasons
for not holding the session at the proper Headquarters
of the United Nations.

60. For those reasons, as well as for the reasons which
have been SI} ably put forward by the representatives
who have already spoken, my delegation will be constrained to vote agai~st this draft resolution.
61. General ROMULO (Philippines): The Government of France, true to its tradition of hospitality, of
which the General Assembly availed itself once beforeand those of us who attended the third session in Pads
are deeply grateful to the Government and to the people
of France - has extended a kind invitation to us to
hold our next session in Paris. The invitation is all the
more precious because it has come after considerahle
delay, not for want of hospitality but precisely becau~e
the spirit of hospitality finally triumphed over certain
considerations of some weight to the people and the
Government of France. If, therefore, I am going to
say -. as I must - that the Philippine delegation is
opposed to the holding of the sixth session outside of
Headquarters, it is not because we arl~ insensitive to
the graciousness of the French invitation or indifferent
to the many attractions which Paris offers us as our
workshop for the thre~ months of our next session.
Gratefully again we recall our sojourn in Paris in 1948,

714

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

and it was an experience so pleasant that it could
bear rep,ting.
62. h ..-vever, there are valid, practical reasons why
we must strongly resist the temptation to meet outside
of Headquarters this year. First, there is the additional
cost of such a meeting. The original estimate of the
Secretary-General as to such additional cost was
$1,821,600. In view of the implied request of the
French Government that its share of the expenses
should be reduced, we may assume that this figure will
be in the neighbourhood of $2,000,000. In fact, the
d:raft resolution before us fixes the ceiling at $2,350,400.
Some may ask: how much is $2,350,4oo? Of course,
in tenns of the astronomical national budgets of certain
Member States, it is but a drop in the bucket. But in
terms of the modest budget of the United Nations, it
represents about 4.5 per cent of the total.
63. To bring the figure closer down to earth, it is
nearly twice the annual cost of servicing the General
Assembly, the councils, commissions and committees.
It is more than the total cost of maintaining all the
regional economic commissions for one year, and half
a million dollars less than the cost of maintaining the
United Nations Office at Geneva. That $2,350,400
would cover the cost of all the printing jobs of the
United Nations during one year. And we do quite a
bit of printing, considering some of the very long
speeches to which we have to listen here. It would
maintain the International Court of Justice for three
and a half years. Finally, and this comparison should
be of some interest to a great many delegations,
$2,350,400 is slightly more than twice our annual
appropriation for the Technical Assistance Programme
-certainly one of the brightest achievements of the
United Nations.
64. It is true that, if you distribute pro rata the
$2,000,000 among sixty Member States, our respective
national shares become comparatively small. But we
have done some figuring in our delegation and our
Foreign Office in Manila has done some figuring of
its own. We find that, in addition to our share of the
extra cost, the Philippine Government would have to
spend approximately $50,000 more for its own delegation - and we can hardly afford that.
65. Each of the delegations will have made its own
estimates. I believe that, in this time of general financial
stringency, an appeal to ecotU.>my will strike a responsive chord in many of our national parliaments back
home. I am confident that the many voices that have
been raised in the Fifth Committee in support of economy measures will not fail to be heard at this meeting.
66. The invitation of the French Government states
that Paris will not be ready to receive the Assembly
until 6 November. This would delay the session by
six weeks. We must consider whether it would be wise
to permit so long a delay in view of the many vital
questions that will be on the ag\~nda of. the General
Assembly and wilt require urgent consideration. Moreover, to start the session during the second week of
November would mean that there would be only five
weeks in which the Assembly could meet before the
Christmas holidays. This would require the representatives to stay in Paris through the Christmas holidays
or to take a quick trip home, at their own expense, to

be with their families. Meetings would then be resumed
and carried on until the middle of February) with the
result that the entire schedule of meetings of the various
org-eU1S and subordinate bodies of the United Nations
to which our governments have become accustomed,
would be completely 'dislocated. I ask the Assembly
whether there is any reasonable justification for imposing so serious an inconvenience on the representatives and for creating this major disturbance in our
accustomed schedule and procedures.
67. The Secretary-General more than impli~s in his
original report [A/1778] that nowhere in Europe
would the facilities for the accommodation and work
of the representatives be as adequate as they would
he in New York - and there is no better expert in
such a matter than our Secretary-General. What I am
mostly concerned about are the facilities available for
our work and the work of our colleagues of the press
and radio. I am sure the feeling is quite universal that,
even with the best of intentions on the part of the
Secretariat and the host Government, it would be impossible for them to provide us with facilities in Paris
which would be comparable to those available at
Headquarters.
68. References have beel? made to the advantages of
the Parisian atmosph~le of Europe in general over the
New York atmosphere or of America in general as
conducive to better harmony during the session. I
wish I could believe that. United Nations bodies have
met everywhere in the world outside of New Yorkin Geneva, Paris, London, Santiago, Bangkok and
Baguio in the Philippines. In Baguio, we took the
representatives to one of the eoolest and loveliest spots
in the tropics, and I doubt that anyone can prove that
the change of scenery soothed the temper of any representative or induced him to change his position, or his
vote, led to more agreements or made anyone deliver a
shorter speech.
69. Paris is as heavily littered as New York, relatively
speaking, with the bones of conferences that have failed.
I am sorry to have to say that right now one more
bright dream of agreement is fading fast in the supposedly magical atmosphere of Paris. The point is that
New York is going to be the permanent home of the
United Nations, and it seems rather fatuous to hope
that by holding the sixth session in Paris we could
change the destiny of mankind or of the United Nations.
New York is the home of the United Nations. I repeat,
New York is the home of the United Nations, and this
lingering home-sickness for Europe will get us nowhere. The sane and practical thing to do is to get
used to our surroundings, endeavour to do our best work
here, and learn to like it,
70. Sir Gladwyn JEBB (United Kingdom): As the
President is aware, the United Kingdom delegation
voted against resolution 497 (V) adopted by the
General Assembly on 14 December 1950, which provided for the sixth session of the General Assembly to
be held in Europe. We took the view that it would be
possible to hold the sixth session in New York and
that, consequently, the additional expenditure, which is
inevitably iocnrred if the session is held away from
Headquarters, would not be justified. Nevertheless, the
resolution was adupted by a large majority, and we
are fully prepared to accept the Assembly's decision.

329th Meeting-20 March 1951
71. After some doubts, it now appears from the communication addressed by the representative of France on .
17 March to the Secretary-General that.• subject to certain conditions, the French Government has decided to
welcome the General Assembly in Paris for its sixth
session. I need hardly say that if the Assembly is to
meet in Europe, there could be no better place for it
to meet than in Paris. We all have the happiest
recollections of the third session in Paris in 1948, and
of the admirable arrangements that were then made by
the French Government, which I am sure will be repeated if the sixth session is held there as well.
72. There are, it is true, certain considerations which
Mr. Lacoste has made clear, the first being that the
session should not start before 6 November. This will,
of course, involve a departure, as the President has
said, from rule 1 of the rules of procedure. But this in
itself will present no difficulty, as I think it is provided
for in the President's draft resolution. It might indeed
be argued that since the present session is still continuing and seems likely to go on for a further period of
some weeks, if not months, the Assembly might well be
justified in postponing somewhat the normal opening
date of the next session beyond the third Tuesday
in September.
'
73. There are, of course, certain disadvantages in
starting the sixth session so late in the year, since it
seems most unlikely that the General Assembly will
complete its work before Christmas. I would hope,
therefore, that the French Government might find, on
further reflection, that the opening date could be advanced to mid-October. Nevertheless, if this does prove
to be impossible, my delegation would be prepared to
accept an opening date of 6 November, and it would
also agree to the second condition laid down by the
French Government, namely, that if the Assembly has
not completed its work before the end of 1951, it should
continue to meet in Paris during the early part of 1952,
though, I should certainly hope, for not too long
into 1952.
74. The question of finance admittedly raises some
difficulties, and, having just read the draft resolution, I
see how the President has proposed to deal with that
question. It seems to me and to my d~legation to be
correct in principle and not open to serious objection.
In so far as I understand it, what it means is that the
total expenditure for the sixth session of the General
Assembly will, in fact, be no more than we have already
voted upon. That is really the principle which underlies the President's draft, and with that principle my
delegation, I need hardly say, entirely agrees.
75. The draft resolution also says that if the SecretaryGeneral does find, on examination, that certain sumsand I am sure they can only be small sums - could be
made available by economies in other head ~~.gs and
consequent transfer to .this particular heading, that
could be done, provided always that our Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
agrees. I am quite certain that; that Committee will
not agree unless there is good reason -,' and no doubt
there may be good reason - for the transfer of such
small sums as the Secretary-General may indicate are
available. But I am sure that we shall hear the Secre-

715

tary-General himself on that particular paragraph before voting on the draft resolution.
76. The' PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Before calling upon the representative of the Union of
South Africa, I should like to say that the United
Kingdom representative's interpretation corresponds
exactly with the spirit in which the draft resolution.
I am submitting to the Assembly was drawn up.
77. Mr. JORDAAN (Union of South Africa): I
should like to associate the South African delegation
with the general remarks made by the representatives
of the Netherlands and Sweden. We do greatly appreciate the welcome which the French Government has
extended to the United Nations to hold its next session·
in Paris. As Sir Gladwyn J ebb said, if we have to
meet anywhere in Europe, I cannot think of a nicer
place· to meet than in Paris. But our delegation voted
against the resolution which provided for holding. a
session in Europe, mainly because of the finanCIal
implications. At a time of financial stringency, it is
perhaps· asking a great deal to provide for a budget of
$2,350,400, which would be $1,700,000 more than a
session would ordinarily cost at Headquarters.
78. There is also the question of the late date on
which the opening of the General Assembly would take
place. I need not say much on that. I think that the
representatives of the N eth~rlands and Pakistan have
amply demonstrated how that may dislocate the work
of the General Assembly. Apart from that, there is,
for the South African delegation, another reason why
we cannot support the proposal before us, and that is
that our Parliament normally assembles in January,
and it would mean that if a cabinet milnister were to
lead the delegation, he might have to r,etum to South
Africa before the work of the Assembly was finished.
That would be an inconvenience, and it Is an additional
reason why we would not be able to support the
. .
draft resolution.
79. Finally, while I am going to vote against the
resolution in any event, I would also like to join the
representative of the Netherlands in asking the Secretary-General whether it would be possible to make the
financial arrangements envisaged in paragrapl-. 3 of the
draft resolution before us within the framework of the
$2,350,400, plus such additional amounts as may be
authorized by borrowing from other sections, and also
whether the Secretary-General is satisfied that it would
not be necessary t,O resort to the Working Capital Fund
if this draft resolution is adopted.
80. Mr. BRENNAN (Australia): I regret that the
Australian delegation will· have to vote against the draft
resolution that has been distributed. I should like to
make it clear at the outset that in d~ing so it is in no
sense out of any lack of appreciation for the very generous gesture of the French Government. I feel sure
that the representative of France will not misunderstand any remarks of mine which may follow. It is
quite in keeping with th" traditional hospitality of
France that this invitation should have come and that
it should have been given at a time when, I may say
candidly, it is not entirely convenient for the French
Government. That only heightens our appreciation of
tlle generosity of the offer.
.

7'16

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

81. I may say personally alsQ that very many members
of the Australian delegation WQuld like to go to Paris
for the next session) and if the next session is held in
Paris I think there will be a lot of jockeying for PQsi..
tion to get on the delegation. However, we do feel
that, for reasons which J propose to give, y,,'~ shall have
to vote against t~e draft resc1ution. I am sure that
we will not be misunderstood and that· our vote will
not be taken in any way as a reflection on the generosity
and co-operation of the French Government.
82. I should like to recall that the decision that the
next session of the Gen<::ral Assembly should be held
in Paris was based on admitllstrative considerations.
The resolution which the General Assembly adopted
recited the fact that some doubt existed on the adequacy
C\t facilities in New York; accordingly, the General
Assembly decided that it would hold its next session
in Europe.
'"
83. At the time that decision was made my delegation
felt that there was no doubt at all that facilities would ,
be available in New York and, so far as I am aware,
that fact was never contested. Not only were facilities
available in Nev.;' York, but in many respects these had
advantages over the facilities we had previously enjoyed in New York. Much of the travelling between
Manhatta!i and Lake Success would have been obviated
and c-onsultation among delegations and with the Secretariat would have been facilitated. \Ve were somewhat
at a loss to understand exactly what these administra~
tive difficulties and shortcomings were.
84. Another consideration is that, at the time the
resoiutiofi was adopted, there was really. no alternative
to New York. It was not a question of weighing the
respective merits of New York and some other place;
it ",as a questiml of weighing the merits of New York
and. an invitation from a government which at that
time had not extended any. We had very great difficulty
in agreeing that the fa.cilities in New York.were not
as good as they were somewhere else, or anywhere
else, so to speak, because no concrete proposal had
been put up as an alternative to New York.
85. The General Assembly did, however, adopt a. resolution in due course that it would meet· in Europe,
and the Secretary-General and the President of the
General Assembly were requested to see what facilities
could be arranged in Europe. In effect, we decided to
. go to Europe and we then passed the hat around
among the member delegations. After some time, the
hat returned and, I am sorry to say, it was empty.
But at a crucial stage in the negotiations, we heard
that there was a possibility that the French Govemment would respond to the suggestion that had been
made that we meet in Europe. In due course, the
French Goverlh"lletttvery kindly agreed to make facilities available in Paris.
86. The French Government 'has placed some conditions on this invitatio..l and I have the greatest sympathy: for those conditions. The Australian Government
would not for one moment suggest that they are anything other than perfectly reasonable and proper conditions. But they do pose certain difficulties. I would
teca11 that r~501utioi1 497 (V) which was adopted last
December said ~hat "con.sidering that in these circumstances" (as they existed in New York) there may
...

arise technical difficulties liable to impede the normal
functioning of the General Assembly and the convenience of its deliberations ... " Following that paragraph
in the preamble, the General Assembly made a certain
decision.
87. It does appear to me, and again I wish to repeat
my reservation to the representative of France, that
the conditions which it has been necessary for the
French Government to impose on this invitation would
impede the r..0t'ma! functioning of the General Assembly and the convenience of its deliberations. It likewi~e appears to the Australian Government' that the
General Assembly could be held in New York with
no impediment to its normal functioning or to the convenience of its deliberations. For this reason we feel
it is very difficult to accept the proposal that we should
meet in Paris.
88. A particular condition of the French Government
to which I should like to draw attention is the one
affecting the date of the opening of the session. We
fully understand the reasons which have compelled the
French Government to impose this condition, but to
set the date at that time would practically amount to
postponing the opening date of the General Assembly
by almost two months; I think that would also postpose the closing of the General Assembly by at least
that length of time, and possibly more, because there
is likely to be an interruption over Christmas and the
New Year. Some representatives may be compelled for
a variety of rea!:lons, such as parliamentary duties at
home or other compelling nece5.:1ties, to leave Paris)
at least temporarily. The closing date of the session
might be something in excess of two months.
89. In those circumstances, it seems to me that there
would indeed exist a very serious in-lpediment to the
normal functioning of the General Assembly. Furthermore, it is quite likely that the Economic and Social
Council might wish to hold its first meeting in 1952
before the conclusion of the General Assembly, and
that certainly would be an impediment to its normal
functioning. The Economic and Social Council could
not properly hold a session in the early part of the
year if the General Assembly· were still in full swing.
90. Likewise, there is the question of the specialized
agencies, many of which hold their geI!eral conferences
in the early part of the year. There would be no time
for discussions and decisions of the General Assembly
to be conveyed to the general conferences of the specialized agencies if the likelihood existed of the session
dragging on until late February.
91. Thus, I do not feel that we can conscientiously
consider that we have arrived at a decisinn on the place
of the next meeting which will impose 110 impediment
to the normal functioning of the United Nations aud
its spedalized agencies. I should like to point out too
that the decision that we should meet in Europe next
year was the third of three decisions affecting the
meeting of United Nations organs away from Headquarters. Two sessions of the Economic and Social
Council, at least, wen~ nnder consideration in the Fifth
Committee and, indirectly, in the General Assembly.
The fir3t of those sessions was to be held in Santiago,
Chile, and, in fad, the Economic and Social Council
has met there; the other was the second session in
1951 of the Economic and Social Council.

329th Meeting-20 March 1951

t

...

92. One consequence of the df.dsion to hold these
meetings away from Headquarters, as many delegations pointed out, was that senior oft}cers of the Secretariat would be continually absent from .Headquarters
for an unbroken period extending OVf:r many months.
They have to be in Santiago, Chile, f~r the meeting of
the Economic and Social Council; th~y have to attend
a meeting of one, and perhaps more; of the regional
commissions of the Economic and Social Council; following that, they have to attend the SlImmer session
of the Economic and £ocial Council in Geneva, and
that would no sooner have concluded when these people
would have io be in Paris for the next session of the
General Assembly. That is an inconvenience not only
to the men themselves but also to the delegations which
find it impossible to get in touch with them or to seCUre
their opinions on major matters of policy which have
to be considered and discussed and which will be the
subject of subsequent decisions in bodies of the United
Nations.
.93. If it is proposed that the General Assembly should
not only meet in Paris but that it should postpone its
opening date by two months, all those difficulties will
be accentuated far beyond what was ever anticipated
when the General Assembly arrived at its decision in
December that it would meet in Europe.
Y4. There is one otber mlnUl mana-, This decision
to meet in Paris, if it is arrived at, will involve two
'changes in the rules of procedure. One is in the rule
which l'equires that meetings shall be held at Headquarters, and the other is in the one which requires
that the sessi(;ms of the General Assembly slnll open
on the third Tuesday in September. The mere deviation
from those rules is not important in itself. This Assembly is master of its own procedure, as has been pointed
out, and is quite at liberty to change or depart from
its rules, as it sees fit. But this is not the point. The
point is that these rules of procedure had a very solid
basis in reason at the time that they were adopted.
If we authorize departures from them, we have to'
evaluate not so much the breaking of a rule as the
departure from the very substantial reasons which led
us to adopt the rules in the first instance.
95. It is quite apparent, for example, that the'date of .
one meeting affects the dates of quite a number of
other meetings. There is a calendar of conferences for
ail the subsidiary organs of the United Nations and
:for all the specialized agencies. These things are very
closely interlocked; they are an organic whole. You
cannot depart from one of them without seriously
irterfering with the others. That is the reaso::J. why
I suggest that we should give very serious consideration to the matter before we ultimately take a decision
involving a departure at two points from the rules of
procedure which we very carefully adopted some time
ago.
96. Coming to the partictillar draft resolution that is
before us [AI1790], there are certain questions that
are left unanswered as, for example, the question of
cost. The representative of the Philippines has gone
into that subject at great length, and his figures were
very enlightening. The Australian delegation stated its
views on the question of cost at some length last December [324th meeting] and I shall not repeat the

711

opinions that have already been expressed. In any event,
they would add little to what has just been said. However, it is a fact that on the budget figures the cost of
holding the Assembly in Paris would be three times
the co..,t of holding it in New York. I do not think that
we should pass over this fact lightly. That is not all.
In the draft resolution before us, there is a proviso
in the last paragraph-or something in the nature of
a proviso--that the Secretary-General is to be authorized to conclude with the French Government certain arrangements. One of the understandings is that
the arrangements will not involve us in costs exceeding the amount of some 2 million dollars which have
already been provided in the 1951 budget-and here'
is the proviso-"plus such additional amounts as may
be authorized by transfer from other sections of the
1951 budget by the Secretary-General with the prior
concurrence of the Advisory Committee On Administrative and Budgetary Questions".
97. We all knmv'that it is not an uncomnlon thing
for transfers to be made from one section of the budget
to ~other with the concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions. We
vote the budget by sections. If it is found that we have
spent a little more in one section than we anticipated
and a little less in another section, it is common practice-in fact, it is the rule-for the Secretary-General
to make up these de:F.cipncies by transferring funds
from the light section to the heavy section with the
concurrence of the Advisory Committee.
98. I am not 'questioning that principle. What gives
me concern is that we see written into this draft resolution .express authority for additional funds to be expended, subject to the ordinary rules being complied
with. That seems to me to indicate very clearly that
the Secretary-General has ver~- serious misgivings as
to his ability to keep the costs for the Assembly in
ParL within the figure of $2,350,400. If he did not
have those misgivings, I do not think he would have
inserted that saving clause. He would not have done
that if only a slight amount were involved. If he saw
fit to write it in specifically in those terms I do think
it indicates that he has very grave doubts as to whether
he Ca'll keep within that amount. If, at a later stage,
the Secretary-General wished to make any comment
on this draft resolution, the Australian delegation would
welcome any opinion he may desire to express on that
particular aspect of the matt,;r.
99. On this question of {''Ost, we might also recall
something that the Secretary-General himself wrote as
a foreword to his budget note two years ago. l In writing the foreword, as he usually does, he makes some
very succinct and valuable comments. These are never
very long and are confined to those budgetary issues
which he believes to be of the greatest importance. Two
years ago, when he was writing the foreword to hb
budget, he saw fit-and I commend him for it-to say
that the Secretary-General conld not be held l'esponsible for administrative economies if delegations consistently adopted the policy of deciding to hold meetings away from Headquarters with consequent increases
in the costs of those meetings. I could not agree more.
1 See Official Records of the General Assembly. Fourth Session, Supplement No. 5.
.
,

718

General Assembly

Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

If bodies decide to meet away from Headqu.arters, t~e
cost will inevitably rise and it is most u~falr that ~ e
Secretary·General should be held responsIble; and l~. b1 he l'S held responsible. It is the more un~alr
vana y
. add"
t h mg
to the Secretary-General because, m
Ibon 0 ay
to pay the price for an increased bud~e~-:-not m ~
financial sense but in a sense of resp~nslblhty-;-he alf
ways has to put up with the added m.conve111en~e 0
having his most senior and most expenenced adVisers
scattered to the four corners of the globe.
100 I have dealt at some length on the administra·
tive' considerations of this particular question bec~~se,
as I said at the outset of my intervention, the declSlon
to go to Europe in the first place wa.s based on administrative considerations. The Austrahan Gove;n;nent
felt that if the matter was viewe~ purely ad~ll:lstra­
tively only one decision was possIble:. the decISIOn to
meet 'in New York. It still feels the same way, The
invitation that has now come before the Assembly confirms this in our view.
101. It is now no longer possible f?r us ,to hold the
session in Europe in any manner which w111 allow the
proceedings of the General Assem?ly to go for:v ard
with a reasonable measure of convemence and.efficI~ncy
and with any reasonable certai~ty. that our dehberatl?ns
are likely to come to an end wlthm a reasonable penod
of time.
102. I should like to pass on to the politi~a1 considerations ill case there are some representatIves who are
influenced by them. I do not wish light.ly to brush
aside the views of those governments whIch feel that
there is considerable value in rotating meetings from
onc country to another. There is considerable merit in
that and the Australian Government, on previous oc·
cnsions has voted in support of proposals that the
princip~l organs of the United Nations, or some of
them, should hold meetings away from Headquarters.
But I do feel that the political considerations and the
administrative considerations are interlocked. I think
that it would be very short-sighted indeed to itl6ist that
meetings should be held in New York because, it was
administratively convenient if, for any reason, It were
politically unwise to hold them there. Similarly, I
think it is unwise to insist that meetings should be held
away fr0111 New York on the grounds that it is politically valuable or expedient when all the administrative considerations would point to the overwhelming
desirability of meeting in New York, and I believe that
to be the case today.
103. While it may be true that there are political
advantages in holding a session of the General Assembly in Europe, I do feel that this year is not the year
to do it. There will be other years when, perhaps,
invitations can be extended in circumstances which
will enable us to hold our deliberations with conve.
nience and efficiency. Those considerations do not exist
today.

104. Mr. WENDELEN (Belgium) (translated from
French): In December last . [324th meeting], when
resolution 497 CV) was adopted, whereby the General
Assembly decided to hold its sixth session in Europe,
my delegation abstained from voting.
105. The financial implications of the draft resolution
submitted by the President of the General Assembly do

not seem to be of a kind to prompt the Assembly to go
back on its decision. It is probably because the members
have the first resolution before them that several delegations have been encouraged to take up again today the
arguments which failed to convince the General Assembly in December. Some of those arguments were the
cause of our abstention. We regarded them as cogent at
the time. We think they are still good arguments, but it
would be presumptuous to ~ope that the ~ajority will
be convinced simply by heanng arguments It has already
heard. The fact that the Belgian delegation was not
then in favour of the decision taken does not absolve it
today from keeping in mind the fact that the decision
was adopted.
106. In the circumstances, my delegation welcomes the
French Government's invitation to the Assembly because it will permit that body to put its decision into
effect and to do so under the best possible conditions.
The Belgian delegation wishes to make clear that it
fully apprec!ates an inv!tation which, as we all know,
implies conSiderable sacnfices on the part of the Government giving it.
107. The draft resolution before us is sufficiently cl~ar
and simple to relieve us of the nec~s~ity of a long diScussion. It has the advantage of glVl11g the Secre1:a;ryGeneral explicit instructions while at the ~ame ~Ime
enabling him to make any necessary finan~lal adJustments, subject to the agreement of the Advlso;y Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions.
108. I should add that we hope that the French Government will interpret paragraph: 2 of the draft reso.lution which provides for the openmg of the Sixth seSSlOn
on November 1951 at the latest, as a reflection of the
General Assembly's wish not to delay the regular op.ening date more than is absolutely necessary for practical
reasons. If the delay could be reduced to four or five
weeks instead of six, the weight of the objections made
here today would be diminished.
109. My delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution before the Assembly.
110. Mr. COSTA DU RELS (Bolivia) (translated
from French) : As all the previous speakers have heaped
bouquets upon the French Government and praised the
marvellous hospitality of Paris, I hardly d~re add. my
thanks to that Government for the welcome It has gIven
to the suggestions emanating from this Assembly.
Nevertheless, they all said that they would vote against
the draft resolution: in cauda venenum.
111. In the circumstances, I should like to place the
following on record: all the representatives who have
spoken against the resolution seem to have ignored the
fact that there is a resolution which was voted by
thirty-one countries on 14 December 1950. Consequently, all the arguments invented at that time have
no value.

us 1
ruigl
Eur l
ing
to s
bedE

112. However, since those arguments have been advanced, I should like all the same to remind the General
Assembly that when my delegation, together with the
delegations of Peru and Colombia, submitted a draft
resolution [A/1593] tMy did not do so in obedie~ce to
a whim, in a spirit of fantasy, as was rumoured 111 the
corridors of this Assembly. On the contrary. Because of
certain technical difficulties which the Assembly would
encounter if it met in New York in 1951, it seemed to

itis

6

113.
over
peo!
to fi

oftl
wen
was
theil

114.

dele,
abot
alre~

not

rueel
gain
see
cam
grav

115.
was

orga
expl

mee·

war.
gaOl
the

116.

fron
Afri
had

one

Dni

effe(
the

mOll

cam
will
poin

117.

the
tive'
cam

to01

had
The
brot
be s
well
of t
bed!

118.

and
Par
chal
lon~

repl

COUl

329th Meeting-20 March 1951
~s

necessary to suggest that the General Assembly
might meet in Europe. Why? Because, at this time,
Europe is in fact a sick continent. It would be displaying great political wisdom if the United Nations were
tu say: "Sick continent, I am coming to sit at your
bedside, to try to find a remedy for your ills."
113. I arrived from Europe two days ago. While I was
over there, I was able to get in touch with all kinds of
people, from the highest to the lowest. I have talked
to financiers, statesmen, workers and taxibdrivers. All
of them said that if the Assembly of the United Nations
were to meet in Paris in 1951 it would mean that war
was not yet imminent. I saw a kind of new hope in
their eyes.
114. This is the great psychological effect which the
delegations of Bolivia, Peru and Colombia seek to bring
about: to make it knc-:vn to the peoples of Europe,
already buffeted by tendentious propaganda, that war is
not near, th3.t it is not inevitable and that sixty nations,
meeting together under the aegis of the Charter, are
going to Europe so that all Europeans will be able to
see them working loyally in an attempt to reconcile
completely divergent views and to find remedies for
grave ills.
115. I remember that Bismarck once said that force
was the great midwife of society. Now that international
organizations have been set up, this sinister, disastrous
expression must be erased. Peoples of goodwill must
meet, smooth out all the obstacles, pull their weight and
work to ensure that the United Nations, thanks to the
goodwill and the understanding of the peoples, becomes
the midwife of society.
116. While listening to the arguments of my colleagues
from the Netherlands, Australia, the Union of South
Africa, Sweden and other countries, I realized that they
had only one thing in mind: the budgetary question. Not
one word has been said about the advantages of the
United Nations going to Europe, about the psychological
effect we are all searching for. What can be said about
the United Nations? That it spends money? But this
money is spent to bring the peoples together, to overcome difficulties and smooth down corners. The money
will be well spent. I cannot therefore agree with their
point of view.
117. I remember once in the League of Nations, at
the time of the Italian-Ethiopian conflict, a representative-I think it was the representative of one of the
countries which intervened in this discussion todaytook the Secretary-General to task because the latter
had spent, if I remember rightly, $35,000 on telegrams.
Thereupon Lord Cecil, one of the symbols of human
brotherhood, rose and said: "If a million pounds had to
be spent to wipe out all seeds of war, it 'Would be money
well spent". I can only agree with Lord Cecil. The fact
of the United Nations going to sit, as I said, at the
bedside of a sick continent is not merely adventitious;
it is also a duty.
118. I shall not do ~.S some representatives have done
and draw a sort of comparison between New York and
Paris. Comparisons are always odious. We have been
charmingly received in New York. We have spent
long periods here and we have never complained. Some
representatives have not been able to go home to their
countries for the Christmas holidays. I am among them

719

and I have not complained. I stayed in New York to
do my duty. Thus, if some representatives perhaps had
to spend the Christmas holidays in Paris, they would be
wrong to complain; they would only be doing their
duty too.
119. Moreover, the fact oi going to Europe is not
simply a duty; it is also a way of. approaching a number
of European countries which unfortun.ately do not have
seats in the United Nations. It is a way of getting to
know their wishes better and making ourselves better
known to them. In this way, we shall broaden the
horizon of our discussions.
120. In the circumstances, I do not see what point of
principle can be brought up against the resolution of
14 December 1950 which, I repeat, remains in force
and could only be repealed by a two-thirds majority of
the General Assembly.
121. Having said this, I want to thank the French
Government for the rapidity with which it has let us
know it will receive the United Nations in Paris in
November 1951. I should point out that if I said in this
Assembly on 13 February 1951 [328th meeting] that
the French National Assembly was on the point of
dealing with the matter and asked the General Assembly
to postpone any decision, it was in order that the will
of the French people could make itself felt. So much
80-1 am very proud n9W of having intervened at that
moment-that the French National Assembly unanimously adopted the suggestion that the French Government should agree to receive the United Nations in
Paris next autumn. If the General Assembly of the
United Nations is held in France, it will be through the
unanimous will of the French people as expressed by
650 deputies in the National Assembly.
122. When I hear representatives question the resolution of December 1950, and express the belief that it
might be justifiable to vote against accepting the
invitation from the French Government, I say to them:
If the General Assembly listened to you, it would be
taking an absurd, illogical and, what is more, discourteous decision. I do not think that my colleagues
could lightly resolve to vote against the draft resolution
which has been submitted by the President of the
General Assembly. It is a clear statement of the only
problem to be discussed. The budgetary questions have,
in fact, been settled by virtue of the decision of December 1950. We cannot go' back on that. There are only
two points to be considered.
123. The first is the date. The French representative
has made the position on that point quite clear and I
shall refrain from adding anything at all. If I might
express one wish, it woWd be to suggest that, should
certain conditions be fulfilled and should· it be possible
to put forward the date .by one or two weeks, the
General Assembly would favour such an advance. In
that, I agree with the United Kingdom representative's
pertinent obse-Nation.
124. Secondly, I fully understand why the French
representat~ve told us that it might be unwise to ask a
government to receive us and to make quite considerable
preparations for or.ty three or four or, at the most, six
weeks. It is natural that the whole of the Assembly
should be held in Paris. No representative could finu
anything to say against that.

'720

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

125. I think the draft resolution is very clear. The
arguments used against it are .those which were advanced last year and have already been stated before
the General Assembly in December 1950. They were
not accepted by the General Assembly since thirty-one
delegations voted in favour of the draft resolution
submitted by the delegations of Colombia, Peru and
Bolivia. As the Belgian representative rightly pointed
out, arguments which some people might have regarded
as valid at that time no longer carry any weight. What
now remains for us to do is simply to accept the date of
6 November and to thank the French Government for
the hospitality which it has kindly offered to the General
Assembly as from 6 November 1951, or at an ~arlier
date if possible.
126. Mr. J. MALIK (Union of Soviet 30cialist Republics) (translated from Russian) : It i~ a well known
fact that on 14 December 1950 the Gf.neral.Assembly
decickd to hold its sixth session in Eurcpe. In paragraph
2 of the operative part of the resolution, the President
of the General Assembly and the United Nations
Secretariat were instructed "to select the city most
suitable for the above purpose and to make the necessary
arrangements". The preamble to this resol~tion states
that "the building intended for the holdmg of the
General Assembly will not be completed until 1952",
and that consequently "there may arise t~ch!1ical difficulties liable to impede the normal functlOmng of the
General Assembly",
127. Not one of the orators who spoke here and
endeavoured to show the so-called advantages of New
York over Paris took the trouble to explaifl why he
thought that those advantages would be available this
autumn and one and all confined themselves to a brief
and unfounded statement on the subject. It is common
knowledge however, that at the rate at which work
on the ne~ Headquarters is proceeding, building operations on the New Yor1: site will be in full swing next
autumn and the sixth ;:;ession of the General Assemhly
and its Committf>e:; would probably have to work amid
the clang of excavating ma<"Alines and hamme~s.· Thus,
conditions at the New York Headquarters WIll hardly
be conducive to the normal conduct of the work of the
General Assembly's sixth session.
128. We have therefore absolutely no reason to reconsider the views set forth in the preamble to the
General Assembly resolution adopted in .December;
those views still stand, for the factors whIch led the
General Assembly to include them in the pre~mble
remain unchanged. This is so clear that there IS no
need to dwell any further on the matter.
129. Considering, however, that the French Government, in welcoming the suggestion to hold the General
Assembly's sixth session in Paris, proposed as one of
the conditions that the opening date of the.session ~hould
be postponed until 6 ~ ovember,. we mIght deCIde to
adopt a 'separate 'resolutlon-albelt there would appear
to be no special need for it-to the effect that the
General Assembly has no objection to a postponement
of the opening date of its sixth session.
130. Some speakers have tried to prove to the Assembly that such a step ",:oul~ lead to a disl?cation in the
work of United NatIons organs. Nothmg, however,
justifies such a statement, which is merely couched in

high-sounding terms and is not founded on or supported
by any considerations or arguments. For we all know
that the fifth session of the General Assembly has been
going on for seven or eight months, that the other
organs of the United Nations have continued to function
and that there has been no dislocation of their work.
131. This, it should be noted, is not what threatens the
collapse of the United Natiops. The dislocation and
downfall of the United Nations are threatened by other
contingencies to which Generalissimo Stalin called attention in a recent interview when he pointed out that the
aggressive bloc in the United Nations was trying to
transform this Organization, designed as it is to promote
peace and friendship among nations, into an instrument
of war. This is what is leading towards the disintegration of the United Nations and not the fact that the
General Assembly's sixth session will begin on a
Tuesday in November instead of a Tuesday in September. So much for the argument of those opposed to
holding the General Assembly in Paris, which hardly
carries enough weight or conviction to warrant a
protracted Assembly debate.
132. In view of the fact that those who spoke against
holding the sixth session in Paris merely restricted
themselves to general statements without putting forward any concrete arguments in support of their
objections, it is essential to draw attention to the general
trend on this matter which is characteristic and cannot
be disregarded.
133. How did the whole affair develop? First, there
appeared a trend to reconsider the decision taken on
14 December 1950 to hold the sixth session in Paris.
That tendency made itself clearly felt in February,
when the opinion was expressed that "there is no suitable place" in Europe. Poor Europe I It was also alleged
that "Geneva is inadequate". Thus, there was a definite.
tendency to frighten us with the idea of insurmountable
difficulties in Europe. At today's meeting of the General
Assembly, however, it has become perfectly clear that
that attempt at intimidation was u1).founded. It now
appears that the sixth session of the General Assembly
could be held just as well in Geneva, as may be seen
from an official document, as in Paris, where the French
Government welcomes the holding of the General Assembly's sixth session.
134. Thus, the initial attempt to plead the existence
.of insurmountable obstacles due to the alleged absence
of a suitable place in Europe and the unsuitability of
Geneva has fallen flat and has proved to be worthless.
135. Now, new arguments are being dragged outquestions of economy. In this connexion, it may be
opportune to dwell for a moment on the initial arguments advanced by those who desire to scare the
General Assembly with the supposedly insurmountable
difficulties which would attend the holding of the sixth
session in Europe.
136. We know that there is an official letter from the
World Federation of United Nations Associations,
dated 5 February 1951, which has been circulated to
the heads of all delegations to the United Nations. In
that letter, the Federation's Secretary-General, Mr.
John Ennals, statc.~s that, in view of the General
Assembly resolution of 14 December 1950, the General
Council of the World Federation of United Nations

329th Meeting-20 March 1951
Associations had adopted, at its tenth session on 4 February 1951, a resolution approving the General Assembly's decision to hold iW next session in Europe and
declaring that the Gene~a area is well able to provide
the General Assembly with all the necessary facilities,
including hotel accommodation.
137. The General CO,uncil of the Federation informed
the General Assembly of that fact and expressed the
hope that the United Nations would be in a position to
accept the warm invitation extended to it by the Geneva
authorities to hqld the General Assembly's sixth session
in Geneva, where it could meet under normal conditions
in peaceful and quiet surroundings. The conclusions
set forth in the letter from the World Federation of
United Nations Associations completely refute therefore
the assertions that Geneva is unsuitable.
138. Obviously, there is more reason to rely on the
Genevese, who adopted this resolution in Geneva itself,
than to believe casual visitors who went there only on
a flying trip.
..
139. While on the subject, it was the Australian
representative who spoke here, if I am not mistaken,
of a hat which had been passed round and had failed
to collect any invitations. However, from the document
mentioned by me, it is clear that those who went to
Europe never removed their hats and kept them so
firmly on their heads that no proposal was dropp\2d
into them. If their hats had been removed, an invitation
would have dropped inside. However, despite everything, the invitation has been received in an official
document. As it is, events are following their natural
course, hat or no hat!
140. It is evident that the sixth session of the General
Assembly can be held not only in Geneva but also in
Paris. The French Government officially invited the
General Assembly to hold its sixth session in Paris and
said that it would be happy to welcome it there, as Mr.
Lacoste, acting representative for France to the United
Natiol1s, stated in his letter.
141. It is now quite clear that the alleged difficulties
raised by certain persons in connexion with the place
of meeting of the General Assembly's sixth session
prove that pressure is being brought to bear by some
outside force. There is an attempt to convince somebody
of something and to intimidate us with talk of insurmountable difficulties. On investigation ~t appears, however, that no such difficulties exist and the whole
argument, based on imaginary difficulties, therefore falls
to the ground.
142. The first two arguments-that "there is no
suitable place in Europe" and that "Geneva is inadequate"-have thus been disposed of. There are two
possibilities in Europe: Geneva and Paris. "V'!e even
have a choice.
143. However, after the first two arguments have
failed, a third one based on financial considerations is
now put forward.
144. With regard to the financial considerations, let
us look at the cost of the General Assembly's third
session in Paris, which was unhappily not concluded
there but was transferred to New York. According to
the official report for the financial year ended 31 December 1948 and the report of the Board of Auditors,

721

the total cost to the United Nations of holding the
General Assembly's third session in two parts in Paris
and New York, was $2,329,000. This is almost as much
as is contemplated for the next session in Paris. According to the draft resolution, we are being offered
$2,350,400, whereas the third session-which began in
Paris and finished in New York two years ago-cost
the United Nations $2,329,000. The difference is not
very great, in all, about $21,000.
145. It would be foolish to assert that prices will not
have risen between 1948 and the end of 1951. The
reason for this rise in prices is universally known. It is
no secret to anybody and least of all to the broad
masses, including housewives, who are at present forced
to pay higher taxes and higher prices. It is due to an
armaments race unparalleled in history and started by a
country, the name of which we need not give, for it is
known to everybody. Thus, the tens of millions of
dollars set aside for rearmament here in this country
since the beginning of this session speak for themselves.
146. It is therefore inevitable that there should be
some increase in the cost of holding the General
Assembly's sixth session in Paris. The cost of holding
that session in New York would also appear to be
considerably more than for former sessions held ther~
as prices in the United States have risen while taxes
have become much higher.
147. In the light of those facts, any talk of the "dislocation" of the work of the o~gans of the United NationsI believe this was the wortl used by the representative
of the Philippines, General k6mulo-due to the sixth
session being held in Paris is unfounded. These organs
of the United Nations which, according to the calendar
of meetings have to meet in November-December 1951
or in January-February 1952, can easily advance their
meetings to September-October 1951 if the sixth session
of the General Assembly is not being held at that time.
Such a c<?urse would be possible and it is within the
powers of the United Nations Secretariat to revise the
calendar of meetings accordingly, should it be decided
to convene the sixth session of the General Assembly in
Paris on 6 November 1951. As I have already said,
these are not the reasons for disruption and 'dislocation,
as General R6mulo, and indeed all of us, are well aware.
148. So much for the organizational and financial
aspects of the question. In view of these considerations,
the USSR delegation feels that there is no need to
review the decision of last December.
149. We could of course do without a special new
resolution on the subject, but taking into account the
rules of procedure and other considerations, we could
adopt an additional resolution to the effect that the
General Assembly has no objection to postponing its
sixth session until 6 November 1951.
150. In view of its statement on the financial aspect
and the practice so far followed by the United Nations,
the USSR delegation does not ;3ee any need tor
paragraph 3 of the operative part of the draft resolution.
Obviously, those responsible for handling the budget
cannot go beyond the appropriations made, namely, the
total mentioned in the budget.
151. If in view of the increase in prices, taxes, etc. to
which I have referred, there is need for a.dditional
expenditure in connexion with hol~ing the sixth session

122

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

in Paris, that expenditure can of co:urse be authorized
with the consent and by the decision of the relevant
United Nations organs, including the Advisory Committe:e (In Administrative and Budgetary Questions.
Such is the established practice and there is therefore
no need t~ take a special decision on the matter. No one
has the nght, without the concurrence of that Committee, to transfer funds from one section of the United
Nations budget to another or to exceed the funds
which have been appropriated. If any additional expenditure were to arise, then those who deal with such
questions would discuss the matter with the Advisory
Committee. I should also like to draw the delegations'
attention to General Assembly resolution 184 (II)
concerning the place of meeting of the third session of
the Assembly, which was held in Pans. Th~ resolution
contained no special provision in that respect. The
operative part of that resolution merely stated:
((The General Assembly

"

((Decides that the third ~egular session of the
General Assembly shall be held in Europe;
((Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with a committee of nine members designated by the
President of the General Assembly, to choose the city
where the third regular session of the General Assembly shall be held."
And there the matter ended. That was the decision and
the session was held in Paris without any additional
discussion or financial considerations.
152. As. I see it, there is little need to take any special
decisio~s now regarding the meeting place of the sixth
session; we should therefore merely say that the General
Assembly confirms its earlier decision of December last
to hold its sixth session in Europe-to be precise, in
Paris-adding a statement to the effect that the General
Assembly has no objection to commencing its sixth
session on 6 November instead of in September. Nothing
more need be said.
153. As regards the expenditure involved, that is
covered by definite financial rules which may not be
brokell by anyone. Should additional funds be required,
those dealing with such matters will have to prove
conclusively to the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions that additional allocations are really needed. That is how matters really stand.
154. Consequently, if we are not to give in to those
who would like to intimidate the General Assembly
with references to insurmountable political and local
obstacles, or at least to financial difficulties, it might
perhaps be best to maintain only the first two paragraphs
of the operative part of the draft resolution and to delete
paragraph 3, although tbe latter does not call for any
objection of substance.
I
155. As is well known, when we discussed the place of
meeting of the General Assembly's sixth session [324th
meeting], 'the USSR delegation voted for Europe. The
USSR delegation considers that the General Assembly's
decision of last December is quite sufficient and sees no
particular reason to adopt at tHe time any other
decision.
156. The USSR delegation has no comments to make
on the considerations set forth in Mr. Lacoste's letter

and agrees that the General Assembly'siixth session
should be held in Paris. In that connexion, it is impossible to pass over the strange remarks of some speakers,
which really make an odd impression. Certain representatives, after thanking the French Government for its
hospitality, declined, in the same breath, that hospii:Cl1ity.
Such behaviour makes a poor impression, to say the
least. In my opinion, thf: General Assembly has every
reason to take advantage of the hospitality which has
been offered it and to convene its sixth session in Paris.
157. The USSR delegation will therefore ,vote for the
first two paragraphs of the operative part of the draft
resolution but does not see any special need for the
inclusion of paragraph 3.
158. The PRESIDENT (tra,nslated from French):
We have already heard ten speakers arid there are four
more on my list: the representatives of Haiti, Israel,
United States and France. If there is no objection, I
shall close the list of speakers. Before putting to the
vote the draft resolution now before the Assembly, I
shaH call upon the Secretary-General who will answer
some questions put to him.
159. lVIr. Dantes BELLEGARDE (Haiti) (translated from French) : I apologize for intervening in this
discussion. I am a newcomer to the United Nations and,
although I am a "veteran" of the League of Nations, .
I regard myself as a "freshman" in this Assembly.
I should, however, like to say why I shall vote in
favour of the draft resolution before us.
160. The General Assembly adopted a resolution in
December last, and it is valid, as the President has
stated and most of the previous speakers have confirmed. We have been called together simply to decide
whether France's proposal should be accepted. -We had
decided that the next session of the United Nations'
General Assembly should .be held in Europe. The
Secretary-General told us in his report that he had not
found any government in a position to invite the
Assembly to meet in its capital or any other of its cities.
161. Now the Assembly has a formal invitation from
the French Government which in all the more appreciated because it comes from the French National Assem~ly. It is the Frenr.;h nation itself, through its
government, which is hlViting the United Nations to
hold its next General Assembly in P~!i3 in November.
162. There is undoubtediy some valne to the arguments put forward during the discussion of the resolution adopted last December, and I do not see any ill will
on the part of some of our colleagues who have used the
same arguments again this afternoon. I do not regard
that as a disloyal move: all those who have spoken
against adopting the proposal are honourable men,
guided solely by the interests of the United Nations and
of peace throtighout the world. Nevertheless, the arguments advanced in December were not considered valid
then by the General Assembly and they are not valid
.this afternoon.
163. The only q"tlestioT.l which now remains is the date
of the Gener~l Assembly's opening. The French re:,resentative has given the compelling reasons which
prevented, and r.mll prevent, France from inviting the
United Nations before' November. Many representatives
have stressed the poirLt thnt that date would place them
in a difficult position. S011.1e are accustomed to spend

329th Meeting-20March, 1951 .
Christmas and the New Year with their familiesI might say that we are all in' that position. But this
argument is valueless when considering the importance
of the task before us. During a war do soldiers, officers,
generals ask that hostilities should be suspended so that
they can go and spend Christmas and the New Year
with their families? We are engaged in a war for peace,
and all personal considerations must be set aside when
we have to serve the cause of peace.
164. Unfortunately, the old formula has reappeared:
"If you want peace, prepare for war". We want to
obtain peace by preparing for peace. We have also heard
references made to the armaments race. It is terrible
that millions of dollars should be spent for the work of
death instead of for the work of peace and those who
are really responsible for this ar:maments race must be
sought out.
165. The ,Bolivian representative's argument that we
m.ust go to Europe beC:,:lUse Europe is today a "sick
man" impressed me very strot1gly. We must go to
Europe in order to show that continent that the United
Nations was established not for war but for peace. We
must give Europeans a living proof of the fact that we
are working for peace. This morning, I read that the
Economic and Social Council's session at Santiago de
Chile had made a strong impression on the Chilean
people. In our countries, we r/ead the papers, listen to
speeches (n the radio and even watch the speakers on
television, but the kind of work we are doing is not
fully appreciated..We must bring to the peoples as often
as possible a living illustration of our work, of our
labour for peace and for the whole world.
166. That is why I am whole-heartedly in favour of
holding the next General Assembly in Europe-the
continent which, more than any other part of the world,
needs to know the true nature of the work accomplished
by the United Nations.
167. As to the financial considerations r-aised here,
they can be quite pro?erly settled under the terms of
the resolution now before us.
168. Without entering into a prolonged discussion,
I wanted to place the views of the Haitian delegation
before you. I have just stated the grounds for our
support of the draft resolution, and for our desire that
~he next session of the General Assembly should be
held in Paris.
169. Mr. RAFAEL (Israel) : The delegation of Israel
voted last December against holding the sixth session
of the General Assembly in Europe. The reasons which
prompt us now to maintain our position have been
enumerated and substantiated in this debate by the
representatives of the Netherlands, Sweden and others
who followed them.
170" May I, in this respect, add only one other small
consideration. In addition to the financial burdens and
administrative difficulties which would confront the
United Nations in holding the next session in Europe,
delegati0ns would have to accommodate themselves to
new and untested facilities which might impede their
efficient functioning.
'
171. In voting a~-ainst the draft resolution now before
us, my delegation wishes to assure the representative
of France that we greatly appreciate the gracious
l

723

response given by the French Government to the wishes
of the majority of the Members of the United Nations.
France has been the scene of and host to many
momentous and successful conferences. The only peace
treaties concluded after the last war were negotiated
and signed in Paris. This should serve as an inspiration
to all those who have not abandoned hope that negotia..
tions, conducted now and in the futUre in a spirit of
mutual understanding, can and will pave the road to
lasting peace. The Israeli delegation is confident that
French hospitality will have ample opportunity to
contribute to the success of international conferences,
even if in 1951 France does not' have occasion to
welcome the sixth session of the General Assembly
in Paris.
172. Mr. GROSS (United. States of America) : When
the question of selecting the site for the sixth session
of the General Assembly came up last December, my
delegation abstained from 'voting. We did so because
we felt that as host government, and as the country
having the honour of furnishing the site for the United
Nations Headquarters, abstention on our part seemed
to be the proper course to take.
173. We do not wish to appear to avoid the responsibilities resting on the host government, nor do we
want to seem to take advantage of the obvious economies,.
efficiencies and general convenience which would flow
to us, as wdl as to a number of other countries,by
reason of having the sixth session t~ke place in New
York. I stress those three considerations of economy,
efficiency and convenience.
.
174. It seemed to us only appropriate to consider the
question of economy not merely as a loyal Member of
the Organization but as one of the large contributors
to its budget. We agree with the comments that have
been made by some of the preceding speakers that, in
a sense, the general policy question was put at rest by
the decision which was taken by the General Assembly'
on 14 December, and it is not now my purpose to ,
reopen this matter nor to· question the policies underlying it, particularly because of the factors which led
us to abstain, which I have just outlined.
175. With regard .to the questions which are' now
before the Assembly, I consider that the record io com-pletely clear with regard to several very practical considerations which have been presented. The w..atter of
financial implir.ations of the proposal .contained in the
draft resolution is one which I am sure will cause concern to all of us ana, for a variety of reasons, will be
of particular concern to my gqvernment, as well as
to some of the other governments represented here.
176. We are also very mnchconcerned, as I imagine
all Members are, with the administrative problems
which have been mentioned in very clear terms by
some of the precedit1g speakers. It would be interest.;.
ing to know what, in fact, would be the effect upon
the work of the United Nations organs and specialized
agencies of this new element which has come into the
situation: the rather late date which the Government
of France suggests or advises us is the earliest date
upon which· it can conveniently make the necessary
arrangements. While.I am sure that this is not the
time or the place tQengage in general political polemics,
it does seem to me that there may be varying interests

724

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

in the work of· these specialized agencies. Some of us
participate in their work whole-heartedly; ot..l}ers have
seen· fit not to participate, and therefore perhaps they
might be excused if they do not take into account the
necessities for efficiency and orderly operations which
those constructive age.\cies perform.
177. Therefore it is relevant and indeed rather im··
portant for the Assembly to be advised by the Secre~
tary-General, if he would be kind enough to do so what,
in hisij opinion, would be the effect upon the work of
the other agencies and organs of the United Nations
of the date of opening of the Assembly proposed to us
by the note which we have received from the Gov~m­
ment of France.
178. Finally, there also arise,,; the question of general
convenience and efficiency of operations upon which
the views of the St:~reta.!'""j'-Gent~ral, as the responsible
executive of the Organization, would also be most
welcome to my government and I imagine to other
governments represented here. Therefore, before my
delegation is in a position to act upon this matter, it
would be most obliged if the representative of France
would find it possible to indicate to the Assembly
whether it is within the plan of the Government of
France, as it has surveyed the problem, to provide the
necessary facilities in such form and manner as would
leave the United Nations without the necessity of incurring any extra expense beyond the amount which
appears in the aP1?roved budget for 1951, perhaps with
some small addition that might be decided upon by the
Secretary-General in consultation with the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions-by a small amount I assume is meant an amount
which in fact we would all agree was a small amount.
We would therefore appreciate it if the SecretaryGeneral would be kind enough to give us an appraisal
of the administrative implications, both with regard to
the efficiency of operations and the impact upon the
work of other organs of the United Nations and the
specialized agencies.
179. Mr. LACOSTE (France) (translated. from
French): I should indeed be ungrateful if I did nJt
thank the various delegations which have spoken about
Paris and its hospitality in such a flattering manner
before they announced that they would vote against the
President's proposal that the General Assembly should
taKe a definite decision to hold its next session in Paris.
Many of the speakers who have addressed the Assembly
on this subject have spoken of the capital of France
. in such terms that the members of the French delegation present here could not help feeling a little homesick. I must also express,.my gratitude to some of these
delegations for the charming embarrassment they
. showed in developing their arguments.
180. In the matter of substance, I have but two remarks to make. First,· my government will not, of
course, feel annoyed or hurt in any way if the result
of the vote on the President's draft resolution should
be adverse. Likewise, if the decision should be favour. able, it is prepared to assume the additional obligations-if the truth were told, rather heavy additional
obligations-entailed by its acceding, against its financial interest at least, to the friendly pressure exerted
upon it by the majority of the Assembly during previous debates on the matter. I wouid just remark,

however, that it would undoubtedly have been bette:if the arguments which have been advanced here today
against the proposal-some of which are, indeed, very
pertinent-had been. made earlier. In that way we
should have gained time, which seems to be one of the
basic concerns of most representatives speaking against
the draft resolution today.
181. Last, but not least, I wish to thank those who,
in speaking in favour of the draft resolution, also
praised Paris and in so doing invoked reasons the
lofty character of which touched· me. P am sure that
the representative of Bolivia will realize that I am
referring to him and that he will be recognized by
everyone.
182. There is one last remark I should like to make.
I am faced by a somewhat delicate situation: to decide
how I shall cast my vote. I was tempted to abstain but
I must say that some of the arguments put forward
to discourage the Assembly from voting to choose
Paris-I shall leave it to the Assembly to guess whichhave led me to consider seriously whether I should
not vote in favour of the proposal.
183. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
We are very happy about the conclusions Mr. Lacoste
has reached. I now call upon the Secretary-General.
.~
~
184. The SECRETARY-GEN.l:!.:RAL: I am reluc:··
tant to answer now all the questions which have been
raised because if I am to negotiate agreements with
the French Government I do not wish to commit
myself to too great an extent at this time. A card player
likes to have some hidden cards in his hand.
185. I might just say that the difference between
1948 and 1951 is the following, and I mention this to
explain the necessity of adopting paragraph ~~ of the
draft resolution proposed by the President. In 1948
countries were almost competing with each other to
welcome the General Assembly, and we were so popular
at that time that we had invitations from three governments in Europe-from the Governments of France,
the Netherlands and Belgi Wll. It was much easier then
to negotiate the necessary agreements and we had in
fact reached an understanding with all three governments on the basic principles relating to holding the
Assembly in anyone of those countries. Thus, before
we began to negotiate, detailed agreements were alread1'
in existence with regard to each one of the countries
which might be selected by the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, stipulating that the government concerned should provide us
with a General Assembly hall, office space, buildings,
maintenance service and so on. Everything was ready~
When Paris was chosen by the Advisory Committee, ' .
on my advice and in accordance with my proposal, we
just had to work out the details with the French
Government.
186. This time there is no basic agreement. We have
a letter by which we are welcomed to Paris. Something
remains to be negotiated-agreements concerning the
practical life. of the General Assembly for twelve or
thirteen weeks.
187. Therefore, I think it is necessary that paragraph
3 of the President's draft resolution shou1d be adopted
by the General Assembly, as such a resobtion would

329th' Meeting-20 Mareh 1951

725

means of assessing at the moment what the effect of
state the wishes of the majority and would express the
limits within which I have the right to negotiate with
such a transfer from one section to another will be
the French Government in connexion with all practical
on the section from which the money is withdrawn.
agreements.
I think that this can easily be understood to mean that
it
will have an effect on the budget estimates, although
188. I should like to answer one question which has
it
may not affect the total sum under those budget estibeen put to me by several speakers: whether the Workmates. If that is correct, I suggest that rule 152 of the
ing Capital Fund is involved. If the draft resolution
rules of procedure applies. Rule 152 reads in part:
.
is adopted, including its last paragraph-the proviso
"No resolution in respect of whi<;h expenditures'
that some amounts can be transferred to the section
of the budget covering the holding of the General
are anticipated by the Secretary-General shall be
Assembly session-the Working Capital Fund will not
voted by the General Assembly until the Adminisbe involved. I think, therefore, that it would be a
trative and Budgetary Committee has had an op"
guarantee to have the last paragraph of the draft
portunity of stating the effect of the proposal upon
resolution adopted by the General Assembly.
the budget estimates of the United Nations."
.
189. I agree with what has been said by the represen194. Consequently, I request the President to rule
tative of the United Kingdom and by the Presidentthat the General Assembly cannot vote upon this draft
and there were also some remarks to that effect in the
resolution in its present form.
.
statemeIlt of the representative of France-that the
195. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
amounts mentioned in the last-sentence of the draft
I propose to express my opinion af[~:r the representaresolution are to be small amounts. The budget for
tive of A11stralia has spoken. HoweYe~·. I wish to state
1951 is very tight. Perhaps we may effect saving if
that, in my opinion, the sum provided in paragraph 3'
the situation changes in some of the organs of the
of the draft resolution has already been approved by·
United Nations and, if small amounts will satisfy the
the General Assembly.
French Government's request, I shall recommend to
196. Mr. BRENNAN (Australia): You may recall
the Advisory Committee that it agrees to place those
that I referred to those few words at the end of the
amounts in that section of the budget which covers
draft resolution when I addressed the General Assembly
the session of the General Assembly.
earlier in the meeting. As I said then, it is quite cris190. Mr. KHALIDY (Iraq) : I wish to raise a point
tomary.
for amounts to be transferred from one section
of order. I believe I am right in saying that all financial
of the budget to another, and those words may mean
allocations require a two-thirds majority. In the
no more than a repetition of the normal procedures
opinion of my delegation, the final paragraph of the
of
the General Assembly. I did say, however, that their
draft resolution deals with a financial allocation and
express inclusion indicated to me the possibility that
therefore must obtain a two-thirds majority. In view
the
Secretary-General might anticipate that the amount·
of this fact and in view of the fact that the last paraof
$2,350,400
would in fact prove to be inadequate. I
graph impinges on the preceding paragraphs of the
am
not
quite
sure.
whether I correctly understood the'
resolution, we believe that the last paragraph should
Secretary-General when he spoke to us a moment ago,
be voted on first.
but perhaps he could clarify this because it would have
191. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
a bearing on my impression as to whether this particIn my opinion, the adoption of paragraph 3 does not
ular sentence requires a two-thirds majority or not.
necessarily require a two-thirds majority. It is true
197. When the question was being considered at
that some figures are mentioned in it, but the budget
an
earlier stage by the Fifth Committee and subhas already been adopted by a two-thirds majority of
the General Assembly. It would not be correct to say .sequently by the General Assembly, there was a report
from the Secretary-General [AIC.j5/433] which inthat the decision would involve budgetary expenditures
dicated that he anticipated that the cost of holding
and that the paragraph must accordingly be adopted
the session of the General Assembly in Europe would
ey a two-thirds majority.
be a certain amount, on the assumption that certain
192. The original decision of the General Aesemblyfacilities, which were there enumerated, were provided.
I refer to resolution 497 (V) dated 14 December 1950
by a host government. What I am not entirely dear
-was adopted by a simple majority, but when the
about is this: is the Secretary-General proposing that
budget was submitted to the Assembly-a budget
if, in respect of those items which he had ~stimated
which made provision for the holding of the ~ixth
would be carried on the United Nations budget, the
regular session in Europe-it was adopted by a twoexpenditure is under $2,350,400, plus any savings on
thirds majority.
the budget from other sections, we should be authorized
193. Mr. BOKHARI (Pakistan): The last: part of
to apply those savings to lightening-·if I may say so
the draft resolution reads: et••• plus such ~dditional
without disrespect-the burden on the French Govemamounts "as may be authorized by transfer {'('om other . ment? If that were the. case, I think it would require
sections of the 1951 budget by the Secretary-General
a two-thirds majority" because it is a departure from
what has already been agreed to. If, however, thos
with the prior concurrence of the Advisory Committee
additional words are just to remind the General As
on Administrative and Budgeta1"y Questions'l'. Of
sembly that after all it is not uncommon for sections
course at this stage, beyond a vague assurance that
to be exceeded and that, if the atnount of $2,350,4
these sums will be small, we do not know what the
were exceeded it is always open. to the Secretary..
importance of these sums will be. Secondly, we do not
know, whatever their importance, whether they can
General, with the concurrence of the Advisory Committee, to transfer it to another section, he would
be found within the budget, and thirdly, we have no
c

,
j

i

726

,General AeseU1bly-Filth S. .ion-Plenary Meetings

merely be repeating what is accepted practice. and I do
not think it would require a two-thirds majority. However, I should be grateful if the Secretary-General
would clarify exactly what is involved.
198. Mr. GROSS .(United States of America): On
the same point of orderl I believe that the representative of Australia raises a problem which is directly
rela~ed to th~ question I put in my statement and to
which I regret that I feel no answer has yet been
given. If economies were 1l1ade, the effect on the budget
in th~ normal course of operations would be that those
economies would quite simply be unexpended funds,
and therefore the purpose of the expenditure does seem
to be relevant· to the point of order which has been
raised.
199. In my comments a few moments ago, I very
respectfully suggested that it would be most ·desirable
to have th~e record perfectly clear on two points: first,
whether the Government of France, in its planning
and its concept of the probleml considers that the sixth
session can be held in Paris without eAceeding the
total amount set apart in the present 1951 budget for
the purpos1e of holding the sixth session; and, secondly,
before the vote is taken, among other things to enable
my delegation to abstain rathe:", than vote against the
pending draft resolution, it mig' ~,~ Le advisable to have
an appraisal from the Secretary-General of the effect
which the opening of the session at the late date sug"'~
gested would have upon the work of other United
Nations organs and the specialized agencies. In no
. sense did I put those two questions as rhetorical questions. They seem to my delegation to be relevant and
. quite important to a proper and orderly consideration
of t!lis matter.
200. The SECRETARY-GENERAL: I shall answer
the last question first. If the General Assembly convenes on 6 N o''lember~ .and goes on until the end of
January or the middle of February, some difficu1tie~ will
arise with the schedules of the specialized agencies. I
have always encou\raged the specialized agencies to hold
their general conferences in the spring, so that the
international meeti,nfsmight be spread out over the
year. That results in a saving in the long run. I cannot go into the detalls of that now. However, my
answer to that que~on· is that there would be practical difficulties wlJch would, in the long run, mean the
same thing' as further expenditure by the United Na!ions and the specialized agencies.
201. With regard to the question'raised both by the
representative of Australia and the representative of
the UrJted States, it is too complex a question for me
to answer at this time. We are all facing too many unknown factors. I cannot say more on that subject than
what I have already stated. I think that paragraph 3
is necessary.
2Q2. Mr. BOKHARI (Pakiston): We can proceed
on only one of two assumptions. Either paragraph 3
is necessary or it is not. According to the comments
made by the President, one would conclude that it is
merely a reiteration of a decision which has already
been properly taken on a previous date. In that case,
I would beg leave to suggest that it is unnecessary.
However, a moment ago, the Secretary-General assured ,us that this paragraph is in fact necessary, which

means that it has budgetary implications, and that it
does provide for sums beyond those which the Assembly has voted for this particular purpose.
203. I suggest, therefore, for the .{'resident's consideration, that he should rule in the spirit of the second
'sentence of rule 152 of the rules of procedure under
which th~l Assembly is not empowered to vote upon
the matter unless it has been eY.amined and reported
upon by the Fifth Committee. In the last resort, if this
paragraph is taken out, the complexion of the resolution would be different. But, so long as it stays there,
I beg leave to doubt whether, under the present circumstances, this Assembly has the power to vote on
it. If the Assembly should decide, against the President's advice or in support of his advice, that it can,
certainly there is no doubt that a two-thirds majority
would be required.
204. The PRESIDENT (translated from French)':
I believe that the rules of procedure provide a solution
for such difficulties. The Assembly is divided on the
question of whether a two-thirds majority is necessary
or not for the adoption of paragraph 3 of the draft ,
resolution before us. In order not to put the Assembly
in an embarrassing position, I prefer not to make a
ruling. I shall consult the Assembly as to whether it
thinks the vote on paragraph 3 requires a two-thirds
majority or not. Under the rules of procedure, this
ci~cision will be taken by a simple majority.
205. I call upon the USSR representative on a point
of order.
206. Mr. J. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): It seems to
me that the United States representative is making
what I would call an unfair request by asking the
'French representative to say; on his Government's behalf, whether the General Assembly will be able to
manage on its present, budget. It is very difficult for
any government to answer such a question, which is
essentially a matter for the United Nations General
Assembly itself.
207. I feel, therefore, that there is no need or justification for asking the French Government any such
question. We ourselves can consider and decide here
whether or not any additional funds will be required.
Taking the whole situation into account, it is probable
that they will be required. Should that be so, thtre is
the accepted procedure whereby those responsible for
financial arrangements must apply to the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions.
208. The USSR delegation therefore sees no particular need for paragraph 3 of the draft resolution,
but if this paragraph is indispensable we could support
it on the understanding that it is to be interpreted as
meaning that we are not thereby authorizing the Advisory Commh~ee on Adtninistrative and Budgetary
,Questions to revise the General Assembly's decision
but that its function must be restricted to finding,
together with those . responsible for the budget" ways
and means of covering the additional expenditure; in
any case, the Advisory Committee must not be given
carte blanche in the matter. That Committee prlght
suddenly decide that it cannot sanction additional funds

~

7~7

329th Meeting-20 March .1951
or monies eve~ to the extent of a single dollar, and
that, therefore, the Assembly cannot meet in Paris.
209.' ! feel that we must here agree that the General
,Assembly does not by this resolution confer such
powers on the Advisory Committee. That Committee,
together with the officials of. the Secretariat in charge
of the budget, must ~nd ways and means of covering
any additional expenditure that may be incurred. At
the moment none of us has a clear idea as to what
the' supplementary expenditure will be; it may well
be that there will be none. Should any be necessary,
however, it is essential that the Advisory Committee
should assist in finding the necessary funds to cover
those expenses, within the limits of the' total budget
and without exceeding the funds appropriated for 1951.
210. That is how the matter sfunds. On no account,
however, should this decision be construed as authorizing the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions to revise t4~ General Assembly's
resolution, in the event that anyone should think of
interpreting, it in that sense.
211. It must, therefore, be made perfectly clear that
the General Assembly is instructing the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, together with those dealing with budgetary matters, to see to the proper disburfjcment of the available
fur.Js and to find ways and means of meeting any
additional expenditure should the need arise, but does
not authorize the Advisory Committee to revise the
General Assembly's decision.
212. Mr. KHALIDY (Iraq): In speaking ou the
same point of order regarding financial allocn.tions, I
beg leave to disagree with the President in his, statement that paragraph 3 of the draft resolution could
not be interpreted as a new budgetary allocation. I
draw attention to the President's own words in his
draft resolution, where he says cc• • • plus such additional amounts as may be authorized by transfer from
other ~ections of the 1951 budget by the SecretaryGeneral. . . ." The draft resolution refers to "other
sections". When the last General Assembly approved
the budget, it did so in connexion with, let us say,
sectiOtlS A, B or C. The Assembly did not foresee a
new insertion of section "X" for an additional Paris
meeting. Therefore, the transfer of a certain amount
of money from one section to another, or from one
purpose to a~other purpose, is a new financial question.
This is my first observation.
213. With regard to the second point I wish to raise,
I direct your attention to Article 18 of the Charter
which, in part, states as follows:
.
"Decisions of the General Assembly on important
questions shall be made by a two-thirds majority of
, the Members present and voting. These questions
,
shall include . . . budgetary questions."
'fhe Charter does not even mention budgetary allocations; it refers to budgetary questions.
214. My third point relates to the rules of procedure,
, certain parts' of which have already been referred to
by the representative of Pakistan.
215. In the 'light of all these considerations, it is
impossible to escape the conclusion that paragraph 3
of the draft resolution is, first, a budgeta~ and finan-·
I

cial allocation and, secondly, a new allocation, although
it is made within the framework of the 1951 budget.
The Secretary-Genera~ himself has said that we are
facing too many unknown factors. He is quite right.
VVe do not know what these factors will turn out to
be. The Secretary-General is going to Paris or will
send someone there to negotiate various agreements
which might have all kinds of financial implications.
How can this Assembly put its stamp of approval on
something the implications of which it does not even
know? I-Iow can this Assembly, which professes to
direct the peace of the world, take such a decision at
a time when thousands of people are dying on the
battlefield ? We must think twice before doing so.
216. Let us leave all otl.p~ considerations aside. I
do -not know what the delegations may have in mind
when speaking of going to Paris. Surely there are good
reasons for the Assembly to think of its responsibilities.
217. The representatives of the United States asked
whether the time-table would upset the functioning of
other United Nations organs. The reply was that naturally it would~ However, no complete an.swer was
given. The' ·Economic and Social Council meets in
February; that meeting will p.ave to be cancelled, as
well as, the meeting of the TrUsteeship C.ouncil in
January and of the United Nations Children's Emergency Fund, which also meets about that time, to say
nothing of the specialized agencies.
218. How many representatives here present can tell
us the number of Korean refugees who are dying now
in Korea? What is the number of Arab refugees or
of Greek refugees? Is the world really so much at
~eace that we can so easily trade a few m~1lion dollars ;
lIght-heartedly? And for what purpose? Can someone .
tell us just what advantage i~ to be gained from going
to Paris and trading away a few million dollars? This
Organization has great responsibilities qn its should~rs..
Not even the Government of France wants the United
Nations to meet in Paris at that time. It is quite right.
The French Government is not anxious to put up a
few million dollars (f its own mor!e}r for the doubtful
blessing of having an international organization sitting
in the Palais de Chaillot during a very critical period
of its political life. I ask -those who support the idea
of going to Paris if that would be. an advantage to
the United Nations. By the time of the proposed date,
the French elections will just have been held. The
French Government will be settling down to a period
of cabinet-fon'lling and party politics. Would it 'be
an advantage to France to have us there? Would that
be an advantage to the United Nations? Where is the
advantage?
.
•
219. It is not my intention to speak fo~ a long time,
I am rising now only to speak on a point of order. I did not speak before because I did not want to influence
the majority. The fact is inescapable that starting the
session on 6 November would upset the entire meeting
schedule of the United Nations. It must be ca1~u1ated
that between the end of such a -session and the beginning of the following General Assembly there will be
only a six months' interval, while the period between
the end of last December .and,.
next' General Assembly will be about a year. 1rou cannot leave the
problems of the wotld to be considi~red&tsucb irregular
intervals.
'

the

728

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

220. I now come bnck to my point of order. I must
disagree with the President; the last paragraph of the
draft resolution is ~. new allocation. According to the
rules of procedure and the Charter, it requires a twothirds majority.
221. The PRE~'HDENT (translated from French):
We are.now discus,:';ng the question whether paragraph
3 requires a two-thirds majority for adoption or not.
We have already had a long debate; let us not stray
from the subject.
222. Mr. BOKHARI (Pakistan): The President has
been good enough to express his views on whether or
not rule 84 of the rules of procedure applies. May I
remind him that I h~ve also drawn his attention to
rule 152, on which he has not expressed his vi~ws. I
should like to refresh the memory of the General
Assembly by reading the last sentence:
UN0 resolution in 1 espect of which expenditures
are anticipated by the Secretary-General shall be
voted by the General Assembly until the Administrative and Budgetary Committ~e has had an opportunity of stating the effect of the proposal upon
the bud.1et estimates of the United Nations."
223. The question before us is merely this; n respect
,A the decisions l,:ontained in this draft resolution, does
th~ Secretary-General anticipat(; further expenditures?
He has told us twice that he does. H so, this is one of
those draft resolutions on which the Assembly, in the
way it is at present set up, is not empowered to vote
unless the matkr has been before the Fifth Committee
and the report of that Committee, on the effect of the
proposal, is before the Assembly. I should be very
grateful to the President if he would rule on this
matter in the spirit of rule 152 of tilt'; rules of procedure.
. 224. The PRESIDENT (translated ff'om French):
In my opinion, rllle 152 does not apply. It reads aB
follows:
'"No resQlution invohr;ng exppnditure shali be reclJliii~ended by a committee for approval by the General Assembly unless it is accompanied by an estimate
of ex:penditures prepared by the Secretary-General."
225. But this is not a committee, this is the Assembly
itself. Furthermore, rule 152 was applied when the
Assembly w.:mted to take a decision on the 1uestion
of holding the sixth session in Europe. At that time
the Fifth Con:mittee studied the financial implications
and submitted a report to the Assembly [A/1714].
The Assembly then approved the budget ~s a whole
by a two-thirds majority. Com,equently, I repeat, rule
152 doe':; not npply in this case. It is true that the
Charter and the ruk.... of procedure stipulate that a
draft resolutior. ·'''':~h has budgetary implications must
be approved by two-thirds majority. When the General Assembly h~s doubts whether this rule is applicable
to a draft resolution or not, however. and is divided on
the point, it must take a specific decision. I should
therefore like to have tb~ Ai;seinhly's opinion in order
to get out of this impasse. It would be difficult for me
to make a ruling myself or to listen to the same arguments over 1.nd over again. I shaH therefore not make
a ruling but shall ask for the Ass,~biy's opinion. Are
we agreed on this po;,nt?

226. Mr. BOKHARI (Pakistan): My difficulty lies
in the fact that the President read the first sentence
of rule 152. I refer to the second sentence of tha~
rule. The first sentence undoubtedly does not apply
but the second sentence d')es. The expenditures anticipated in this draft resolution have never been voted
upon by the General Ac;sembly for the purpose for
which they are to be al10cated now.
227. The PRESIDENT (translated fro11t French):
If I should call on all those who want to speak on this
point, we should never finish. The Assembly must take .
a decision. If I am obliged to do so, I shall make a
ruling but it will be ch.ailetxged and possibly overruled.
I would like to avojd this procedure as I want the
Assembly tc decide for itself whether a two-thirds
majority is needed for the adoption of paragraph 3 of
the draft resolution. Will the representatives agree to
refrain from speaking? The representative of Iraq has
asked to speak. He is the sixth on my list.
The President continued in English.
If the members do ne" agree with my last ruling, I
shall have to allow the ",ther representatives to address
the Assembly as well.
228. Mr. COSTA DU RELS (Bolivia) (translated
from French) : I ask for the closure of the debate.
229. The PRESIDENT (transL,ted from French):
Points of order have to be dealt with in an orderly
manner. Although the Bolivian representative wants
to facilitate my task, I am sorry to say that his point
of order is out of order, since we are already discussing
a point of order which has to be settled.
230. Mr. BREN~ A.N (Australia): I am v ~ry sorry
to prolong the discussion hut in fact I wish to make a
suggestion which might posEibly shorten it. It occurs
to me that a small amendme'lt might overcome all the
difficulties we are facing.' If, as I said earlier, the last
part of paragraph 3 in the draft resolution merely
reiterates what is standard practice, it would seem to
me not to require a two-thirds .najority. I was therefore wondedng if we mig~lt delete the words "plus
such additional amount ..." down to the end of the
paragraph, and insert at an earlier stage something
along the following lines:
"Provided that the total estimated cost of holding
the sixth session in Paris, including such meetings
as may be arranged after 1 January 1952, shall not,
subject to the normal rules of finance of the General Assembly, exceed the amount of $2,350,400
provided in thC} 1951 budget."
231. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I do not know the opinion of other representatives,
but I judge from the reaction of those who supported
the draft resolution that this amendment would be
rejected.

232. Mr. COSTA DU RELS (Bolivia) (translated
from Fren~h) : I have listened carefully to the remarks
of the representatives ot P~dcistan and Iraq, but I cannot support them for the simple reason that, whatever
happens, the 1951 bttdget cannot be altered. It has been
adopted by a tWD-thirds majority of the Assembly.
Since the budget has not been amended and expenditures do not exceed its provisions, no new question
has arisen, contrary to the affirmation of the represen-

329th Meeting-20 March 1951
tative <;>f Iraq. This is not a new question, since the
expendIture concerned remains within the 1951 budget.
~onsequent1y, I do not think that a two-thirds majority
IS necessary.
233. Mr. LACOSTE (France) (translated from
French) : I merely wish to reply to Mr. Gross's question. The French Government has not asked for any
specific sum to help it in the preparatory arrangements
for the Assembly, but relies on the Secretary-General
to contribute whatever he can within the available
appropriations, towards the Ass~mbly's session in Europe. If the Secretary-General should find that he does
not have quite enough funds at his disposal and should
wish to consult the Advisory Committee on Administra~ive and Budgetary Questions, that is for him. to
dec.lde. We have asked for nothing more than the
assI.stance, understanding and co-operation of the
Umted Nations in giving us, within the limits deemed
possible by the Secretary-General, such support as will
ensure that our financial obligations are not excessive.
234. Mr. KHALIDY (Iraq): I do not believe it is
proper procedure-again taking the President's leave
since I seem to be disagreeing with him all the tim.e
today-to take the sense of this Assembly when there
is in the rules of procedure a rule which is quite clear.
The representative of Pakistan quoted the second sentence of rule 152. This is quite specific and reads as
follows:
"No resolution in respect of which expenditures
are anticipated by the Secretar¥-General shall be
voted by the General Assembly until the Administrative and Budgetary Committee has had an opportunity of stating the effect of the proposal upon
the budget estimates of the United Nations."
"235. When the rules are very clear there should be
no question either of a ruling or of taking the sense
of the Assembly. The rule is clear. We cannot take a
vote by a simple majority to decide on a question whiCh
is already determined by the rules of procedure.
236. The PRESIDENT: Who is to decide whether
or not the rule is clear? It may seem clear to you but
others may have a different opinion.
"237. Mr. BOKHARI (Pakistan): The President
was going to put to the Assembly the question of
whether rule 84, which provides for a two-thirds majority, does or does not apply. I have submitted that the"
second sentence of rule 152 is applicable. The President has disagreed with me. Therefore, to get the
record straight, that should be the first question to
be put to the Assembly; if that is the President's ruling,
I shall take the liberty of challenging that ruling.
238. The PRESIDENT .(translated from French) :
My ruling is firm and final. The Pakistani representative's last resort is to challenge it. The time is now
6.30 p.m. and the matter has been sufficiently discussed.
I shall put to the Assembly the question of whether or
not the adoption of paragraph 3 of the draft resolution
requires a two-thirds majority. Have I made myself
clear?
239. Mr. BOKHARI (Pakistan): I challenge the
ruling.
240. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) :
I shall repeat my ruling, which is to put to the Assem-

729

bly the question of whether a two-thirds majority is
required for the adoption of paragraph 3 o~ ~he draft
resolution. It is not a decision on my part, It IS rather
a decision to put the question to the Assembly, In
challenging my ruling, does the Pakistani represen. tative mean that I am not to consult the Assembly on
that point?
241. Mr. BOKHARI (Pakistan) : I have not reache~
the stage of contesting that ruling. I contest the. PreSIdent's ruling that rule 152 does not apply. That IS what
the President has ruled and I take the liberty of challenging that ruling.

242. The PRESIDENT: That is not my ruling, I
beg the representative of Pakistan to follow very carefully what I have to say. And I prefer to say it in French
in order to be sure that I do not make mistakes.
(Translated from French) :
My ruling is that I shall put to the General Assembly
the question of whether or not a two-thirds majority
is required for the adoption of paragraph 3 of the draft
resolution. Does the representative of Pakistan still
challenge that ruling?
243.

Mr. BOKHARI (Pakistan) : First of all, I request the President to give a ruling on whether or
not rule 152 applies. I have submitted that rule 152
does apply and that therefore-leaving aside the question of a two-thirds majority-the General Assembly
cannot vote at all on the matter. First, then, the President has to decide whether the General Assembly can
vote. In my view, rule 152 forbids the General Assembly to yote on this question at all. If the President
"rules that rule 152 does not so forbid the General
Ass'embly, I shall take the liberty of challenging his
ruling. Therefore, to set the record straight, that is
the first question on which I shall request a ruling by
the President. If it is decided that the General Assembly cannot yote on this question at all, then the
question of a two-thirds majority does not arise.
244. As to the question of language, I might add that
the President speaks most beautifully in both languages.

245. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) :
The President is not obliged to make a ruling 011 every
question put to him. I have acquired a certain familiarity with the conduct of debates during the six months
of the General Assembly. I repeat my ruling as President and shall not accept any points of order. My decision, as President, is to put to the General Assembly
the question of whether a two-thirds majority is required for the adoption of paragraph 3 of the draft
resolution contained in document Aj1790.
246. Are the members of the General Assembly agreeable that I should put the question in this way? There
are no objections. The General Assembly agrees that
the question should be put thus. I therefore put to the
vote'the question of whether a two-thirds majority is
required for the adoption of paragraph 3 of the draft
resolution.
The result oj the vote was 11 in jav01wJ 23 against
and. 11 abstentions. It was decided by a two-thirds
m;aJonty t~a~ paragraph 3 could be adopted by a.
stmpZe maJonty.

730

'General Assembly-Fifth Seeeion-Plenary Meetings

247. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
! now put to the vote the draft resolution contained. in
document A/1790.
248. Mr. GROSS (United States of Aperica) : Point
of order.
249. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Is it connected with the question of voting?
250. Mr. GROSS (United States of America): No,
but I attempted to raise this point of order before.
The problem as I see it, and which stands on the record
at the present time, is that the Secretary-General in
reply to my question stated that he anticipated that
the holding of the sixth session in Paris, beginning on
6 November, might involve additional expenditures by
reason of the effect upon the work of other organs .of
the .United Nations of the opening of the session on
that date. I understood his answer to be in that sense.
Therefore it seems to me that paragraph 3 of the draft
resolution is not really at issue, at least it is not, at
issue in the context of the question I put to the Secretary-General. This is precisely the point upon which I
previously requested clarification. The new problem
which has been presented by the response of the French
Government, gracious and welcome as it is to many of
. us, does involve the impact upon the plan of the fact
that the sixth session is to start on 6 November.
251. If I am incorrect in my interpretation of the
Secretary-General's reply that commencing the sixth
session on 6 November' may have an effect upon the
budget of the United Nations in other respects, I
should like to have that misapprehension. corrected.
If, on the other hand, I am correct in my interpretation
of the Secretary-General's statement, I should like to
point out, with the greatest respect, that in my opinion
rule 152 applies.
252. The PRESIDENT (translatlJd from French) :
I now put to the vote the draft resolution contained in
document A/1790, which reads as follows:
uThe General Assembly,
UHaving been informed that the French Governtt1~nt, desirous of responding to the wish that has
been expressed to it on several occasions, has decided
to welcome the General Assembly to Paris for tne
duration of its sixth session,
.
"1. Decides, in pursuance of its resolution 497
(V) of 14 December 1950, to hold its sixth regular
session in Paris;
"2. Decides that, notwithstanding u~e provisions
of rule 1 of its rules of procedure, the sixth session
. shall commence not later than 6 November 1951;
"3. Authorizes the Secretary-General to conclude
with the French Government the necessary agreements fm· holding the sixth session of the General
Assembly in Paris, provided that the total estimated
cost of holding the sixth session in Paris (including
such meetings as may be arranged after 1 January
1952) shalt not exceed the amount of $2,350,400
provided in the 1951 budget, plus such additional
amounts as may be authorized by transfe~( j~rom other
sections of the 1951 budget by the Secreta1.y-General
with the prior concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions."
Printed in U.S.A.

253. ,Mr. COSTA DU RELS (Bolivia) (tran$lated
from French) : I request a roll-call vote.
254. Mr. BOKHARI (Pakistan): I request that a
separate vote should be taken on paragraph 3.
255. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
If the representative of Bolivia agrees, the roll-call vote
will be faken only on the draft resolution as a whole.
256. Mr..COSTA DU RELS (Bolivia) (tram~lated
from French) : That is quite agreeable to me.
The preamble and paragraphs 1 and 2 of the operative part of the draft resolution were adopted by 26
'Votes to 14 with 13 abstentions.
257. Mr. LACOSTE (France) (translated from
French) : I would suggest that the voting on paragraph
3 should be in two parts: first, up to and including
the words: H • • • provided in the 1951 budget •.." and
then the remainder of the paragraph.
258. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
In accordance with the French representative's request
I put to the vote the first part of paragraph 3, up to
and including the words: "... provided in the 1951
budget ..•".
The first part of paragraph 3 was adopted by '28
votes to 15, with 10 abstentions.
259. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I now put to the vote the last part of paragruph 3,
beginning with the words: ". . . plus such additional
amounts . . :'.
The last part of paragraph 3 was adopted by 22 votes
to 17, with 12 abstentions.
260. Mr. SARPER (Turkey): My delegation regrets
that it is not in a position to support this draft resolution due to the inclusion of paragraph·3. I shall therefore vote against the dra.ft resolution, but for that
reason only.
261. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) : I
now pu~ to the vote the draft resolution as whole. A
vote by roll-call has been requested.
A vote was taken by roll-call.
Colombia, having been drawn by lot by the President,
was called upon to vote first.
In favour: Colombia, Costa Rica, Czechoslovakia,
Dominican Republic, Ethiopia, France, Haiti, Iran,
Lebanon, Luxembourg, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Poland, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Venezuela, Yugoslavia,
Argentina,. Belgium, Bolivia, .Byelorussian SO'\ iet
Socialist Republic, Chile.
Agaim·t: India, Indonesia, Iraq, Israel, Liberia,
Nether1~nds, New Zealand, Norway, Pakistan, Philippines, Sweden, Turkey, Union of South Africa, United
States of America,' Australia, Canada, China.
Abstaining: Cuba, Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt,
Greece,.Mexico, Saudi Arabia, $yria, Thailand, Yetnen,
Afghamstan, Brazil.
The draft resolution was adopted by 24 'Votes to 17,
with 12 abstentions.
1

a

The meeting rO~'e at 6.45 p.m.
A-40464--May 1951-3,600

...•.
I
·
'
