S/PV.7665

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7665th meeting

Tuesday, 5 April 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Liu Jieyi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Mahmoud
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Okamura
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Taula
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Ciss
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Power
Mr. Bermúdez
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali (S/2016/281)
Letter dated 29 March 2016 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2016/288)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-09544 (E)
*1609544*

S/PV.7665

The situation in Mali

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Mali (S/2016/281)
Letter dated 29 March 2016 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2016/288)
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, invite the representative of Mali to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Abdoulaye Diop, Minister for Foreign Affairs,
International Cooperation and African Integration of
the Republic of Mali.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2016/281, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Mali. I wish also
to draw the attention of Council members to document
S/2016/288, which contains a letter dated 29 March 2016
from the Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for giving me this opportunity to
brief the Council on the situation in Mali, just a short
time after the important visit that the Council carried
out in Mali and in the West African subregion at the
beginning of the month of March. I should like also to
welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs, International
Cooperation and African Integration of the Republic
of Mali, Mr. Abdoulaye Diop. I take this opportunity
to convey to him the satisfaction of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations at the excellent cooperation
2/9

05/04/2016

with the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
As the members of the Security Council noted during
their recent visit to Mali, and as is underscored by the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2016/281), significant
progress has been made in recent weeks in implementing
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.
Carrying on from the consultative meeting of the
Agreement Monitoring Committee, held in Algiers on
18 January under the auspices of the Algerian Foreign
Minister, Mr. Lamamra, the Malian authorities made
official on 19 January the establishment of two new
regions, Taoudenni and Ménaka. On 27 February,
President Ibrahim Boubacar Keita called for a meeting
in Bamako with the Coordination des mouvements de
l’Azawad (CMA) and the Platform coalition of armed
groups, during which the parties to the agreement
announced that they had set an implementation timeline
for March and April, with a focus on the establishment
of interim authorities in the north, improving security
conditions, cantonment and the swift implementation of
the peace agreement provisions relating to preparations
for local elections.
Following lengthy consultations between the
Government and the signatory armed groups, which,
incidentally, were expanded to civil society and
political parties, on the process of the establishment
of the authorities responsible for administration,
municipalities, communal circles and the regions of the
north during the interim period, the National Assembly
adopted on 31 March a law modifying the territorial
municipalities code. This was followed by the adoption
of a decree on the modalities for implementation of the
interim authorities in territorial municipalities.
All of these texts define the functioning of the
transitional administrations, which will be composed
of representatives of the Government, the CMA and
the Platform, and will be limited to municipalities,
communal circles and the regions of Gao, Kidal,
Ménaka, Taoudenni and Timbuktu. This is therefore a
decisive stage that should be welcomed. It is now up to
the parties to implement this law as soon as possible
and to make concrete progress on implementing other
important clauses of the peace agreement, in particular
on defence and security matters.
In order to fully cover all of these institutional
developments, I wish also to commend the appointment
on 23 March, following a consultation process with
16-09544

05/04/2016

The situation in Mali

the signatory groups, of a new Governor of Kidal,
Mr. Ag Ahmadou. His arrival in Kidal will symbolize
a gradual return of the State Administration. I should
like to assure the Council that MINUSMA will spare
no effort to facilitate the full implementation of all of
these measures.
Although significant measures have been taken
in recent weeks, in particular the establishment
of committees on integration and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR); a Government
allocation for the pre-cantonment of signatory
armed groups; the construction of the first three
pre-cantonment sites and the beginning of work this
week on five others, progress in the area of security
forces remains too slow, given the security challenges
in the north of Mali. Almost 10 months after the signing
of the agreement in May, it is urgent to quickly make
the Operational Coordination Mechanism functional
and, above all, to begin the joint patrols, which will
play a crucial role in securing the cantonment and the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process,
in addition to making things visible to the population. I
therefore appeal to the Government and to the signatory
armed groups to create the conditions required to carry
out those steps. As to the armed groups themselves, I
call on them to provide without delay the list of their
representatives to the integration and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration commission, as well
as — no less important — the list of their fighters
who are to be part of the cantonment process. In that
regard as well, MINUSMA will continue to play its
full role in facilitating the process as part of its goodoffices mandate. I therefore urge the Government
and the signatory armed groups to quickly set out an
implementation timetable for all pending matters set
out in the peace agreement.
When I previously briefed the Security Council
(see S/PV.7600), I raised the alarm with regard to the
worrying security situation in Mali. Each day that
passes without the peace agreement being implemented
is a day gained for extremist and terrorist groups, which
are betting on the failure of the peace process in Mali
and are indiscriminately targeting representatives of
the Malian State, signatory groups and the international
forces of Operation Barkhane and MINUSMA. In that
regard, I should like to pay homage to the victims
of the terrible attack by terrorist groups in Kidal on
12 February. Many Guinean peacekeepers died during
that attack on our camp. I also pay tribute to the victims

S/PV.7665

among Mali’s defence and security forces, who paid
a very heavy price in the face of repeated attacks by
Ansar Eddine and the Al-Mourabitoun. We should also
point out, as we say almost every day, that the delay
in implementing the peace agreement and the ongoing
insecurity also have an impact on intercommunal
conflicts, which continue to increase, especially in
the areas of Gao and Mopti, with sometimes alarming
consequences for the civilian population.
Beyond the commitment and political will of
the Government and the signatories to speed up the
implementation of the agreement — which I commend
and about which I have no doubt whatever — the
challenge today has to do with trust among the parties,
which we must further strengthen. As such, I regret that
the Kidal forum, which was initially to bring together
all the signatories to the agreement and which I had the
honour to attend, was ultimately transformed into an
internal meeting of the Coordination des mouvements
de l’Azawad held from 28 to 30 March. However, given
the conclusions of the meeting, there is hope that it paved
the way for a strengthening of cohesion among the armed
groups, as well as for their renewed commitment to the
timely and full implementation of the peace agreement.
The effective putting in place of interim authorities,
which signals the return of State services in the north of
the country, the launch, as I mentioned, of joint patrols
and the cantonment and disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration processes should constitute a key step
in the gradual restoration of basic services, including
health and education, and enable the most vulnerable
populations to benefit from the peace dividend they
await so fervently. We encourage the Government of
Mali quickly to launch the preparatory process for the
national reconciliation conference provided for in the
peace agreement, which should contribute to a more
inclusive peace process with regard to the concerns of
other forces of the Malian nation.
The combination of increased insecurity in northern
Mali, but also in the central region of Mopti, and the
increase in terrorism in the subregion, as seen in the
attacks in Ouagadougou at the end of last year and
those in Grand Bassam, in Côte d’Ivoire, in mid-March
should prompt us to pay greater attention to the state of
the security threat in the entire West African subregion.
In that regard, we should welcome the increased efforts
by the Malian armed forces, in cooperation with the
armies of neighbouring countries — including Burkina
Faso, Mauritania and the Niger — as part of the regional

16-095443/9

S/PV.7665

The situation in Mali

initiative by the group of five Sahelian countries and
with the support of the French Operation Barkhane to
conduct operations to reduce the influence of terrorist
groups in the subregion. For its part, MINUSMA is
intensely continuing its efforts for the upgrading of its
contingents to increase their mobility and to further
adapt their available capacities for intelligence and
protection to respond to changing the threat to our
facilities and all our personnel.
Faced with that threat, at a time when United
Nations peacekeeping in West Africa is changing, the
prevalence of terrorist groups and organized crime are
latent threats to the stability of the subregion. In that
regard, we are prepared to continue to explore with
other actors, including the African Union, ways and
means to strengthen cooperation among the countries
of the subregion in terms of intelligence and border
control and security, with a view to contribute to
containing the expansion of the terrorist threat. I note
that the efforts of the subregion have already allowed
for the dismantling of some terrorist cells, as well as
for the arrest by the Malian authorities of the leader
of Ansar Eddine for the southern region, Souleymane
Keita, as well as the bombing suspects in the attack at
Grand Bassam. All of that, of couse, has been part of
separate operations.
We must keep in mind that the non-permissive
environment in which MINUSMA is deployed has its
roots in deeper issues related to political and security
governance in the West African subregion. That is
why I would like to commend China’s initiative,
Mr. President, in organizing an open debate on April
25 on the issue of peacebuilding in West Africa, which
I am certain will enable us to further consider together
ways and means to respond in a more integrated and
coordinated manner to all those new threats to peace
and security in the subregion.
Finally, I take this opportunity to officially
inform the Security Council that the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations has initiated a strategic
review of MINUSMA. Over the next two months, we
will focus on further reflections in our consultations
with the Government of Mali and other partners. We
will share the recommendations of the strategic review
in the next report of the Secretary-General, whose
publication is expected in late May, a month before the
Mission’s mandate comes to an end.
4/9

05/04/2016

The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Ladsous for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Minister Diop.
Mr. Diop (Mali) (spoke in French): Allow me, first
of all, to express to you, Mr. President, the satisfaction
of the delegation of Mali at seeing your country, the
People’s Republic of China, preside over the Security
Council this month. China is a friend of Mali and a
long-time partner, to which we wish every success and
pledge our full cooperation during its presidency. At
the same time, I would like to congratulate Angola,
also a friend of Mali, for its outstanding leadership
of the Council during the previous month, one of the
highlights of which was the field visit that took place
from 4 to 9 March by the 15 members of the Council,
who went to Mali, Guinea-Bissau and Senegal. I
welcome the positive results of the visit, and I reiterate
the congratulations of my delegation to all Member
States for the quality of the exchanges with all of the
stakeholders in the peace process. Allow me also to
pay tribute to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
laudable ongoing efforts on behalf of international
peace and security, in particular when it comes to
resolving the crisis in Mali. I also extend my gratitude
to his Special Representative and Head of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), our brother and friend
Mahamat Saleh Annadif, with whom the Government
of Mali has a very good relationship of cooperation. We
look forward to that continuing in the future.
I am also pleased to commend the efforts of Algeria,
which has been leading the international mediation and
is Chair of the Agreement Monitoring Committee, as
well as the efforts of the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States, the European
Union, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
France, Burkina Faso, Mauritania, the Niger, Nigeria,
Chad and the United States of America. I also thank
all countries that contribute troops to MINUSMA and
would like to remember the Blue Helmets who have
fallen in the line of duty and all victims of the crisis
in Mali.
The delegation of Mali takes note of the report
(S/2016/281) of the Secretary-General under
consideration and would like to thank its friend,
Mr. Hervé Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, for his briefing and, above
all, for his ongoing support for the peace efforts in Mali.
16-09544

05/04/2016

The situation in Mali

With regard to the peace process in Mali, the
Security Council, as I already mentioned, carried out
useful work during its field visit, as the visit allowed
members to see at first-hand the progress achieved
and the difficulties that remain, but also to listen and
engage in an exchange with all stakeholders about
their concerns and expectations. Those frank and
direct interactions strengthened the conviction of
the Government of Mali that it is up to the Malians
themselves to take their destiny into their own hands and
to commit resolutely to implementing the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali with the support of
the international community.
The assurances given by the President of the
Republic, His Excellency Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar Keita,
on 6 March, at the fruitful meeting he had with members
of the Security Council echoed that spirit. Members
will recall that on that occasion President Keita left
no shadow of a doubt with regard to the willingness
and determination of the Government of Mali to
fully play its role to speed up the implementation of
the peace agreement in an environment rid of the
spectre of terrorism, violent extremism and all
forms of transnational organized crime. Similarly,
during the meeting between the Government of Mali
and the Security Council delegation, on 5 March,
the Ministers outlined the various measures taken
by their Government within the framework of the
implementation of the Agreement.
Members therefore have all the information about
the evolution of the peace process in my country.
Nonetheless, the current meeting on the review of the
Secretary-General’s report on the situation in Mali
gives my delegation an opportunity to return to certain
observations made by the Council during the meeting
on the conclusions of that visit to the field, which
are referred to in the current report under review. I
am sure that all members noted some things during
their visit. First, I am sure they noted the significant
advances that have been made in the implementation of
agreement, which are largely thanks to the leadership
and personal efforts of the President of Mali. Secondly,
I am sure that members also noted the resurgence in
terrorist attacks, which are today the main obstacle to
the implementation of the peace agreement. Thirdly,
members also underscored the need to take into account
the regional and transregional nature of the challenges
that are confronting Mali. Finally, they recognized the
incompatibility of MINUSMA’s current mandate with

S/PV.7665

its operating environment, as well as the Mission’s
operational shortcomings, in particular in terms of
training and equipment. With regard to the last point,
I would like to briefly recall that the Government
of Mali, during its discussions with the Security
Council delegation, outlined a series of actions whose
undertaking would improve the position of MINUSMA
by making it more proactive.
The recommendations of the Government of Mali
were aimed at ensuring that MINUSMA operated
in a more effective and efficient way and revolved
around bringing together the Mission itself and the
Malian defence and security forces, as well as regional
initiatives, which will support all those efforts. The
Malian Government’s recommendations were also
the subject of extensive discussions as part of the
United Nations inter-agency strategic review mission
for Mali, led by the Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. El-Ghassim Wane. We
would like to take this opportunity to congratulate
him on his appointment to that important post. The
review of the quarterly report, in June 2016, to which
the conclusions of this review will be appended and
which has been launched for the purpose of renewing
MINUSMA’s mandate, will offer us an opportunity to
go into greater depth about the concerns that we have
about MINUSMA.
At this juncture, I would like to recall our common
view that MINUSMA, despite being almost entirely up
to strength in terms of troops and police, is nonetheless
struggling to fully assume its role of stabilizing the
country and supporting the Government of Mali for
the full implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation. Beyond the attacks targeting the civilian
population and the Malian defence and security forces,
the Mission itself is now the target of terrorist groups.
The heavy toll of more than 80 Blue Helmets killed
in just three years of the existence of the MINUSMA
makes it, unfortunately, the deadliest peacekeeping
operation currently. That explains why the Government
of Mali believes a lot is riding on the renewal of the
mandate of MINUSMA and why the mandate must
take into account the current security context, which
is marked by a resurgence and intensification of the
terrorist threat.
The Government of Mali, commensurate with its
responsibilities arising from the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation, has undertaken a series of actions
focused on the following priority areas. First, in terms

16-095445/9

S/PV.7665

The situation in Mali

of political and institutional reforms, and this is not an
exhaustive list but I would like to underscore certain
actions — and Mr. Ladsous touched on some of these
in his own briefing — namely, the appointment, in
January, of governors for the newly created regions of
Taoudenni and Ménaka. I would also point out that, in
March, a new governor was appointed for Kidal, which
had been without state Government for approximately
three years. I would like to make it clear that all three
governors are from communities in northern Mali.
I also draw the Council’s attention to the adoption
by the Council of Ministers, on 24 February, of the
draft bill and decree relating to the interim authorities
called upon to manage the territorial collectivities,
especially in the northern regions of Mali. I am pleased
to announce that the National Assembly of Mali has
just adopted, at its meeting on 31 March, the texts that
were submitted by the Government. They are simply
awaiting their enactment by the President and, above
all, the appointment of the leadership of those interim
authorities.
Allow me also to inform the Council that we have
begun the constitutional review process by drawing up
draft decrees and a timetable, especially to incorporate
the provisions pertaining to the implementation of a
second chamber, which is one of the key elements of
the peace agreement.
There is also the issue of the holding of local and
regional elections, which were postponed to foster a
more inclusive approach. We hope the elections can
be held as soon as possible, in particular following the
establishment of the interim authorities and once the
security situation on the ground has improved. We have
also established and installed regional development
agencies in all regions of Mali and in the district of
Bamako.
Turning to the issue of defence and security, I draw
members’ attention to the effective establishment of
bodies responsible for disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration, as well as security sector reform
initiatives. I also underscore the efforts undertaken
by the Government of Mali to provide support for
combatants from the signatory movements as a precursor
to and during the effective start of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process. I also refer
to the identification of 24 sites to be prepared by
MINUSMA and the start of construction on three
other sites.
6/9

05/04/2016

With regard to justice, national reconciliation and
humanitarian efforts, I would like to note that basic
social services have been relaunched in the north,
where security conditions allow, with the cooperation
of the Platform coalition of armed groups and the
Coordination des mouvements de l’Azawad. In addition,
the Truth, Justice and Reconciliation Commission has
begun its work. In order to improve its inclusivity and
increase the representation of the signatory groups, the
Government of Mali has adopted a decree increasing
the number of commissioners from 15 to 25.
I should also note that steps have been taken to
further strengthen trust among the parties, including
through the release of prisoners. Under-SecretaryGeneral Ladsous also touched on the very important
issue of trust, and I think that significant steps have
been taken to genuinely improve the atmosphere of
calm understanding among the parties in Mali, all of
which are now in a position to speak with one voice
and continue with their commitment to achieving
the comprehensive and complete implementation
of the peace agreement. Another crucial issue that
Mr. Ladsous mentioned is the organization of a national
reconciliation conference by the end of the year so as to
enable us to implement the provisions of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation as soon as possible.
With regard to the establishment of an international
commission of inquiry, I should emphasize that as long
ago as July 2014 the Government of Mali sent a letter
to the Secretary-General, who informed the Human
Rights Council. We are still awaiting a response from
the Secretary-General on the issue.
With regard to the bodies monitoring the agreement,
I would also like to note that the Agreement Monitoring
Committee has held regular meetings whose inclusivity
has greatly improved in the wake of the integration into
subcommittees of all the agreement’s signatory groups,
testified to at the Committee’s seventh meeting on
9 and 10 March, which through the collaborative efforts
of the Malian parties was able to settle the issue of its
entities’ representativeness under articles 10 and 24 of
its internal rules and to adopt a budget. I should also
highlight the establishment of a national mechanism
for coordinating and monitoring the implementation of
the Peace Agreement through the creation of a national
coordination committee for its implementation, which
is chaired by the Prime Minister and is also open to the
signatory groups and civil society.
16-09544

05/04/2016

The situation in Mali

There are various aspects that I should note in the
area of social, cultural and economic development,
the first of which are the continuing efforts to carry
out development activities on the ground, where
security conditions permit, including through
sectoral programmes and projects. With regard
to the joint evaluation mission to the north, the
Government has already passed on its comments to the
Monitoring Committee.
We should also welcome the setting up within the
Ministry of Economy and Finance of a team responsible
for defining the financial architecture of the sustainable
development fund for Mali’s northern regions, with initial
funding of almost CFAF300 billion, about €457 million,
for the period from 2016 to 2018, representing the
Government of Mali’s peace contribution. I should
emphasize the substantial increase in the State budget
allocations for the implementation of the peace
agreement in 2016, in the amount of €25 million, about
€16.4 billion more than the previous year. In addition,
on 24 March we held sectoral consultations in Bamako
on transport infrastructure in the north. All the projects
presented that were subjected to feasibility studies have
received funding pledges, and we are making progress
on that front. At this point I must urge our technical
and financial partners to honour the commitments they
made at the international conference for Mali’s recovery
and development held in Paris in October 2015.
Unfortunately, the optimism generated by
the signing of the agreement and the start of its
implementation is now somewhat tempered owing to
some persistent threats and challenges, at the centre of
which are terrorism, drug trafficking and every form
of organized crime in the Sahelo-Saharan region. That
was the unanimous conclusion reached during the
Security Council’s visit to Mali and the MINUSMA
strategic assessment. As Mr. Ladsous emphasized just
now, this is because the criminal activities of both the
terrorist groups and the drug traffickers are aimed
indiscriminately at peaceful civilians, the Malian
defence and security forces and the international forces
of MINUSMA and France’s Operation Barkhane. The
threats now extend to several countries in West Africa
and the Sahel, as was unfortunately demonstrated by
the recent terrorist attacks in January in Ouagadougou,
Burkina Faso, and in March in Grand Bassam, Côte
d’Ivoire. I would like to reiterate to those nations
and bereaved families the heartfelt condolences and
solidarity of the people and the Government of Mali.

S/PV.7665

In combating terrorism, beyond our national
efforts, we should place special emphasis on regional
and international cooperation. Mali’s defence and
security forces are on the front lines of that fight.
Sadly, they are still paying a heavy price, and we should
commend their sacrifices and bravery. However, the
complexity of the environment and the asymmetrical
nature of the war mean that Mali’s defence and security
forces cannot cope with this threat, which concerns all
of us, alone. They need support from their partners in
logistics, intelligence and active cooperation aimed at
strengthening their operational capacity for intervention
on the ground. I should like to reiterate our appreciation
to France for the Barkhane force’s outstanding work in
the fight against terrorism and for all the sacrifices it
has made.
With regard to the mandatory, in fact essential,
coordination of efforts to curb the recurring threats in
West Africa and the Sahel, I would like to recall the
initiatives of the Nouakchott Process and the Sahel
Group of Five (G-5 Sahel), and to encourage the Security
Council to support the operationalization of the G-5
Sahel intervention force, whose operating modalities
were adopted on 4 March in N’Djamena at a meeting
of the Group’s Ministers of Defence. We also believe
it is crucial to ensure that the international community
can provide us with the necessary support for the
establishment of an African Union intervention force
for combating terrorism. In that regard, I welcome the
recent African Union-United Nations joint assessment
mission in Mali, whose conclusions, we hope, give new
momentum to Africa’s peace and security architecture,
including the African Standby Force.
As the Security Council is aware, the region’s
general instability is related in large part to the
continued deterioration of the political and security
situation in Libya, which has direct consequences for
the countries of the Sahel, including Mali. In that regard,
we urge that the efforts to reach a political solution to
the Libyan crisis continue. It is for that reason, which
we share with the other States of the region, that my
delegation is opposed to any kind of unilateral military
intervention in our brother country of Libya. In that
connection, I would like to remind the Council that the
multidimensional crisis that rocked my country in 2012
followed the earlier military intervention in Libya.
With regard to the allegations of human rights
violations mentioned in paragraph 31 of the SecretaryGeneral’s report, I would like to point out that

16-095447/9

S/PV.7665

The situation in Mali

unfortunately the numbers cited do not enable us to
distinguish the cases that may specifically be laid at the
door of Mali’s defence and security forces. With regard
to the 265 detainees referred to in paragraph 32 of the
report, checks carried out by our relevant services
make it clear that the number bears no resemblance to
the one available at the Ministry of Justice, which leads
me again to invite MINUSMA to bring allegations
of human rights violations to the Malian authorities
within a reasonable time frame, in order to enable the
Government of Mali to respond in a timely fashion.
Similarly, the observation in paragraph 36 of the
report that
“the Malian judicial authorities did not initiate
criminal proceedings in relation to those human
rights violations and abuses”
should, from our point of view, be tempered by the
observation in paragraph 33 that
“[m]ajor impediments to criminal proceedings
included the lack of logistical resources for
magistrates, insecurity preventing the judicial
authorities from effectively carrying out
investigations, especially in the north”.
Faced with such obstacles, and as recommended by
the Secretary-General, it is vital that the stabilization
process be sped up through redeployment of the
defence and security forces in northern Mali and that
an environment more conducive to the implementation
of the agreement be fostered.
Whatever the case, I would like to refer to
paragraph 36 of the report and recall the nature of war
crimes and crimes against humanity and the fact that
there can be no amnesty for the perpetrators of those
crimes, particularly crimes of sexual and other types
of violence. Mali therefore reiterates its willingness
to cooperate closely with all actors involved in the
protection and defence of human rights. In the outline
that I have just presented on the current situation, and
in the light of the forthcoming renewal of MINUSMA’s
mandate, the Government of Mali would like to call
to attention of the Security Council the need to make
certain adjustments, first, with respect to adapting
MINUSMA’s mandate to the new security environment
and, next, to speeding up the implementation process
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.
Before concluding, I would like to strongly
emphasize, as was done by the Secretary-General in his
8/9

05/04/2016

report, the need to speed up the implementation of the
agreement as a whole, but in particular its provisions
pertaining to political issues and security issues, which
colour the proper execution of all other provisions of
the agreement. Against that backdrop, and in the light
of all that I have just said, it seems very clear that the
Government of Mali has given strong impetus and
taken significant steps towards the full implementation
of the agreement. Such actions were publicly welcomed
by the signatory movements to the agreement. The
adoption, last week, of a law on interim authorities by
the National Assembly is further eloquent proof.
The Government of Mali also believes that
important and rapid progress is needed from the
signatory movements on security issues, particularly by
stepping up the process of cantonment, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, and the roll-out of
joint patrols, and, as Under-Secretary-General Ladsous
mentioned, by communicating the lists as soon as
possible so that we can move forward in an area as
sensitive as this one, that is to say, in a volatile security
environment. Such measures will allow us to better
pursue the recommendation of the Secretary-General
directed to the Government that we strengthen the
presence of the defence and security forces in the north
so that, more broadly speaking, State authority may be
extended throughout the national territory, in order for
there to be better protection for persons and property.
Such actions will also allow for the restoration of
basic social services and create a more favourable
environment for the peace process and for the activities
of MINUSMA.
To that end, and in conclusion, I would like to
reiterate the Government of Mali’s determination
to fully shoulder its responsibilities, and invite the
Security Council to fully shoulder, in turn, its own
responsibilities, namely, to get the parties, especially
those that have not yet done so, to meet their
commitments, and, most important, to step up the pace
of change to allow us to stabilize Mali once and for all
and strengthen peace and stability in the region, in the
Sahel and hopefully well beyond.
I thank you, Mr. President, for the support that
my country continues to enjoy from the Council,
from the United Nations more generally and from the
international community as a whole.
16-09544

05/04/2016

The situation in Mali

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue

S/PV.7665

our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.45 a.m.

16-095449/9
