Resolution 241 (1967)

Resolution 241 (1967)

of IS November 1967

du 15 novernbre 1967

Le Conseil de securite,

The Security Council,
Concerned by the serious situation created in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo following the armed
attacks committed against that country by foreign
forces of mercenaries,

Preoccupe par la grave situation creee dans la Republique democratique du Congo la suite des attaques
armees commises contre ce pays par des forces etrangeres de mercenaires,

Concerned that Portugal allowed those mercenaries
to use the territory of Angola under its administration
as a base for their armed attacks against the Democratic Republic of the Congo,

Preoccupe par le fait que le Portugal a permis a
ces mercenaires d'utiliser le territoire de l' Angola sous
son .administration comme base de leurs attaques armees
contre la Republique democratique du Congo,

Taking into consideration the support and assistance
that those mercenaries have continued to receive from
some foreign sources with regard to recruitment and
training, as well as transport and supply of arms,

Prenant en consideration le soutien et I'appui que
ces mercenaires ont continue a trouver aupres de
certaines sources etrangeres en ce qui concerne tant le
recrutement et l'entrainement que le transport et l'approvisionnement en armes,

Concerned at the threat which the organization of
such forces poses to the territorial integrity and independence of States,

Preocrnpe par la menace que !'organisation de telles
forces constitue pour l'integrite territoriale et l'independance des Etats,

Reaffirming its resolutions 226 (1966) of 14 October
1966 and 239 (1967) of 10 July 1967,

Reaffirmant ses resolutions 226 (1966) du 14 octobre 1966 et 239 ( 1967) du 10 juillet 1967,

1. Condemns any act of .interference in the internal
affairs of the Democratic Republic of the Congo;

1. Condamne tout acte d'ingerence dans les affaires
interieures de la Republique democratique du Congq;

2. Condemns, -in particular, the failure of Portugal,
in violation of the above-mentioned Security Council
resolutions, to prevent the mercenaries from using the
territory of Angola under its administration as a base
of operations fo::- armed attacks against the Democratic
Republic of the Congo ;

2. Condamne en particulier la defaillance du Portugal pour n'avoir pas, en violation des resolutions
precitees du Conseil de securite, empeche les mercenaires d'utiliser le territoire de !'Angola sous son administration comme base operationnelle d'attaques
armees contre la Republique democratique du Congo;

3. Calls upon Portugal to put an end immediately,
in conformity with the above-mentioned resolutions of
the Security Council, to the provision to the mercenaries of any assistance whatsoever;

3. Invite instamment le Portugal a mcttre immediatement. fin conformement aux resolutions precitees
du Conseil de securite a I'octroi aux mercenaires de
quelque assistance que ce soit ;

4. Calls upon all countries receiving mercenaries
who have participated in the armed attacks against
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to take appropriate measures to prevent them from renewing their
activities against any State;

4. Invite instamment tous les pays recevant Ies
mercenaires qui ont participe aux attaques armees contre la Republique democratique du Congo a prendre
Jes mesures appropriees afin de les empecher de renouveler leurs activites contre quelque Etat que ce
soit;

5. Calls upon all Member States to co-operate with
the Security Council in the implementation of this
resolution ;

5. Invite instamment tous les Etats membres a
cooperer avec le Conseil de securite pour assurer le
respect de la presente resolution;

6. Decides that the Security Council should remain
seized of the question and requests the SecretaryGeneral to follow the implementation of the present
resolution.

6. Decide que le Conseil de securite reste saisi de
la question et prie le Secretaire general de suivre
!'application de la presente resolution.

Adopted at the 1378th meeting.

Adoptee d la 13786 seance.

a

14
