United Nations

S/PV.6561

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6561st meeting
Tuesday, 21 June 2011, 12 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Messone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Gabon)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Vukašinović
Mr. Gorgulho
Mr. Yang Tao
Mr. Alzate
Mr. Bonne
Mr. Berger
Mr. Vinay Kumar
Mr. Assaf
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Mashabane
Mr. Quarrey
Mr. Dunn

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa
Briefing by the United Nations Office to the African Union (UNOAU)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-38140 (E)

*1138140*

S/PV.6561

and the administrative function of the Joint Support
and Coordination Mechanism of the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) — reporting separately to three different
departments at Headquarters and supported remotely
by UNAMID in Darfur — to a new lean, self-sufficient
operation based in Addis Ababa. Also, by 31 July, we
will have recruited 61 staff members out of a total of
63 positions.

The meeting was called to order at 12 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
Briefing by the United Nations Office to the
African Union (UNOAU)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Zachary Muburi-Muita, Head of
the United Nations Office to the African Union, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Muburi-Muita.
Mr. Muburi-Muita: It is a great pleasure for me
to appear before the Security Council today to make
my maiden presentation on the work of the newly
established United Nations Office to the African Union
(UNOAU). While I have spent several years working
with the United Nations as a Permanent
Representative, this is my first briefing to the Council
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General, a
role I assumed some nine months ago.
As the Council is well aware, the establishment
of the Office is part of our collective efforts, over a
number of years, to, inter alia, enhance the United
Nations-African Union strategic partnership on peace
and security issues, provide coordinated and coherent
United Nations support to the African Union (AU) on
both short-term operational and planning matters and
long-term capacity-building, and make the United
Nations representation to the African Union on these
matters more coherent, cost-effective and efficient. I
am pleased to report today that I think we are making
progress on all three fronts.
Let me begin by briefly updating the Council on
our activities designed to operationalize the Office and
streamline the United Nations presence. I am very
happy to say that, with the active engagement of the
Department of Field Support, we are nearing
completion of our transition from three former separate
offices — the United Nations Liaison Office to the
African Union, the African Union Peace Support Team
and the United Nations planning team for Somalia —

2

In support areas where we could see efficiency
gains, and to fill gaps in our own support structure, we
have signed an memorandum of understanding with the
United Nations Economic Commission for Africa
(ECA) in Addis Ababa, allowing us to tap into their
existing common services and provide UNOAU with
adequate office space in the new premises being
constructed at the ECA compound. We expect to be
collocated there in the first quarter of 2013. As with
any new office, we have been busy with these
administrative issues — logistic, personnel and
support — while at the same time undertaking action to
deliver on the main mandate of UNOAU.
The consolidation of the Office and the elevation
of the Head of Office to a Special Representative of the
Secretary-General at the level of Assistant SecretaryGeneral have certainly raised the United Nations
profile at the AU. To help inform United Nations
decision-making, we are producing real-time reporting
and political analysis on peace and security issues
based on daily consultations with senior AU officials
on political developments in Africa.
Upon my arrival, our Office immediately
organized a substantive retreat with our African Union
Commission counterparts, which resulted in a fruitful
exchange of views on how best to work together,
especially on the implementation of the UNOAU
mandate. We have intensified consultations with the
AU at the strategic level to respond to common
challenges on long-standing peace efforts in Africa —
for example, on Côte d’Ivoire, the Sudan, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Somalia — and
on recent developments in Tunisia, Egypt and Libya.
At the strategic level, we are focused on
enhancing coordination, strengthening common
understanding and maximizing comparative advantages
on United Nations-African Union joint peace efforts in
Africa. Our experience with the cooperation between
the two organizations shows that we do better in

11-38140

S/PV.6561

addressing crises in the continent when we stand
together and speak in one voice.
Nobody knows better than the Security Council
that the mediation of conflicts is a challenging
business, particularly when we are faced with a
multiplicity of actors, initiatives and organizations all
playing varying roles. That is why one of UNOAU’s
roles is to strengthen our coordination with AU
institutions and enhance their capacity to deliver peace
in Africa. My regular participation at meetings of the
African Union Peace and Security Council on country
specific situations, such as Côte d’Ivoire, Somalia and
the Sudan, and on the most recent developments in
North Africa, has proved to be instrumental in
coordinating action. In addition, building upon the
gains from two United Nations-Africa Union
workshops on collective peace efforts in Somalia,
Guinea-Bissau and Kenya, the United Nations
Secretariat and the Africa Union Commission have
agreed on United Nations-Africa Union mediation
partnership guidelines. The guidelines will be endorsed
and launched by the third meeting of the United
Nations-African Union Joint Task Force on Peace and
Security, to be held in New York in September on the
margins of the sixty-sixth session of the General
Assembly.
To help address these and other challenges, we
have also embarked on revitalizing the peace and
security cluster as part of the regional coordination
mechanism framework. We are also working to
improve the activities of its three sub-clusters, namely,
on the Peace and Security Architecture of the African
Union; post-conflict reconstruction and development;
and human rights, justice and reconciliation. As Chair
of the cluster, I have launched a committee to work
with the secretariat of the Regional Coordination
Mechanism on an overall strategic plan into which our
cluster activities will be integrated as part of efforts to
implement the Ten-Year Capacity-Building Programme
for the African Union.
As we recruit more staff for UNOAU, we are
enhancing the effectiveness of our capacity-building
support to the African Union, helping it to design and
implement new strategies to develop its institutional
capacity for peacekeeping management, especially the
African Union Peace Support Operations Division’s
structural needs, in the context of an ongoing and longterm overall restructuring of the AU.

11-38140

At the working level, while there are many
imperatives for short-term support, which must be
responded to cooperatively, we have made it a priority
that all UNOAU planners make tangible achievements
in helping the AU to assess its capacity needs in their
areas of expertise; in designing appropriate strategies
aligned with AU priorities and adapted to a realistic
assessment of absorptive capacity to fill those needs;
and in implementing those strategies.
Far too often, capacity-building efforts get
bogged down in helping counterparts meet urgent dayto-day needs, and achieve little in terms of
strengthened capacity. We want to avoid such a pattern
so that we can achieve our common goal of helping the
African Union Commission to be fully capable of
planning and executing its own peace support missions.
Realistically, however, we must accept that
institutional capacity-development is a long-term goal.
As members of the Security Council know,
UNOAU is not alone in supporting the AU’s
institutional development. That is why coordination is
an important part of our mandate. The Ten-Year
Capacity-Building Programme brings together the
entire United Nations family to support that objective.
In February, the Secretary-General submitted a report
to the Council and to the General Assembly that
recommended, among other things, more clearly
defined work programmes for the Ten-Year CapacityBuilding Programme and its clusters, aligned with the
programming and planning cycles of the AU
Commission. We are working with the Commission
and partners to that effect.
Coordination with partners outside the United
Nations is also essential. In addition to the established
African Union Partners’ Group, which meets regularly
at different levels, we have agreed to establish
coordination among experts of the Group supporting
the African Union in their respective areas of specialty.
In most cases, UNOAU will play a leading role in such
multi-partner coordination. We are also engaging
organizations that can bring other resources to the
table. For example, the World Bank has expressed keen
interest in partnering with us on support to the AU in
the area of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration.
We have also made gains in our support and
advisory roles with regard to AU planning; let me
mention a few. As part of the African Peace and

3

S/PV.6561

Security Architecture, an AU continental-level peace
support operation exercise code named AMANI
AFRICA was conducted with UNOAU support, in
close coordination with the European Union and
NATO, to assess the operational readiness of the
African Standby Force (ASF). This brought to a close
the ASF Road Map II. UNOAU is currently assisting
with the development of the African Standby Force
Road Map III, which should culminate in the
operationalization of the Force by 2015.
As part of its ongoing support to the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), UNOAU
assisted the African Union Commission in generating
the troops for AMISOM to meet its original mandated
strength of 8,100 and in conducting a number of
predeployment visits to ensure the smooth insertion of
the troops. We are now assisting the AU in achieving
the newly approved strength of 12,000 troops. UNOAU
also helped to review, update and develop most of the
strategic and operational documents for AMISOM, in
keeping with United Nations standards. The Office has
also assisted in recruiting AMISOM civilian staff. We
have been helping to strengthen the AU Peace Support
Operations Division. AMISOM public information
offices have helped to update the AMISOM
communications strategy and its strategy on the
protection of civilians. It has also translated and
published the AMISOM rules of engagement and code
of conduct in a pocket-sized format.
We have facilitated more than a dozen training
activities and workshops for AU regional economic
communities on peacekeeping, planning, logistics and
other operational and administrative issues, helping to
ensure that they are in line with AU Commission
training policy guidelines, which themselves, under our
guidance, are largely based upon United Nations
standards.
Just this past weekend, another in a regular series
of desk-to-desk consultations was held between staff of
the Secretariat, the AU Commission, UNOAU, the
African regional economic communities and members
of peace and security cluster. Some 40 participants held
a thorough discussion and exchanged analysis on
current issues such as Somalia, the Sudan and Côte
d’Ivoire. We also maintain constant contact with the
AU Commission on cross-cutting issues such as
elections, conflict prevention and mediation.

4

In developing these joint efforts and
consultations, I hold regular meetings with the African
Union Commission Chairman, Mr. Jean Ping, and the
various commissioners, particularly the Commissioner
for Peace and Security, Mr. Ramtane Lamamra. In that
context, I have been frequently invited to attend
meetings of the AU’s Peace and Security Council on
pressing issues facing the African continent, including
efforts to resolve the crises I have just mentioned. I
have also represented the Secretary-General at highlevel meetings in Africa.
In conclusion, let me say a few words about the
overall strategic relationship, the improvement of
which, as I said earlier, is one of the priorities of my
Office’s mandate.
As members saw for themselves during the
Council’s visit to Addis Ababa last month, we have
achieved a lot in our partnership with the AU. But the
full potential of the cooperation between the two
organizations is still to be achieved in a number of
areas. Helping the AU to strengthen its capacities so
that it can play an ever more effective role in
addressing peace and security issues in Africa is an
objective that we all share, and it is the basic reason
UNOAU was created. I firmly believe that the various
activities of my Office will greatly strengthen the
foundation for this relationship by helping the
Secretariat to improve its effectiveness so that better
strategic planning, better analysis and better
coordination with other partners can inform political
decision-making and pave the way for more effective
political coordination between the two organizations.
In conclusion, I would like to thank the Council
for its support in the establishment of UNOAU, and to
assure it of my utmost commitment to achieving its
objectives.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Muburi-Muita
for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to members of the
Council.
Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): My delegation
welcomes Ambassador Muburi-Muita to the Security
Council. We thank him for his briefing on the work of
the United Nations Office to the African Union. As this
is the first time that he briefs the Council in his
capacity as Head of the United Nations Office to the

11-38140

S/PV.6561

African Union (UNOAU), we wish to take this
opportunity to congratulate him on his maiden briefing
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
South Africa views the integrated and enhanced
presence of the United Nations at the African Union
(AU) as a further manifestation and testament to the
increased partnership between the two organizations in
the areas of conflict resolution, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, in line with Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations. In that regard, the presence of
UNOAU should, in accordance with its mandate,
contribute significantly to the effective implementation
of the Ten-Year Capacity Building Programme. In
addition, the presence of the United Nations Office
must further enhance the capacity of the AU in its
support and management of peace operations,
including the Peace and Security Architecture.
We call on the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to bolster
support for concerted efforts to fully operationalize the
African Peace and Security Architecture, including the
development of a continental early-warning system, the
African Standby Force and an enhanced mediation
capacity, including through the Panel of the Wise.
It is important that the United Nations be
represented at an appropriate level, taking into account
the increasing level of integration of the African
Union. This is also important in view of the mandate of
UNOAU in enhancing the strategic and operational
partnership between the two institutions and the
subregions.
We welcome the notable efforts under way to
forge closer cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union, specifically in accordance with
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. The
United Nations retains the primary role in the
maintenance of international peace and security, and
therefore there is an expectation that it must contribute
to the role of regional and subregional organizations,
which has in recent years been shown to be seminal,
especially in the context of the African Union. We are
convinced that the interests of peace will be well
served if the requisite synergy and cooperation exist
between the two organizations at both the strategic and
operational levels.
Moving from this common understanding, we
look forward to a vision that clearly defines this
strategic partnership, a vision that articulates the

11-38140

expectations of the role of regional organizations in the
maintenance of international peace and security.
The African Union’s proximity to conflicts on the
continent as well as its legitimacy and credibility
makes it an important ally in our collective efforts to
advance peace and security in Africa. We recognize
that a strategic relationship cannot take into account
peacekeeping issues only. A strategic relationship will
include cooperation on a range of considerations that
may include conflict prevention, preventive diplomacy
and political mediation. In that regard, we look forward
to receiving the report of the Secretary-General on his
strategic vision of the partnership between the African
Union and the United Nations.
At the institutional and operational level, my
delegation strongly supports the view that the reports
of the Secretariat to the Security Council should
incorporate the decisions and the views of the African
Union and the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union in particular. That would be in line with
the practice of the African Union Commission, which
incorporates the views of the United Nations Security
Council in their reports to the AU Peace and Security
Council. This, in our view, would be a further
contribution to enhancing synergy and possible
collaboration between the two Councils.
My delegation welcomes the establishment, on
25 September 2010, of the United Nations-AU Joint
Task Force on Peace and Security, which will further
enhance cooperation at the operational level.
Africa’s commitment to the establishment of
peace and security on the continent is further
evidenced by its increasing role in peacekeeping
operations. In that regard, the African Union Mission
in Somalia and the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur are further indications of
the commitment and political will of the African Union
to bring peace to conflict-affected areas.
The African Union’s efforts are severely
hampered by the lack of sustainable, predictable and
flexible financing for AU-supported peacekeeping
operations. It remains important that the United
Nations, at an institutional level, continue its
consideration of this important matter, pursuant to
resolution 1809 (2008). The Secretary-General, in
reference to this important issue, stated that the current
financial framework for partnership in peacekeeping
operations was not conducive to building a sustainable

5

S/PV.6561

long-term strategy. In that connection, we reiterate the
call by the African Union for this issue to receive the
continued support of the United Nations.
In conclusion, we view the United Nations Office
to the African Union as strategically placed, first in
assisting both the African Union and the United
Nations in advancing these broad issues I have
outlined, and, secondly, in ensuring that the
complementarity and the comparative advantage of the
African Union is maximized and adequately resourced.
My delegation wishes the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General every success in his current
endeavours and looks forward to a subsequent update
on the progress made by the United Nations Office to
the African Union in facilitating a strategic and
cooperative relationship.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): I wish at the outset to
thank you, Mr. President, for having convened this
meeting. I am pleased to welcome Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Muburi-Muita
to the Council and to thank him for his very lucid
briefing, and particularly to express my appreciation
for the passion with which he has approached his new
responsibilities.
Nigeria welcomes the growing partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union.
Since the signing of the joint Declaration on the
enhancement of United Nations-African Union (AU)
cooperation — the Ten-Year Capacity-Building
Programme — several milestones have been achieved
in cementing this cooperative relationship. Notable
among these are the operationalization of the AU
Peacekeeping Support Team within the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, training by the Department
of Political Affairs for the Secretariat of the AU Peace
and Security Council, and an information exchange
between the two bodies, facilitated in part by the
Security Council’s Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa.
The impact of such policy-level cooperation is
evident in the giant African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). The Tripartite
Mechanism on Darfur has been a useful conduit for
strategic planning and information exchange and in
easing administrative difficulties in the Operation.
In spite of the concerns raised by the AU Peace
and Security Council in a communiqué dated 8 April

6

2011 that proposed a start date for a fresh Darfur
political process, there are numerous lessons to be
derived from the UNAMID model. We are pleased to
note that the relationship remains strong, as is evident
from the communiqué of last month’s consultative
meeting between the members of the AU Peace and
Security Council and the United Nations Security
Council. As envisaged by Article 52 of the Charter of
the United Nations, regional bodies such as the AU
have traditionally played a supportive role in relation
to the United Nations in the maintenance of
international peace and security. This approach is a
pragmatic recognition of the asymmetric capabilities of
the two organizations. Whereas the African Union has
the political will, it is insufficiently resourced to
undertake long-term peacekeeping and transition
operations.
On the other hand, the centralization of resources
and expertise within the United Nations system affords
it
enhanced
peacekeeping
and
peacebuilding
capabilities. All too frequently, AU member States will
muster sufficient troop numbers to address crisis
situations, only to be undermined by a lack of
equipment and logistical support.
In that regard, we stress that the capacity
development of peacekeeping personnel, though
essential, is not a substitute for adequate equipment,
logistics and training. We are therefore encouraged by
the range of initiatives under consideration,
particularly the prospect of giving the African Union
access to United Nations logistics base capacities and
United Nations strategic deployment stocks. Also
encouraging is the prospect of a surge capacity team of
experts being made available to the African Union at
the initiation of a peace support operation.
In the context of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), different challenges abound. On
31 January 2011, the AU called on the Council to
provide greater support to AMISOM and to fully
assume its responsibility towards Somalia and its
people, including through increased funding from
United Nations assessed contributions. Such direct
calls for support are not new. While those appeals have
been met in some measure, not all requests have so far
been granted.
The current challenges facing AMISOM vividly
illustrate the need for more predictable funding for
AU-led operations as well as the need for the United

11-38140

S/PV.6561

Nations to assume primary responsibility for AU-led
operations initiated as bridging measures. This should
not be misunderstood as the African Union’s
unwillingness to manage its own operations. Rather, it
is an acknowledgment that today’s armed conflicts
require complex, nuanced and often high-technology
responses that demand a particular level of
infrastructure that the AU simply cannot afford. The
need for support does not amount to dependency.
Instead, it must be viewed as a vital partnership in the
global quest for maintaining international peace and
security.
Cooperation in the area of deployment, including
the deployment of expert civilian personnel, is central
to this partnership. Our joint vision must be the
enhancement of capacity-building for the African
Union in peacekeeping operations and ensuring costeffectiveness. The opening of the United Nations
Office to the African Union (UNOAU) is a step in the
right direction. We hope that it leads to a more
systematic and less reactive approach to joint
peacekeeping between the African Union and the
United Nations.
We are particularly pleased to note, in the report
of the Secretary-General on the budget for UNAOU
contained in document A/64/762, the stated objective
of facilitating an operational African peace and
security architecture with an effective capacity to
address threats to regional peace and security. We
believe that there is real scope for effective cooperation
through the preventive diplomacy pillars of the AU’s
Peace and Security Architecture. With the right level of
support at the international level, the AU has a chance
of developing best-practice models for early-warning
mechanisms and for mediation that could be effectively
applied globally.
Partnership is the cornerstone of Africa’s effort to
stabilize its vast region and to shoulder its share of the
global responsibility to maintain peace and security.

Office, after integrating the components of the relevant
United Nations agencies, has saved resources,
increased efficiency and promoted cooperation
between the African Union (AU) and the United
Nations. We hope that UNOAU will continue to
strengthen capacity-building and provide better
guidance and coordination to the other United Nations
offices in African countries, as well as to regional
organizations.
My second comment concerns defending the
United Nations-African Union strategic partnership.
We hope that the Security Council and the AU Peace
and Security Council will stay in close touch through
the current dialogue mechanism. We also hope that the
United Nations-African Union Joint Task Force on
Peace and Security will play a more positive role in
promoting the strategic partnership. We call on the
Secretary-General, at the request of the Council, to
submit a report at an early date so as to provide his
thoughts on how to further advance the strategic
partnership between the two organizations.
Thirdly, we call for respect and support for the
African Union’s mediation efforts on some hotspot
issues. The AU has an in-depth understanding of the
issues in Africa and has achieved positive results in
promoting the settlement of such issues as Somalia and
the Sudan. It is also working hard on a political
settlement for Libya. While considering issues relating
to peace and security in Africa, the Council should give
priority to the opinions and advice of the AU and
facilitate its mediation efforts.
The fourth concern has to do with strengthening
support to the African Union’s peacekeeping
operations. The United Nations should assist the AU to
secure financial support for such operations. At
present, AMISOM is facing a severe shortage of
financial resources. We call on the United Nations to
help the AU to establish a predictable and sustainable
financing mechanism. In addition, we hope that the
United Nations will strictly implement the Ten-Year
Capacity-Building Programme for the AU so as to
further support it in building capacity for its
peacekeeping operations.

Mr. Yang Tao (China) (spoke in Chinese): Let me
begin by thanking Mr. Zachary Muburi-Muita, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to the African
Union, for his briefing. I appreciate his hard work in
promoting cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union. I wish to take this opportunity to
make four comments.

Mr. Bonne (France) (spoke in French): I too wish
to thank Ambassador Muburi-Muita for his
presentation.

The first pertains to strengthening the United
Nations Office to the African Union (UNOAU). The

As other speakers before me have said, the
African Union is one of the regional bodies that has

11-38140

7

S/PV.6561

most developed its dialogue and cooperation with the
United Nations. The relationship is solid, especially
between the Security Council and the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union, as was again
recently demonstrated by the meeting between our two
Councils at Addis Ababa on 21 May. It is also a rich
relationship, particularly between the Secretariat of our
Organization and the Commission of the African
Union, which is a good thing, because our partnership
is justified on several fronts, especially when it comes
to ways of working together to improve our
peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations on the
continent.
The African Union supports the United Nations
on the ground and with regard to knowledge of the
regional environment. This shows that the continent is
fully involved in its own security. For its part, the
United Nations provides the African Union with
competencies and resources and shares experiences
that are useful in supporting the African Union in its
missions to prevent and manage crises on the
continent.
Today, our efforts should ensure that this original
partnership continues and improves in the spirit of
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. In
that connection, we believe that the establishment of
the United Nations Office to the African Union in
Addis Ababa is a good thing. We believe that the
Office should contribute to strengthening the
partnership between our two organizations by
integrating greater United Nations activities and
strengthening
our
forecasting,
planning
and
coordination abilities on the ground.
I wish to congratulate Mr. Zachary Muburi-Muita
for his work and, again, for the briefing he has given
us. Thanks to this work, there is a greater visibility for
the United Nations in Addis Ababa as well as greater
visibility of the institutional cooperation between our
two organizations, which is important. I wish to
reiterate our support for Mr. Muburi-Muita and to
express our interest in his first report on the Office’s
activities when it becomes available.
Mr. Fernandes (Brazil): I would like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Zachary
Muburi-Muita. We commend the achievements in the
field in connection with United Nations operational
support for the African Union (AU), as well as the
efforts made to improve the efficiency of the United

8

Nations representation. I will focus my comments
today on issues relating to the partnership on peace and
security.
The African Union, through its Peace and
Security Architecture, is making a unique contribution
to resolving conflict on the continent and establishing
the basis for lasting peace. The Council’s recent trip to
Africa provided an opportunity to witness first-hand
the urgency of sustaining and increasing United
Nations support to the AU’s work in the area of peace
and security. Brazil believes that ensuring such support
is a key part of the Organization’s responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
The creation of the United Nations Office to the
African Union was an important and positive step. We
hope that it will indeed enhance the ability of the
United Nations to take a strategic approach to
cooperation with the AU, thereby improving its support
for AU peacekeeping, particularly though overarching
initiatives such as the United Nations-African Union
strategic partnership and the Ten-Year CapacityBuilding Plan.
It would be equally advisable to intensify the
involvement of the African Union in the ongoing
policy work of the United Nations in the area of
peacekeeping. A number of the studies, policies and
lessons learned produced by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field
Support could prove useful to AU peacekeeping and
vice versa. Given the AU’s experience with
peacekeeping and conflict resolution, it has a valuable
contribution to make to the development of policy and
guidance.
As we strive to improve the Organization’s
support for AU peacekeeping, we cannot overlook
other relevant areas of cooperation, such as conflict
prevention, mediation and post-conflict peacebuilding.
The African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) is the main concrete instance of
cooperation between the two organizations, along with
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur. It is clear that AMISOM requires greater
material and financial assistance from the United
Nations. Brazil favours a serious and action-oriented
discussion within the United Nations on financial
support to African Union peacekeeping missions
beyond the specific case of AMISOM. We must not
allow bureaucratic or technical considerations to stop

11-38140

S/PV.6561

us from giving the African Union the help it needs to
do its part in maintaining peace and security on the
continent.
In closing, we would like to stress that
cooperation between the AU and the United Nations in
the area of peace and security has a vital and
inescapable political component. Cooperation between
the Secretariat and the Commission must be predicated
on a substantive and mutually respectful dialogue
between the Security Council and the AU Peace and
Security Council. Only at that level can we ensure the
common strategic vision and political impetus needed
in order for the partnership to fulfil its potential.
Mr. Vukašinović (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Office to the African Union (UNOAU), Mr. Zachary
Muburi-Muita, for his informative briefing. I also
congratulate him on his appointment to that very
important and demanding post.
Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes the early
activities of the Office. We are convinced that it will
contribute significantly, in close cooperation with
subregional actors, to the promotion of peace and
stability in Africa. The mandate of the UNOAU
includes enhancing the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union (AU) in the areas of
peace and security as well as providing support to
better engage the AU in these areas. The importance of
providing coordinated and consistent United Nations
support to the African Union, in terms of long-term
institutional
capacity-building
and
short-term
operational support, cannot be overemphasized.
The UNOAU integrated three offices: the United
Nations Liaison Office to the African Union, the
African Union Peacekeeping Support Team and the
United Nations Planning Team for the African Union
Mission in Somalia, as well as support elements of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur Joint Support Coordination Mechanism. This
integration will strengthen cooperation and the
strategic partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union, which is of key importance for
security, stability and durable peace on the African
continent. My delegation believes that this concrete
step will also improve cooperation between the United
Nations Secretariat and the African Union Commission
and contribute to minimizing duplication of effort.

11-38140

Besides the operationalization of the African
Peace and Security Architecture, the Office will play a
leading role in the implementation of the Ten-Year
Capacity-Building Programme for the African Union.
As noted in the relevant report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2011/54), the lack of a well-defined
programme of work related to the Ten-Year CapacityBuilding Programme and of resources has negatively
affected implementation efforts.
UNOAU should continue to work with African
Union institutions to implement the Programme within
the framework of the Regional Coordination
Mechanism. The success of this endeavour will depend
on the leadership and ownership of the African Union
Commission and the effective provision by the United
Nations of regional support in line with the
Commission’s priorities. To that end, building AU
management capacity is essential as part of the
transition to a more predictable funding process.
Much has been achieved in the context of the
relationship between the two organizations, on the
basis of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations. There are a number of noteworthy recent
positive examples of cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union, such as the activities of
the African Union High-level Implementation Panel
aimed at the resolution of the crisis in Côte d’Ivoire
and the role of the Economic Community of West
African States in resolving the Ivorian post-election
conflict.
It is therefore critical to develop a broader
strategic framework for partnership between the
African Union and the United Nations. Meetings of the
United Nations-African Union Joint Task Force on
Peace and Security in New York and Addis Ababa
should contribute to a better focus on strategic and
specific issues relating to the African continent that are
relevant and of interest to both organizations. The
United Nations-African Union partnership must be
built on a shared vision and advantages.
Finally, we emphasize that cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union has become
increasingly important in addressing various challenges
and issues of concern in the areas of peace and
security. Bosnia and Herzegovina supports all United
Nations efforts and welcomes the efforts of regional
and subregional organizations and donors in mobilizing
resources that can contribute to strengthening the

9

S/PV.6561

African Union and its structure so as to better deal with
conflicts and to help maintain peace and security in
Africa.
Mr. Berger (Germany): I, too, would like to
thank Mr. Muburi-Muita, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his comprehensive briefing.
Strengthening the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union (AU) for the
maintenance of peace and security in Africa is in our
mutual interest. Much has been achieved, including
through consultations, on issues of mutual concern to
the Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council. The establishment of the United
Nations Office to the African Union (UNOAU) is
another concrete step in strengthening the capacity of
the AU and in enhancing the institutional cooperation
between both organizations. We welcome the update
provided by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and look forward to the Office
becoming fully operational soon, and also look forward
to the Special Representative’s first report.
The strong partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union for peace and security
on the African continent manifests itself, as has been
mentioned by many colleagues, in various forms — in
the field of peacekeeping, most visibly in the form of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur. United Nations support is also provided to the
United Nations-mandated African Union Mission in
Somalia. The Joint African Union-United Nations
Chief Mediator for Darfur and the close cooperation
between the United Nations Mission in the Sudan and
the African Union High-level Implementation Panel,
under the chairmanship of President Mbeki, also show
the relevance of close cooperation in conflict
mediation, such as is currently the case in the Abyei
region of the Sudan.
Other issues relevant to peace and security in
Africa have become increasingly pertinent for
inter-organizational cooperation, such as transnational
organized crime, the HIV/AIDS pandemic and climate
change. All of these examples underline the importance
of capacity-building for the African Union and regional
organizations, with a view to enhancing their ability to
manage conflict and to counter security threats,
including through the maintenance of constitutional
order and the promotion of human rights, democracy
and the rule of law.

10

Effective
United
Nations-African
Union
cooperation on peace and security also greatly benefits
from the efforts of other actors, such as the European
Union (EU) and individual Member States, in further
strengthening the African Peace and Security
Architecture. The European Union, with the joint
Africa-EU Partnership on Peace and Security and
through its African Peace Facility, provides substantial
financial and logistical support, as well as capacitybuilding, to the AU at the continental, regional and
mission levels. Those efforts are complemented by
bilateral support. Germany, for instance, is currently
constructing the peace and security building for the
African Union Commission in Addis Ababa. We also
finance the German-African Border Project as part of
our joint combined efforts. We also support the training
and equipping of African police officers for the African
Standby Force and for deployment to United Nations
peacekeeping operations.
As also mentioned by the Special Representative,
enhancing coordination and expanding synergies
among the various efforts of the United Nations, EU
and bilateral donors is important in order to maximize
their impact and avoid duplication.
Let me conclude by stressing that Germany
remains committed to strengthening the African Peace
and Security Architecture.
Mr. Dunn (United States of America): I thank
Mr. Zachary Muburi-Muita for his briefing this
morning.
The United States recognizes the importance of
and the challenges involved in forging effective
partnerships to carry out peace and security missions in
Africa. We thank both the United Nations and the
African Union (AU) for their efforts to save lives,
protect civilians, mediate conflicts and bring peace to
the continent.
Building the capacity of the African Union is
critical to ensuring effective joint efforts with the
United Nations in Africa. The United States fully
supports the Ten-Year Capacity-Building Programme,
which details the steps that both organizations need to
take in order build such capacity. We urge both
organizations to continue to work towards realizing
those common objectives.
2009

The 2008 Prodi report (see S/2008/813) and the
follow-on report of the Secretary-General

11-38140

S/PV.6561

(S/2009/470) serve as essential guides to enhancing
United Nations-AU cooperation in the fields of peace
and security. The United States supports the vast
majority of the recommendations in those reports. We
have been encouraged by the progress in
implementation. With regard to the Prodi report, I
would like to make four points.
First, we applaud the United Nations Secretariat
and the AU Commission for creating and convening
the Joint Task Force on Peace and Security.
Secondly, the effective leadership of the United
Nations Office to the African Union in coordinating
United Nations agencies in the peace and security
cluster will be essential to realizing our mutual goals.
That is especially urgent given the cooperation on
resolving the conflicts in Somalia and the Sudan.
Thirdly, there is more to be done in working out
clearer mechanisms for United Nations organizations
to partner with African Union counterparts.
Fourthly, we welcome the AU’s work on building
early-warning conflict prevention and conflict
resolution capacities. The United States has made
efforts to train and equip parts of the AU Commission
to help accomplish those objectives.
The United States looks forward to further
African Union work to develop priorities for the
African Standby Force that include training in the areas
of the protection of civilians, human rights, and women
and children in armed conflict. The Department of
Field Support (DFS) can show continuing leadership in
assisting the AU to develop a logistics capacity. We
encourage the DFS to continue its good work
supporting the AU in mission support, procurement and
logistics.
Some of the most important recommendations
found in the Prodi report concern the financing of AU
peace support operations. Funding mechanisms for
AU-led peace support operations authorized by the
Security Council should be simple and should promote
accountability. The United Nations and the African
Union should work together to improve accounting
capacities, organizational transparency and internal
oversight.
The United States fully supports the enhanced
sustainability, predictability and flexibility of financing
of the AU’s peace and security capability. We again
call upon the United Nations and the AU to implement

11-38140

the recommendations of the Prodi report as an initial
step in achieving such objectives.
Mr. Alzate (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Zachary Muburi-Muita, Head of the United Nations
Office to the African Union, for presenting the report
on cooperation between the African Union and the
United Nations and, in that regard, the prospects for
that Office.
My
delegation
believes
that
deepening
cooperation among the various actors, including the
United Nations Office, is an immediate imperative.
Such an alliance will give us tangible results to the
benefit of international peace and security, in particular
peace in Africa. However, today we also have an
excellent opportunity to comprehensively assess the
progress, achievements and challenges of peacekeeping
missions in Africa as ideal tools to achieve and
strengthen agreement and harmony among peoples on
that important continent.
In that context, we appreciate the support
provided by the African Union for such aims. We
firmly believe that the African Union plays a crucial
role in the peace missions currently deployed on that
continent. Political support and military personnel, as
well as the police and civilian contributions, in
coordination with the United Nations, have reached an
unprecedented level in the history of those operations,
without which Rwanda, Côte d’Ivoire and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo would not have
been able to put themselves on track towards the
broadest goals of coexistence, such as those expected
of those countries today. Cooperation between the two
organizations is therefore essential.
On the basis of Article 52 of the Charter,
Columbia acknowledges the importance and value of
the efforts of regional organizations to achieve higher
goals, such as that of peace. With the support of the
Security Council, regions are called on to develop their
processes, to exercise their ownership and to promote
actions that truly respond to their own needs through
timely and appropriate assessments. Supporting the
stability and the development of countries through the
competent bodies of the United Nations is a priority
that should be given to any plan or mission under
development.
There are specific missions today, such as those
in Darfur, the Sudan and Somalia, that require actions

11

S/PV.6561

in the immediate future. Owing to events that continue
to unfold and their destabilizing consequences, we are
convinced that peace missions on the African continent
must be strengthened. At the same time, we should
seek formulas to resolve the fundamental social and
economic situations that give rise to such events.

the United Nations Office to the African Union can
also cooperate in drawing up studies to that end. We
know that as processes improve, with better training of
its members, and, above all, better resource
management, results are multiplied. That aspect should
be taken into account.

Various regions of the continent are still
experiencing turbulent times, brought about by violent
groups, the impact of which makes it impossible to
foresee the ultimate consequences of their actions.
Therefore, our appeal is to maintain dialogue and
communication with all those who can provide a
peaceful solution to the conflicts. Thousands of lives
are at stake. In that regard, the humanitarian issue is a
priority of any agenda being developed. We know that
a peacekeeping mission must go hand in hand with
actions seeking peaceful solutions as a prerequisite to
the use of the military component so as to exhaust the
provisions of Chapter VI of the Charter prior to turning
to Chapter VIII.

As the Secretary-General rightly pointed out, the
requirements of the African continent are urgent in
order to prevent minor crises from becoming problems
to which the only solution is troop deployment. The
African Union plays a decisive role in that part of the
world with regard to security, development, prevention
and sustainability. The United Nations must stand
beside the African Union to support its efforts.
Colombia is certainly ready to support actions that give
rise to the security and peaceful coexistence of all its
States and of their citizens within respect for
sovereignty, the rule of law and the fundamental
principles of the Charter.

My delegation believes that the training of
military, police and civilian personnel should continue,
in full compliance with the mandates that the Council
issues, with emphasis on the protection of civilians,
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and the
development plans for each specific mission. The
United Nations Office to the African Union can
certainly play a key role in the training process.
We still have much left to do. Joint capacity
should be given priority over any one-off initiative. To
that end, the allocation of and increase in the necessary
resources must be planned only when needed. It must
be recognized that such resources should not only
remain limited to the contributions of traditional donor
countries. We must explore alternative financing
methods that will make it possible to develop a
sustainable mid- and long-term plan, given the
difficulties faced by missions as they begin to deploy.
Such plans must have essential components, such as
the gradual transition to national capacities in order to
avoid the continued presence of United Nations troops
in certain scenarios.
Mission management is another aspect that we
believe to be important. We must set out a series of
measures and must assess results so that we can
achieve real answers as to the effectiveness and
efficiency of peacekeeping operations in the field in
order for actions and resources not to overlap. Perhaps

12

Mr. Vinay Kumar (India): First of all,
Mr. President, I would like to put on record our
appreciation for your efforts in organizing this briefing
today. I would also like to thank Mr. Muburi-Muita, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Office to the African
Union, for his comprehensive briefing.
Just last month, the Council visited Addis Ababa
and had a very fruitful exchange of views with the
members of the African Union (AU) Peace and
Security Council and several other leaders in Africa. As
many as two thirds of the active items on the Council’s
agenda concern Africa. About three quarters of the
Council’s time is spent on African issues. It would
therefore be no exaggeration to say that the success of
the efforts of the Council in Africa will significantly
determine its overall effectiveness in maintaining
international peace and security.
In this connection, it is important for us to hear
Africa’s voice so that the Council’s activities are not
only based on Africa’s needs, but also complement the
activities that African countries and organizations are
themselves undertaking. Cooperation with Africa will
also enable the Council to act with a better
understanding of the situation and establish Africa’s
ownership of solutions and thereby promote lasting
peace and security on the African continent.
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
recognizes the importance of regional organizations

11-38140

S/PV.6561

and their role in matters relating to peace and security.
The Charter also provides a broad framework for
cooperation between the Council and regional
organizations. We therefore welcome the establishment
of the United Nations Office to the African Union. The
Office will assist the AU in developing a more
effective peace and security partnership with the
Security Council; strengthen coordination and
cooperation between the AU and the United Nations
system; ensure an appropriate level of representation to
enhance the strategic and operational partnership of the
United Nations with the African Union and subregional
organizations; and help the United Nations deliver key
outputs in Africa in an integrated manner.
We believe that the Office will develop a longterm perspective for its mandate and focus on capacitybuilding of the African Peace and Security Architecture
so that the AU becomes a more effective and capable
partner of the United Nations. To implement its
mandate, the Office must be adequately staffed and
resourced so that the constraints on its functioning are
removed.
The Office also needs the active support of the
Council to carry out its liaison work, in particular in
the field of peacekeeping. Simultaneously, the Office
should expeditiously work to establish a formalized
structure of interaction with different AU bodies and
subregional organizations. This would not only ensure
the effective flow of information between the United
Nations and AU, but also help in regular follow-up.
It is our view that progress on the implementation
of the Office’s mandate should be periodically reported
to the Security Council. It is essential for
understanding practical difficulties and gaining
perspectives of the Office operating in the field.
For effective and enduring cooperation between
the United Nations and the AU, it is necessary that the
Council not adopt a selective approach to this
cooperation. While the Security Council bears primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, the Council, as structured at
present, needs to hear the voices of other regions and
countries not represented on a permanent basis.
Alongside the work of reforming the Council, it
would add to the credibility of the Council’s action if
serious consideration were given to the views of the
African Union, in particular when the AU can help in
expeditiously and peacefully resolving a crisis. In this

11-38140

context, we believe that the Council needs to pay heed
to the views of the African Union in resolving the
Libyan crisis.
We hold this view fully mindful of the
demonstrated ability of the African Union to solve
problems in Africa. In cooperation with the Council,
the African Union High-Level Implementation Panel
for the Sudan has been instrumental in the successful
implementation of important aspects of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA). The Panel is
also engaged in resolving outstanding CPA issues and
in the crisis in Darfur. The African Union Mission in
Somalia is a mainstay of international efforts to bring
peace and stability to that country. These are but some
examples of the AU’s success in resolving African
problems.
In conclusion, we fully support the Council’s
continuing cooperation with the AU and expect that the
Secretary-General’s report on the Ten-Year Capacitybuilding Programme for the African Union will be fully
implemented and that the United Nations Office to the
African Union will play an instrumental role in that
regard.
Mr. Quarrey (United Kingdom): I join others in
thanking Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Muburi-Muita for his briefing this morning.
The seriousness of the threats to international
peace and security in Africa, and particularly the
situations in Somalia, the Sudan and Libya, underline
the need for the international community to work
together effectively. A robust partnership between the
African Union (AU) and the United Nations should be
central to that. In that regard, the quality of the United
Nations presence in Addis Ababa is an important
factor.
As the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral outlined, the United Nations Office to the
African Union has, since its establishment last year and
under his leadership, helped to improve the
effectiveness of the United Nations engagement with
the AU. The meetings of the Joint Task Force have also
played a role in building a better and more coordinated
relationship between the United Nations Secretariat
and the African Union Commission.
This is against a backdrop of continued progress
in the institutional development of the AU. This is a
key element in good cooperation. It has been facilitated

13

S/PV.6561

by crucial support to capacity-building from the United
Nations, the European Union (EU) and bilateral
partners.
The United Kingdom welcomes the progress
made so far in the United Nations Ten-Year CapacityBuilding Programme for the AU. The EU’s assistance
to the AU on peace and security issues, totalling €1
billion, is a major source of predictable and sustainable
funding. The African Peace Facility helps to support
the costs of deploying United Nations-authorized AU
peace support operations.
The United Kingdom is a key donor to the AU
peace and security efforts in its own right, including
through recent uncaveated contributions totalling $5.5
million to the United Nations Trust Fund for the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), as well
as through the training of peacekeepers and support for
mediation and peace support operations.
Joint AU-United Nations activities for AMISOM
are an example of the vital cooperation between the
two organizations. We commend Uganda and Burundi
for their continued commitment to AMISOM at great
sacrifice. The United Kingdom greatly welcomes
continued consultation and cooperation on Somalia.
The situation in the Sudan continues to be a high
priority, on which the AU and the United Nations must
work together. We would like to take this opportunity
to commend once again the cooperation between
President Mbeki, as Chair of the AU High-Level
Implementation Panel, and Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Menkerios, with the support of
Ethiopian Prime Minister Zenawi, in facilitating the
Abyei interim agreement. We must continue
cooperation at all levels to ensure that both of the
parties follow through on this agreement and that they
urgently reach agreement on all outstanding issues
relating to the Comprehensive Peace Agreement and
post-secession arrangements.
The United Kingdom looks forward to greater
coordination between the Security Council and the AU
High-Level Panel on Libya. It was helpful that the
High-Level Panel could brief us on their work last
week. In line with the aims of the contact group, which
serves to coordinate international policy on Libya, we
welcome the AU’s efforts to work with and through the
United Nations Special Envoy to find a solution to the
crisis based on the legitimate demands of the Libyan

14

people. We also welcome the AU’s commitment to
resolutions 1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011).
All of these issues demand that the AU and the
United Nations have a strong relationship, including
between their respective member States. Here is the
opportunity to have honest, frank and constructive
dialogue, including on issues where we may disagree.
We look forward to working closely with the AU on
these important issues in the future.
Mr. Assaf (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Muburi-Muita,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his briefing. We welcome his appointment and his
efforts as Head of the United Nations Office to the
African Union.
The relationship between the United Nations and
the African Union has developed a great deal in recent
years, in particular in terms of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding on the African continent. Today there is
an increasing need for greater coordination and mutual
assistance between the United Nations and the African
Union, in particular in managing and deploying
peacekeeping operations in several African countries.
The creation of the United Nations Office to the
African Union both responds to the need for greater
coordination among United Nations offices on the
African continent and promotes partnership between
the African Union and the United Nations, in particular
when it comes to the maintenance of international
peace and security. We see this very clearly in United
Nations peacekeeping operations in Africa, particularly
the hybrid operations such as in Darfur and Somalia.
The creation of the Office will allow the United
Nations to give continuous advice to the African Union
in building long-term capacity. The Office will also
help to coordinate peace and security activities in
Africa and to follow up the activities of the African
Union in the framework of preventive diplomacy in
order to prevent future crises in Africa and find a
solution to conflicts.
Finally, we hope that the African Union and the
United Nations will be able to fulfil their mandates in a
comprehensive way in order to promote such
partnership and cooperation effectively and to promote
peace and security in Africa, in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations concerning cooperation with regional
organizations.

11-38140

S/PV.6561

Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I would like to
thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive and very useful
briefing. We very much appreciate seeing Ambassador
Muburi-Muita here in New York. I wish to congratulate
him for all the work that he has already done in the
past eight months. On a more personal note, I am
always very happy to see him here in the Security
Council.
Let me also thank the presidency for promoting
this first briefing on the United Nations Office to the
African Union. We very much hope that it will become
a regular feature in our activities in the Security
Council.
We all welcome the establishment of the United
Nations Office as an important contribution to
reinforcing the strategic relations and partnership
between the two organizations and providing more
coherence, efficiency and visibility to the United
Nations presence in Addis Ababa.
We have come a long way in terms of forging
institutional ties and developing original mechanisms
of dialogue and cooperation. We should now look
ahead and do our best to build upon these
achievements to ensure that those mechanisms are used
to their full potential.
Concerning the role of the United Nations Office
in matters of peace and security, there is certainly great
potential for efforts towards finding common ground
and continuity in the dialogue between the two
organizations, and namely between the Security
Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council. The regular dialogue between the two
organs — and we recently had an example of this in
Addis Ababa and another example here last week when
we had a discussion with the African Union Ad Hoc
High-Level Committee on Libya — can obviously
benefit from the work of the United Nations Office in
Addis Ababa, in terms of both substance and working
methods.
As the Council recalls, there are several common
issues on which the Security Council and the African
Union Peace and Security Council underlined their
cooperation recently in Addis Ababa. I will only
mention a few, namely, the prevention and resolution
of conflicts, peacekeeping and peacebuilding, human
rights, democracy and the rule of law in Africa. I
would also underline that they expressed a common

11-38140

concern about the situation of women and children in
conflict situations and post-conflict contexts. I would
also add the common concern on the need to
effectively address the problem of sexual violence in
armed conflicts, to investigate crimes and to ensure
that the perpetrators are brought to justice. These are
security issues that are common to the agendas of both
organizations.
This means that we must work on exploiting and
reinforcing channels of dialogue on these major
security issues. Much has been achieved, but we need
better articulation between the African Union and other
actors involved in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts in Africa, which has not always been present
in handling recent crises.
We therefore look forward to receiving the
recommendations from the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the Secretariat’s strategic vision for United
Nations-African Union cooperation in the peace and
security areas, taking into account the lessons learned
from the hybrid missions in the Sudan and Somalia and
from the first years of implementation of the Ten-Year
Capacity-Building Programme.
Portugal is a strong supporter of international
efforts aimed at strengthening the African Peace and
Security Architecture in its various dimensions. The
African Union and African subregional organizations’
own roles in the prevention and resolution of conflicts
on the continent have proved to be an important
promoter of stability, and one that should be
encouraged.
Through our active participation in the European
Union-Africa partnership, we have advocated, and will
continue to advocate, European financial and technical
assistance to African initiatives in the peace and
security domain.
We would also like to underline the importance of
regional arrangements for Chapter VIII peacekeeping
operations. In that regard, we encourage a further
strengthening and cooperation with the African Union
in planning and conducting peacekeeping operations in
Africa and any other initiatives aimed at improving the
interoperability between the United Nations and the
African Union.
Finally, the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur and the African Union Mission in
Somalia constitute two concrete models of

15

S/PV.6561

peacekeeping cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union from which we believe there are
a number of lessons we can learn, but where there is
also much room for improvement, as has already been
mentioned here today.
Let me conclude by thanking again Ambassador
Muburi-Muita for his work and by assuring him of
Portugal’s full support.
Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Muburi-Muita, for his
detailed briefing.
Today’s meeting, as shown by the statements by
our colleagues, reaffirms the particular attention that
the Security Council continues to give to issues
pertaining to the settlement of crisis situations on the
African continent. It is extremely important that the
Security Council not be the only player in this field.
As other speakers have done, we too note with
satisfaction the fact that the African Union and
subregional African organizations are working
increasingly actively in resolving the continent’s
problems. We should support in particular the
determination of the African Union and its member
States to take on responsibility for preventing conflicts
and for carrying out peacekeeping activities in Africa
while showing a flexible and diversified policy for
cooperation with other partners.
In that context, we note the significance of the
creation of the United Nations Office to the African
Union, which should help our universal Organization
to optimize the peacekeeping potential of the African
Union. The peacekeeping activities of the African
Union clearly illustrate the need for and validity of the
rational use of the potential of regional organizations
by the Security Council on the basis of Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations.
We have no doubt that the peacekeeping capacity
of the African Union needs further strengthening,
including through the international community
providing appropriate support. A particular role in that
regard is played by the United Nations, both through
the dialogue between the Security Council and the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union and
through cooperation between the United Nations
Secretariat and the African Union Commission.

16

In addition to peacekeeping, we would like to
highlight the need for attention to be paid to
strengthening the African Union’s potential in
mediation and preventive diplomacy, which is very
necessary in today’s world. Another priority is the
formation by the African Union of a multilevel
institution for collective security, to prevent and react
in a timely way to emerging crisis situations.
In terms of the provision of material, technical
and financial support for peacekeeping efforts by the
African Union from the United Nations, we support a
flexible approach. There is a need here for a detailed
analysis of the conditions of deployment and the needs
of specific peacekeeping operations, and for
comprehensive consultations between the African
Union and the United Nations on all aspects of
cooperation in terms of goals, parameters and duration.
In that regard, there is a need for maximum
cooperation.
The
Russian
Federation
participates
in
developing and implementing programmes for
international assistance to Africa, including by
strengthening the peacekeeping potential of the African
Union. We intend to continue this work in the future.
We would like to wish Mr. Muburi-Muita every
success in his future work in this area.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a brief statement in my capacity as the
representative of Gabon.
I would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Zachary
Muburi-Muita, for his briefing and to congratulate him
on his work as Head of the United Nations Office to
the African Union since its creation by the SecretaryGeneral in July 2010.
My country places great importance on the work
of the Office and its contribution to cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union
(AU), in particular on issues related to peace, security
and development.
The representative of Portugal recalled some
specific concerns that deserve the attention of the
Office. In May, at the meeting between the Security
Council and the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union in Addis Ababa, I presented an
assessment of cooperation between the two bodies on
behalf of the Security Council. I noted the progress

11-38140

S/PV.6561

made in several areas, including strengthening dialogue
and contact on issues related to peace and security;
United Nations support for the Ten-Year CapacityBuilding Programme for the African Union; and
assistance to the African Union and regional African
organizations to help them develop the necessary
capacity to plan, deploy and carry out peacekeeping
operations.
Nevertheless, members of the two Councils
recognized that more needed to be done in terms of
planning strategy and mobilizing resources. That is
precisely the role and place of the Office. Specifically,
it is able to enhance synergies in follow-up activities,
evaluate results and develop response strategies, as do
the African Union Mission in Somalia, the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and
the United Nations Mission in the Sudan. In that
respect, we would like to recognize the commitment of
the contributors, Uganda and Rwanda.
The recommendations made in the Prodi report
(see S/2008/813) and the relevant subsequent reports of
the Secretary-General are, in our view, the foundation
for the work of the Office in implementing the
recommendations contained in the reports themselves
and in analysing methods for improving and
strengthening the relationship between the United
Nations and the African Union.
In conclusion, I would like to assure the Council
of my country’s and my delegation’s support. We will
be sure to give special attention to the next report of
the Secretary-General on the partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I once again give the floor to Mr. Muburi-Muita
to respond to the statements and comments made by
delegations.

11-38140

Mr. Muburi-Muita: Thank you, Mr. President,
for the opportunity to take the floor once again. I do
not have much to respond to, but I wish to seize this
occasion to thank you personally, Mr. President, and
Council members for the very warm words expressed
to me personally and especially to my new Office.
Again, we are taking a very broad approach to
our work. As I mentioned earlier, we worked on a
multi-pronged approach in which the two Councils
play a primary role, as do the United Nations-African
Union Joint Task Force on Peace and Security, the
Secretariat and the Commission — all the way down to
the desk-to-desk meetings. One such meeting has just
been convened in Nairobi to bring together technical
staff of the African Union (AU) and United Nations.
With regard to the issue of the regional economic
communities, they play an important role in resolving
conflict situations on the continent of Africa. United
Nations agencies and the partners’ group have also
been effective in marshalling efforts to enhance the
capacity of the AU to better address matters of peace
and security. So we are taking a multifaceted and very
deep approach in the new Office. As we continue to
establish ourselves, we look forward to having a more
prominent presence there on behalf of the United
Nations.
In conclusion, I hope to have another opportunity
in the future to present a more comprehensive report as
our Office grows.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Muburi-Muita for his comments.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.25 p.m.

17
