S/2020/568

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
23 June 2020
Original: English and French

Letter dated 23 June 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by
Ms. Helen La Lime, Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti and
Head of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti, and Mr. Jacques Létang,
President of the Haitian Bars Federation, as well as the statements delivered by the
representatives of Belgium, the Dominican Republic, Estonia, France, Indonesia (on
behalf of Indonesia and Viet Nam), Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (on behalf of
the three African countries that are members of the Security Council — the Niger,
South Africa and Tunisia — as well as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines), the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America, in
connection with the video-teleconference on the question concerning Haiti convened
on Friday, 19 June 2020. A statement was also delivered by the representative of Haiti.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter from the President of
the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of the members of
the Security Council dated 7 May 2020 (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light
of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic,
these briefings and statements will be issued as an official document of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Nicolas de Rivière
President of the Security Council

20-08286 (E) 240620 040820

*2008286*

S/2020/568

Annex I
Statement by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Haiti and Head of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti,
Helen La Lime
[Original: English and French]
I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for having granted me once again the
privilege of briefing the Security Council on the situation in Haiti.
Just like most of the world, Haiti is currently contending with the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic. While the confirmed numbers of infected people
and deaths pale in comparison with some of the other countries in the Americas, the
pandemic is nonetheless stretching that country’s already fragile health system and
testing its meagre social safety net.
Three months to the day after President Jovenel Moïse declared a health
emergency due to the confirmation of the first cases of coronavirus, the authorities
continue to struggle to open medical centres dedicated to the treatment of COVID-19
patients. Haiti, a country of more than 11 million inhabitants, currently has the
capacity to treat only a few hundred patients at a time, with more beds becoming
available every day. This situation is in part due to suboptimal coordination within
the State apparatus at both the national and local levels as well as to inadequate
funding of the national response plan. It is also the result of the initially staunch
opposition by local communities to seeing such centres open in their midst — a
manifestation of the lingering climate of denial, stigma and discrimination that
exists in the country.
The pandemic, whose spread accelerated in the last month, has to date
officially affected more than 4,900 people and led to 84 deaths. Even though its true
toll is likely much higher, its effects are only starting to be felt by Haiti’s citizens,
a majority of whom were already living in bleak socioeconomic conditions. As a
result of the multiple, interconnected crises that have affected the country in recent
years, Haiti’s economy contracted by 1.2 per cent in 2019 and is projected to shrink
by a further 4 per cent this year. Factories are operating at reduced capacity because
of the need to implement measures to slow the spread of the virus. The spectre of a
further increase in unemployment looms large; the gourde continues to lose value
against the United States dollar; and inflation consistently exceeds 20 per cent. In
the absence of adequate resources to support Haiti’s emergence from the recession
in which it is plunged, the hard-won security and development gains achieved
over the course of the past decade and a half risk coming undone, and a primarily
domestic problem could transform into a regional issue should the already alarming
humanitarian situation continue to worsen and increasing numbers of Haitians be
tempted to seek better fortunes abroad.
Since I last addressed the Council (see S/PV.8729), Haiti has enjoyed a
relatively appeased political climate. The exhaustion from the 18 months of popular
mobilization against President Moïse and the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic led
parts of the opposition to call on Haitians to come together to face the virus, an
initiative that allowed newly appointed Prime Minister Joseph Jouthe to govern. Yet
early signals of the executive’s intention to begin preparations for the long-overdue
legislative and local elections have reignited passions and reintroduced acrimony in
the public discourse and political debate.
The past weeks have seen a marked increase in the frequency and intensity
of clashes between rival armed gangs that are vying to control greater swathes of
territory in the most populous neighbourhoods of the Port-au-Prince metropolitan
2/21

20-08286

S/2020/568

area in an effort to exert influence on the outcome of elections in those constituencies.
A growing number of opposition figures are contesting the length of President
Moïse’s term in office and calling for a transitional administration to take over, one
that would ostensibly launch reforms and organize subsequent polls. The vicious
circle of mistrust, recrimination and, ultimately, violence is once again starting to
define the dynamics of Haitian politics at a time when the entire society should be
unified in its response to the pandemic and striving to lay more virtuous and lasting
foundations on which to build its future.
Haiti has for too long resorted to expedient agreements to address political
problems, to the detriment of the principles that undergird its Constitution. Yet the
ambiguities of the latter, which cannot be authoritatively interpreted in the absence
of the Constitutional Council for which it provides, have regularly forced political
actors to work around it. It is becoming increasingly evident that a reform of the
Constitution is required to break the circle and create the conditions for institutional
stability, good governance and the rule of law, three essential characteristics for the
country to thrive. Such reform can be successful only as a result of a nationally owned
process that combines strong leadership with genuine efforts by all stakeholders to
put aside short-term political interests.
Over the course of the past four months, despite the pandemic, the United
Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH), working in ever-closer collaboration
with the United Nations country team, has not lost sight of the six benchmarks,
the priorities it has set through the integrated strategic framework. It has spared
no effort to assist Haitian authorities and institutions in considering the key issues
that impede the forging of a national consensus as well as the country’s progress
towards stability and sustainable development. Through the use of good offices,
the mission has continued to encourage actors from across the political spectrum to
constructively engage with one another. Along with its partners, it has advised the
Haitian National Police in the successful resolution of long-standing labour disputes
within its ranks and assisted judicial actors in devising a virtual hearings system that
will allow courts to continue functioning despite the current impossibility for them
to physically convene.
Although seemingly small in scope, those accomplishments will contribute to
ensuring that the country’s police force remains cohesive as it maintains order and
seeks to interdict the actions of armed gangs and that the judicial system remains
able to meet the State’s obligation to guarantee a victim’s right to access justice.
Unfortunately, we continue to operate in a context where the upholding of the principle
of accountability remains a key challenge, as evidenced by the lack of progress in
the investigation and prosecution of the recent emblematic cases of Lilavois, Grand
Ravine, La Saline and Bel Air, which involve human rights violations and abuses by
gang members, law-enforcement agents and political officials.
Working with civil society, BINUH will pursue its efforts to encourage
the authorities to amplify the fight against impunity and the promotion of human
rights. Through sound use of the panoply of tools at its disposal, the United Nations
system in Haiti will continue to support the expansion of the multiple aspects of the
response to COVID-19, accompany the country on the path of crucial institutional
and economic reform, and provide assistance to ensure the timely holding of free,
fair and transparent elections, in an appeased climate.
To ensure the success of those endeavours and to address the root causes of its
instability in a meaningful and sustainable manner, Haiti relies on the full support of
the Council as well as on the continued engagement of international partners. Both
are greatly appreciated.

20-082863/21

S/2020/568

Annex II
Statement by the President of the Haitian Bars Federation,
Jacques Létang
[Original: English and French]
It is with pleasure that I am taking the floor to shed light on the situation in
Haiti in my dual capacity as President of the Haitian Bars Federation and a member
of the Human Rights Office in Haiti.
The coronavirus disease epidemic has had a profound impact on the world.
Haiti has not been spared by this wave, with a combination of health risks, a testing
of institutional strength and an economic crisis. The public services are virtually
failing. The most basic rights are not guaranteed, while the depreciation of the gourde
and the hurricane season directly jeopardize the lives of millions of Haitians who
are already food-insecure. The rapid spread of the virus is particularly worrisome in
prisons, where conditions continue to deteriorate. The contingency and decongestion
plans announced by the authorities have so far not been implemented.
The State is losing more and more of its monopoly of legitimate violence.
Many working-class neighbourhoods are being transformed into lawless zones,
where everyone’s life is subject to the goodwill of increasingly well-armed and
organized gangs. Most of the public institutions located in downtown Port-au-Prince
are deserted. Armed bandits regularly cause the authorities, which are responsible
for guaranteeing public order, to flee the courthouse. The State is less and less in
control of the territory, including in the provinces, and one sometimes even wonders
whether it has not lost control of the police, whose demands have repeatedly expressed
themselves with violence.
Massive human rights violations are on the rise. The La Saline case is
undoubtedly one of the most serious massacres in our contemporary history;
unfortunately, it is not the only one. More than 71 people were killed on the night
of 13 November 2018, and dozens and dozens more have been killed since then, not
counting the women who were serially raped, the houses set on fire, the hundreds
if not thousands of displaced persons, the charred bodies abandoned in the streets.
It is a neglected generation that is now being initiated into the harshest of cruelties.
The problem is primarily one of impunity. Despite the precautionary measures
ordered by the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights in December 2019,
there is no longer even an investigation, as the case has been blocked for months
at the level of the Court of Cassation. This is the clear message that the State sends
to those victims who put their lives at risk to file a complaint: at the national and
international levels, they will get neither protection nor justice. The question of
the involvement of the authorities in the perpetration of these atrocities is raised
in many reports, including that of the United Nations Mission for Justice Support
in Haiti and the more recent one by the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti
(BINUH) on the Bel Air massacre. Those accusations are extremely serious, yet
nothing is happening.
It is that same impunity that hinders the fight against corruption. In spite of
citizen mobilization and the edifying reports published by the Court of Auditors on
the waste and misappropriation of billions of dollars, it remains unrealistic to hope
for the organization of a PetroCaribe trial.
These shortcomings are closely linked to the dysfunction of the justice system.
Arbitrary detention is the rule. Access to a judge is not guaranteed to defendants,
who spend years in so-called prolonged pretrial detention. Nor is access to a judge
4/21

20-08286

S/2020/568

guaranteed to victims, first and foremost those of gender-based violence, who are
most often silenced. The Superior Council of the Judiciary has not lived up to its
disciplinary role. The certification process has never been carried out, and judges’
mandates are renewed at the will of the executive. Far from embodying the renewal
of an independent judiciary, that collegial body has become bogged down in political
instrumentalization and a corporatism geared towards defending bad practices, first
and foremost non-compliance with the judicial tariff. Calling for a new strike that
will once again paralyse the system, the magistrates have denounced the ridiculously
low percentage granted to the judiciary in the last national budget.
The electoral process has been deeply perverted. Neither the Constitutional
Council nor the Permanent Electoral Council has been set up yet, giving rise to
countless instances of institutional tinkering. Far from forging democracy, elections
lead above all to interference, violence and the instrumentalization of power. They
do not establish a bond of trust between the people and their leaders.
Now more than ever, we find ourselves at a political impasse. There is no
more parliament, no more local authorities, no more legitimate Government. The
President declared that the institutions whose continuity he had a duty to ensure had
lapsed. Legislation is now adopted by decree, without any consultation. The absence
of any institutional checks and balances is further reinforced by the prolongation
of the state of emergency, which jeopardizes respect for individual liberties and
suspends public procurement procedures. All eyes are now turning towards the
end of the presidential term. As is often the case, the polemic focuses primarily on
the fluctuating interpretation of the Constitution. For almost a year, Haitians have
been experiencing the confinement that the world has discovered in recent months.
Everything seems to be in place for us to be back in a new peyi lòk as soon as the
epidemic is over.
Clearly, the objectives set for BINUH are not being met. When one considers
the resources invested over the past decades, the deterioration of the situation seems
almost unintelligible. The fundamental causes of the instability have not been
resolved; on the contrary, and one wonders how the friends of Haiti are allowing so
much violence and misappropriation to take place. Do they not have the means to hold
the State accountable for its commitments, be it only international commitments?
It should be noted that BINUH has inherited several sensitive files. The cholera
tragedy has fuelled a great deal of mistrust towards the United Nations, which has
had such difficulty in acknowledging its responsibility, if not its guilt. What about
reparations for the thousands of victims? Although the Secretary-General has finally
announced that he wants to assume responsibility for the failure of zero tolerance for
sexual abuse, there is no mention of criminal or even disciplinary condemnation, as
actions to establish paternity and enforce alimony payments remain theoretical until
now. I myself am assisting the bereaved family of a young high school student who
was hit by a United Nations car and who had been assured years of compensation
that never arrived.
Ensuring respect for human rights and supporting a weak State are conflicting
mandates. By supporting a State, a mission links its fate to that of the State and risks
losing objectivity, even if only in the interpretation of indicators. And what happens
when the State violates fundamental freedoms? That question arose in January 2010,
when police officers from the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti failed to
intervene to prevent officers of the Haitian National Police from firing on defenceless
detainees at point-blank range in the civilian prison in Les Cayes.
The strategy of continued international support must be revisited when there
is a lack of national will. That is true for the national dialogue saga. It is also true
20-082865/21

S/2020/568

for support offered to the Superior Council of the Judiciary or institutions that
are supposed to combat corruption, but instead — far from independent — have
demonstrated their willingness to take no action for change. The establishment of
the National Council on Legal Aid is another such example. Donors have welcomed
the rapid installation of an ad interim directorate dependent on the executive, thus
bypassing the establishment of the board of directors provided for by the new law.
BINUH’s latest press release has drawn widespread criticism. Against the backdrop
of this institutional vacuum, how can one support a contested Government’s efforts
to carry out constitutional reform?
The international community is locked in a one-on-one dialogue with the
Government in power. Its support seems to depend more on strategic interests than
concrete actions to promote human rights. The need for stabilization silences popular
protest, thus preventing an essential counterbalance to the excesses of power and
paving the way for veritable social time bombs.
Haitian civil society cannot be overlooked. Unfortunately, the United Nations
too often considers militant organizations as mere project operators, subcontractors
or the upholders of bureaucratic logic. Yet they play an indispensable role as
watchdogs of democracy in a situation where we are losing new points of reference
every day. Civil society actors must be listened to and supported.
I am grateful for having been given the opportunity to address the Security
Council today.

6/21

20-08286

S/2020/568

Annex III
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Belgium to the United Nations
I thank Mr. Jacques Létang, President of the Haitian Bars Federation, and
Special Representative La Lime for their briefings.
Belgium fully supports the work of the United Nations Integrated Office
in Haiti to facilitate political dialogue in Haiti. All parties need to commit to
an inclusive dialogue to respond to the country’s political, social, economic and
humanitarian crisis.
Since our last briefing, only four months ago (see S/PV.8729), the world seems
to have changed several times over. Just as the cholera epidemic seemed eradicated,
Haiti was hit hard by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), which compounded
the country’s many vulnerabilities. We support the role of the United Nations in
assisting the country to respond to this pandemic. With the European Union (EU),
we are also working hard to refocus and prioritize our support to fight this pandemic.
We are concerned about reports of stigmatization and discrimination of people who
allegedly have COVID-19, including through lynching and destruction of property.
We encourage political actors to seize the momentum of the COVID-19
response to build trust and work together to address the root causes of Haiti’s
instability. We welcome President Moïse’s announcement on the holding of elections
and his call for clarity on the electoral calendar. Constitutional reform is needed if
Haiti is to address the extreme levels of political instability and polarization.
The widespread sentiment of impunity and lack of safety remains one of
the main sources of frustration among the Haitian population. We call for renewed
efforts to reform the justice sector, fight corruption and strengthen the promotion
and protection of human rights. The high level of abductions and killings by gangs
are particularly worrisome. In that regard, the finalization of the national strategy
on disarmament, dismantlement, reintegration and community-violence reduction
is encouraging, as is the reactivation of the Haitian National Police’s (HNP) round
table with civil society. To address those challenges, it is clear that the HNP needs
a credible budget.
With regard to human rights, we urgently call for progress in ensuring
accountability for the violence in Grand Ravine, La Saline, Bel Air and, more
recently, Village de Dieu. Perpetrators continue to escape justice. The progress
demonstrated by the national human rights institution and the inspectorate general
of the HNP is encouraging. We call for the national action plan for human rights to
be endorsed and implemented. We are also concerned about the right to food for the
most vulnerable.
Haiti cannot face its challenges alone. Together with our EU partners, we are
providing financial, technical and political support, and we call on all international
partners to follow suit.

20-082867/21

S/2020/568

Annex IV
Statement by the Special Envoy to the Security Council of the
Dominican Republic, José Singer Weisinger
I would like to thank Special Representative La Lime and Mr. Jacques Létang
for their briefings. Their detailed information is helpful in identifying the core issues
affecting Haiti and paving the way for the upcoming renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH).
We welcome the measures undertaken by the Haitian Government to assist
the population and prevent the spread of the pandemic. Likewise, we commend all
Haitian political actors and civil society for joining efforts to combat this scourge.
In that regard, the Haitian and Dominican Heads of State met virtually on
19 May to discuss synergies in their response to the pandemic. Likewise, the Ministers
for Foreign Affairs of our two countries have held periodic video-teleconferences to
discuss that issue and others of common interest.
We hope that this pause in the political process caused by the pandemic
offers some opportunities for reflection and generates momentum for the country’s
leadership to pursue open and inclusive dialogue that breaks the political deadlock,
thus allowing for the creation of a road map and timeline for the pending and future
political processes.
In addition to the challenges posed by the pandemic, the Dominican Republic
also remains concerned about the persisting insecurity resulting from gang-related
activities and the proliferation of illicit weapons and ammunition. The broad
circulation of over 270,000 illicit firearms in civilian hands and the illicit traffic of
small arms and light weapons are contributing to the outbreak of new civil unrest.
We therefore reiterate that it is essential that the flow of small arms and their
ammunition be urgently addressed.
In that context, we value the leadership role of the Haitian National
Commission for Disarmament, Dismantlement and Reintegration in its quest to help
reduce community violence. We also commend the efforts made by BINUH and the
United Nations Development Programme in the areas of peacebuilding, arms control
and conducting a baseline assessment on the life cycle of weapons and ammunition
in Haiti.
In February, even before the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) crisis, more
than 40 per cent of Haiti’s population required humanitarian assistance. The acute
levels of malnutrition among the population make the country one of the most food
insecure in the world. That already dire situation could deteriorate further during
the hurricane season.
In that context, we believe it is necessary to work hand in hand with the Haitian
Government in order to put in place risk-assessment mechanisms and design more
concrete plans and strategies to strengthen core sectors and institutions. Information
and collaboration channels with local communities should also be improved to
expand early-warning mechanisms in order to prepare for the impact of climaterelated shocks.
We commend the international community and other partners for their
pledge to mitigate the humanitarian situation in the country. The 2019-2020 Haiti
humanitarian response plan amounts to $253 million. As of 8 June, Haiti has received
only $29.9 million. In addition to the humanitarian challenges, the Haitian economy
is facing multiple hardships that will exacerbate the socioeconomic situation and
slow the recovery process post-COVID-19.
8/21

20-08286

S/2020/568

In that context, the Dominican Republic calls for an urgent and coordinated
regional and global response to the pandemic. We echo the Secretary-General in his
appeal for additional financial support to help Haiti overcome its development and
health challenges.
In conclusion, we commend BINUH and the country team for their integrated
response and continued work to assist Haiti under these extraordinary circumstances,
which further hamper the fulfilment of the mission’s mandate.
We concur with the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti of the Economic and
Social Council in urging the United Nations system, the international community
and international financial institutions to take joint action to prevent the spread
of COVID-19, mitigate its humanitarian and socioeconomic effects and promote
sustainable development and resilience to future shocks in Haiti.

20-082869/21

S/2020/568

Annex V
Statement by the
United Nations

Permanent

Mission

of

Estonia

to

the

I would like to thank Ms. Helen La Lime, Special Representative of the
Secretary General for Haiti, and Mr. Jacques Létang for their briefings.
Estonia is concerned about the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
in Haiti, where the humanitarian situation is already serious. We welcome measures
taken by the Government of Haiti to combat the pandemic, especially the formation
of the multisectoral commission for the management of the COVID-19 pandemic.
However, more action and a coordinated national response to the pandemic are
needed. The key elements to control the spread of the virus in Haiti are first, raising
public awareness of COVID-19 and, secondly, addressing the dire situation in prisons
and detention centres.
It is distressful that gains in the political process have been marginal. More
effort and responsibility is required to solve the current political impasse. The people
of Haiti deserve better and more stable lives.
We encourage all to take the political process forward. It is important to pursue
open and inclusive dialogue and demonstrate the necessary political will to find
solutions to the most pressing constitutional reform issues. Furthermore, additional
clarity regarding the electoral calendar is needed. Creating conditions conducive to
the holding of the upcoming legislative elections is of the utmost importance.
The ongoing political crises and socioeconomic challenges have a worrisome
impact on the security situation, as they pave the way for increased criminal activities
and violence. Gang-related crime still remains of great concern.
It is encouraging that the Haitian National Police has demonstrated growing
professionalism and restraint in enforcing public order.
During the reporting period, the number of human rights violations, abuses
and killings increased. Efforts to combat impunity are required, as no progress
has been made on any cases since the drawdown of the United Nations Mission for
Justice Support in Haiti, including with regard to the events in La Saline and Bel
Air. In addition, 74 per cent of detainees are still waiting for trial due to lengthy and
complicated judicial proceedings, which has also led to the overcrowding of prisons.
We stress the importance of enhancing accountability and ensuring that all cases are
properly investigated and the perpetrators are brought to justice.
Finally, I would like to thank Special Representative La Lime and her team for
their work. We remain hopeful that their continued efforts will bring a better future
for Haiti.
I also request that we be updated about the alarming situation in Haitian
prisons. What steps have been taken by the authorities to remove the deficiencies in
the judicial system? What are the prospects, in the view of the mission, for improving
the Haitian judicial system?

10/21

20-08286

S/2020/568

Annex VI
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of France to
the United Nations, Anne Gueguen
[Original: English and French]
I too thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti,
Ms. Helen La Lime, for her briefing, as well as Mr. Jacques Létang, who has drawn
up a clear assessment of the challenges facing Haiti.
First, I wish to express France’s support for, and solidarity with, the Haitian
people and Government in their efforts to fight the coronavirus disease pandemic
and mitigate its socioeconomic and humanitarian consequences. The health crisis
in Haiti, more than anywhere else, is compounding existing vulnerabilities,
specifically the humanitarian crisis already affecting millions of Haitians. The
international community has shown that it is ready to lend its support. In 2020,
France will contribute to the work of the United Nations Humanitarian Air Service
in Haiti so as to facilitate humanitarian access. The European Union has announced
the redirection of €165 million in aid. In return, the Haitian authorities must provide
guarantees as to the proper use of those funds.
Unfortunately, this pandemic has not brought an end to the violence or human
rights violations, on the contrary. The increase in insecurity and violence due to gangrelated activity since the beginning of 2020 is a source of deep concern. The Haitian
National Police is committed to tackling this issue, and it must do so responsibly.
No human rights violations can be tolerated. If they are to rebuild confidence, the
Haitian authorities must tackle impunity, first and foremost in symbolic cases such
as the La Saline and Bel Air massacres, which have given rise to damning United
Nations reports. Finally, we call on the Haitian authorities to protect human rights
defenders, who play a crucial role in that context.
Faced with the multidimensional crisis in which Haiti finds itself, we all
know that the only solution lies in ensuring political dialogue among all Haitians.
We regret that efforts towards such a dialogue in February, with the support of the
United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH), did not lead to the formation of
an inclusive Government. France calls on President Jovenel Moïse and all political
forces in the country, in particular the opposition, as well as on civil society and
the private sector, to resume an inclusive national dialogue in preparation for the
elections and the revision of the Constitution, if that is indeed the path that the
Haitian people choose.
Eight months after its establishment, BINUH has been working tirelessly with
the United Nations country team to support Haiti in its response to the pandemic.
The Council must remain fully vigilant and take appropriate measures, particularly
if the situation in Haiti continues to deteriorate.

20-0828611/21

S/2020/568

Annex VII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Indonesia to the
United Nations, Dian Triansyah Djani
It is my honour to deliver this statement on behalf of Indonesia and Viet Nam,
member States of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
At the outset, we would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Helen La Lime, for her insightful briefing, and all United
Nations personnel for their dedication during this challenging time. I would also
like to thank Mr. Jacques Létang for sharing information on the latest developments
in Haiti.
We are deeply saddened by the lack of progress in Haiti in many areas, as
described in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/537). The failure of dialogue
to yield a political agreement in February was a huge loss for the people of Haiti.
On that note, I would like to bring the following three points to the attention of the
Security Council.
First, with regard to political stability, we believe that political uncertainty
and polarization are the main causes of the instability and multifaceted difficulties
in the country. A comprehensive national dialogue is therefore key. We support
United Nations engagement with the Provisional Electoral Council to preserve the
integrity of the electoral process and achieve the objective of a 30 per cent quota
of women in elected posts. A Government that is not functioning for the people is
without meaning. It is therefore important for all stakeholders in Haiti to practice
dialogue and compromise in the interest of a better future for all Haitians. Haitian
authorities bear a moral obligation to provide their citizens with the right to life in a
peaceful and stable environment; it is their duty to make that happen.
Secondly, with respect to security and economic and social challenges, we
note that criminality, gang-related activity, violations and abuses of human rights
continue to rise. The economic situation has suffered multiple concurrent shocks, with
problems being exacerbated by the global economic slowdown. In addition, despite
some progress, the Haitian National Police continues to face serious difficulties
that can hamper its ability to operate. In this regard, we support the efforts of the
United Nations system, including those of the Peacebuilding Fund, to implement
a series of socioeconomic interventions in Haiti that promote stability and reduce
community and gang violence. Haitian authorities need to take the necessary bold
steps to address these problems, which flow from the political deadlock.
Thirdly, with respect to the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19),
we believe that the pandemic and the measures undertaken to contain it have
exacerbated an already acute socioeconomic and humanitarian situation. Basically,
all six benchmarks have been severely affected by COVID-19. The disease has
added significantly more challenges to the holding of elections in a timely manner,
the opening of legal aid offices, the addressing of socioeconomic inequalities
and the provision of access to health care. It has also disrupted the export of
Haitian commodities.
In this regard, we appreciate the engagement of the United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti (BINUH) in encouraging constructive relations between the executive
and the opposition, and we urge multi-stakeholder efforts aimed at addressing the
health emergency. While commending BINUH’s work, particularly the inclusion of
gender equality in its recruitment and activities, we call on the mission and United
Nations country team to identify measures needed to address the urgent issues in
the country.
12/21

20-08286

S/2020/568

In conclusion, we would like to express our support for the Secretary-General’s
appeal to the international community, including, first and foremost, partners
from the region, to increase technical and political support to Haiti during these
challenging times. Indonesia and Viet Nam believe that the regional architecture can
play an important role in shaping a new Haiti that comports with local wisdom and
characteristics, while addressing the root causes of the various challenges. Regional
resilience can be a good catalyst for expediting political and socioeconomic recovery
in Haiti.

20-0828613/21

S/2020/568

Annex VIII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines to the United Nations, Halimah DeShong
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the Niger, Tunisia,
South Africa and my country, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (A3+1). We thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General La Lime for her detailed briefing.
We also thank Mr. Jacques Létang, President of the Haitian Bars Federation, for
his briefing. Finally, we welcome the participation of the representative of Haiti in
today’s meeting.
Today’s briefings and the latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/537)
show that the situation in Haiti is extremely dire. The worrisome security, political,
humanitarian and socioeconomic situation has been exacerbated by the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic and risks being further aggravated by such external
shocks as climate change. Against the backdrop of these daunting challenges,
and mindful of those ahead, the A3+1 encourages the international community to
continue supporting our Caribbean sister nation and reaffirm its support for the
United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH). Accordingly, we wish to make
the following points.
First, the A3+1 remains deeply concerned about the lingering political
challenges, in particular issues surrounding elections and the absence of an
electoral calendar. We note with concern the failure to convene already overdue
legislative elections, and we are cognizant that the constitutional deadline for the
next presidential election is imminent. We urge the Haitian authorities to undertake
the measures needed to ensure the successful organization of these elections in a
timely manner. In this regard, we call on Haitian political leaders to forge ahead with
forming a Government in order to attract more bilateral and multilateral support.
The A3+1 also stresses that there can be no externally imposed solution to the
political crisis, and call on all Haitian stakeholders to work constructively to find
a long-term comprehensive and peaceful solution. In this regard, the A3+1 further
urges all Haitian political leaders to convene a national dialogue and refrain from
acts that may trigger additional violence and compromise the gains made by the
country under the guidance of the United Nations.
Secondly, we welcome the role being played by the National Commission on
Disarmament, Dismantlement and Reintegration and commend the Commission’s
efforts to draft a national community-violence reduction strategy to enhance efforts
in combating gang violence. We also welcome the efforts of the Haitian National
Police (HNP) to tackle the scourge of gang violence in the country. We are disturbed
by the proliferation of illicit weapons and ammunition that continue to enter the
country illegally. Like many other small island States of the Caribbean, Haiti is a
manufacturer of neither firearms nor ammunition. However, its geographic location
between the suppliers and consumers of illegal narcotics in the South and to North
makes it a transshipment point for illicit weapons.
We note that the prevalence of illicit weapons has triggered an upsurge in
crime, particularly among gangs, which continues to create insecurity. We are deeply
disturbed by reports that a death squad has carried out violent attacks in several
impoverished Port-au-Prince neighbourhoods. We call for a thorough investigation
and for the perpetrators to be held accountable. The collaboration among BINUH,
the Haitian national authorities and other relevant stakeholders in the drafting of
arms control legislation consistent with international standards is encouraging in
this regard.
14/21

20-08286

S/2020/568

In addition, the A3+1 urges that institutions and capacity-building mechanisms
be strengthened to address institutional shortcomings. We recognize the marginal
advances that have been made in the Haitian National Police and in the justice and
correction sectors. We regret, however, that the Haitian State had to reduce its
contribution to the national budget for the HNP to cope with the COVID-19 pandemic.
Together with the relevant judicial institutions, the HNP has a fundamental role
to play in the State’s meeting its obligations to protect its citizens and ensure that
transparency and the rule of law prevail.
Thirdly, the worsening humanitarian situation, particularly increasing
food insecurity, overcrowded prisons and challenges for those people made most
vulnerable, remains of grave concern. In the wake of the pandemic and the ensuing
socioeconomic crisis, it is crucial that the international community redouble its
efforts to assist the Haitian authorities in responding to the crisis. We laud the spirit
of unity and solidarity shown by Haitians in their initial response to the pandemic. We
also appreciate all efforts aimed at assisting the country in its national humanitarian
response, including through the Caribbean Community, the Pan American Health
Organization, the World Food Programme, the International Organization for
Migration and the United Nations. We acknowledge the efforts of the Government
of Haiti in meeting some of the benchmarks and encourage further progress in these
important areas.
Furthermore, we welcome reports that some international financial institutions
will suspend Haiti’s debt so that the country can respond adequately to the COVID-19
pandemic, and we call on Haiti’s partners to consider providing debt forgiveness.
Not only does Haiti need debt relief, but it also needs grants to face the already bleak
economic situation forecasted by the International Monetary Fund, which includes
reductions in remittances, textile exports and foreign direct investment. We welcome
the continued engagement of the Economic and Social Council Ad Hoc Advisory
Group on Haiti, which supports the country’s long-term development strategy. At
this critical moment, we urge greater collaboration between the Economic and Social
Council and the Security Council to foster complementarities in the United Nations
system’s engagement with the country, in order to comprehensively address the root
causes of Haiti’s insecurity.
Haiti remains a fundamental pillar to our African and Caribbean civilization,
with a glorious yet complex history. Its seemingly never-ending battle to create
security and stability for its people grieves us, especially given the nation’s leadership
role in paving the way for the abolition of slavery. As the first black nation to revolt
against slavery and oppression in the western hemisphere, Haiti paid an exorbitant
price for its freedom. We cannot abandon Haiti. We must stand in solidarity with our
Haitian brothers and sisters.
In conclusion, the A3+1 reaffirms that the sustainable development of Haiti will
be a mere fleeting illusion to be pursued and never attained if the genesis of Haiti’s
underdevelopment is not addressed, and this must begin with adequate restitution.

20-0828615/21

S/2020/568

Annex IX
Statement by the Political Coordinator of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations,
David Clay
I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General La Lime and Mr.
Létang for their briefings.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s second report on the activities of the
United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH) (S/2020/537). The United
Kingdom acknowledges the extraordinary difficulties faced by Haiti since the
Security Council last met to discuss BINUH (see S/PV.8729). I wish to start by
expressing our appreciation for the hard work of the mission leadership and staff
amid increasingly challenging circumstances.
I will make three brief points. First, the United Kingdom believes that a
coordinated and holistic response to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
is critical. Secondly, urgent steps should now be taken to bolster human rights and
accountability. Thirdly, a road map out of Haiti’s interminable political impasse is
more essential than ever.
First, with regard to COVID-19, it is clear that the pandemic presents a grave
risk to Haiti, in terms of both the impact of the disease itself and its second-order
effects. As the health, humanitarian and economic effects of the crisis take hold, a
coordinated and holistic response by the Haitian authorities and the international
community is critical. The United Kingdom is encouraged by the United Nations
system’s quick adaptation to the situation on the ground, and we call upon the
Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General in particular, also serving
as the Resident Coordinator and Humanitarian Coordinator, to work closely with the
Haitian authorities to help guide a coordinated approach.
Secondly, with regard to human rights and accountability, the United Kingdom
remains concerned about the lack of progress. That the perpetrators of massacres
at La Saline and Bel Air continue to evade justice profoundly undermines efforts
to build confidence and trust in the rule of law. We also regret that the Haitian
Government has yet to honour the commitment it made to appointing a Minister
for Human Rights. This appointment would be a valuable demonstration of Haiti’s
political will to safeguard human rights.
Finally, with regard to the ongoing political impasse, in meeting after meeting,
the Security Council and the United Nations leadership have sought to encourage
the parties in Haiti to come up with a road map to overcome political deadlock and
institutional paralysis. As the Secretary-General notes in his report, the collapse
in February of dialogue efforts to reach an agreement on the road map needed for
constitutional, institutional and structural reforms is yet another missed opportunity.
COVID-19 has aggravated the existing risks to stability Haiti. The economy
is faltering. Elections loom. Now more than ever, all parties should come together in
the national interest. Broad, inclusive dialogue is essential.

16/21

20-08286

S/2020/568

Annex X
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Kelly Craft
I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General La Lime and
Mr. Jacques Létang for shedding light on the situation in Haiti.
As we all know, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has placed significant
stress on Haiti’s already fragile health-care system. Reports of attacks on COVID-19
patients, and on the medical facilities treating them, are deeply concerning, as fear
and distrust will only worsen the situation.
In this challenging time, the United States stands with Haiti. To date, we have
committed over $16 million in assistance to support Haitian efforts aimed at fighting
COVID-19.
Because the peak for COVID-19 infections in Haiti has yet to come, it is
essential that all Haitians work together to limit the spread of the virus. We note
with concern the spread of COVID-19 within the country’s overcrowded prisons,
and call on the Haitian Government to fully follow through on its 27 March decision
to release pretrial detainees accused of minor crimes and medically vulnerable
prisoners nearing completion of their sentences. This is a time for action, not for talk.
It is equally important that the Government continue its work on needed
political, economic and social reforms. President Moïse’s 18 May speech stressing
his commitment to holding elections is a positive step, and we encourage the Haitian
Government and all political actors to reach a political accord and find a way forward,
in the interests, above all, of the Haitian people.
We note the gains made by the Haitian National Police (HNP) as it continues
its efforts aimed at addressing community and gang violence and at reducing
kidnappings. The HNP’s General Inspectorate has acted positively to improve human
rights accountability, a welcome step towards increased transparency. However, as
we have previously noted, the continuing failure to provide the HNP with required
resources places its hard-won gains at risk. Once again, this is a time for action, not
just talk.
We must also express our concern regarding the lack of accountability for
perpetrators of human rights abuses, including in La Saline and Bel Air. Steps must
be taken to avoid reinforcing an environment of impunity.
Finally, as Haiti responds to the pandemic and to the underlying drivers
of instability, it is essential to strengthen the rule of law and end the scourge of
corruption. We are listening to Mr. Létang and we are reinforcing his concerns and
supporting the citizens of Haiti. And I must say to President Moïse and to all of
Haiti’s political leaders: It is time to set aside their differences and to come together
to build the strong institutions that will deliver a more prosperous and secure future
for all Haitians.

20-0828617/21

S/2020/568

Annex XI
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of Haiti to the United Nations,
Patrick Saint Hilaire
[Original: English and French]
I thank you, Madame President, for this opportunity to state the views and
observations of the Government of the Republic of Haiti on document S/2020/537.
I take this opportunity, at the outset of my remarks, to extend our sincere best
wishes for the success of the French presidency of the Security Council for the month
of June 2020. I also take this opportunity to thank all members of the Council for
their relevant commentary on, and in solidarity with my country, Haiti, as it pursues
its quest for political stability, social progress and long-term development.
On behalf of the President of the Republic of Haiti, His Excellency Mr. Jovenel
Moïse, and the Government led by Prime Minister Joseph Jouthe and on my
own behalf, I reiterate the solidarity of the Republic of Haiti with all the States
members of the Council that have been severely affected by the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic. The pandemic has undeniably shown how interconnected
the countries and people of our world are. The untold suffering that the pandemic
has inflicted on humankind has highlighted the need for the Member States and all
stakeholders of the United Nations, in this pivotal seventy-fifth anniversary year,
to pursue strategies and policies for the renewal of the international system with
determination, persistence, solidarity and resolve.
Against that background, I commend the efforts of the Member States,
United Nations entities, multilateral donors, foundations and non-governmental
organizations to continue collective action to contain the pandemic as soon as
possible and mitigate its socioeconomic and other consequences.
Turning to the Secretary-General’s second report on the implementation of
the mandate of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH), let me assure
the Council that the Government of Haiti has carefully considered the report. The
Secretary-General’s observations in paragraphs 49 to 57 will strengthen and advance
cooperation between the United Nations team in Haiti and the Haitian authorities.
Importantly, BINUH will always be able to count on the collaboration of Haiti to
carry out the specific tasks assigned to it under resolution 2476 (2019).
I thank Helen La Lime, Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Haiti for her presentation of the Secretary-General’s report and her overview of the
developments in Haiti in recent weeks. I extend my appreciation to Bruno Lemarquis,
Deputy Special Representative, Resident Coordinator and Humanitarian Affairs
Coordinator in Haiti, and all the members of the United Nations team who carry
out their tasks with respect for the dignity of the Haitian people and in accordance
with the strategic vision and priorities defined by the Government of Haiti. It is
critical that BINUH continue to work this way in implementing its mandate in
strict compliance with the second preambular paragraph of resolution 2476 (2019),
in which the Security Council reaffirms “its firm commitment to the sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and unity of Haiti”.
In the same spirit, I welcome the participation in this Council meeting of
lawyer and President of the Federation of Haitian Bar Associations, Jacques Létang.
The Government attaches particular importance to working together with all
stakeholders in the interest of providing lasting solutions to the country’s current
and emerging problems. Those problems concern all actors in the nation’s political,
economic and social life; therefore, the spirit of collaboration must prevail among
18/21

20-08286

S/2020/568

them. Civil society organizations are encouraged to play an increased and disciplined
role in the efforts necessary to ensure the independence of the Haitian justice system
and in the promotion and respect of fundamental human rights and the rule of law.
I have taken due note of the questions raised by Mr. Létang on behalf of
the Federation of Haitian Bar Associations and, especially, of the concerns he
has expressed.
Regarding justice and security, the country faces multifaceted challenges.
The covert movement of small arms and light weapons is indeed a real plague. Such
weapons are responsible for numerous acts of violence, blatant abuse and deaths in a
number of localities across the country. Armed gangs also remain a major challenge
and cause for concern. The perpetration of acts of gang violence, as well as violent
clashes between rival armed groups, are an undisputed and unacceptable cause
of suffering across the layers of the Haitian population. Countering the security
challenges requires the continuous strengthening of the Haitian National Police’s
capacities. In addition, much more must be done to strengthen the justice system,
make the Courts more effective at ensuring impartiality and ensure that those
responsible for acts of violence are punished.
In addition, the Government is paying particular interest to improving the
situation of prison staff as well as all detainees.
The Government recognizes and fully understands the gravity of the law and
order situation in Haiti and will continue to mobilize all actors in the security sector
to face and resolve the threat to law and order. We are satisfied that the SecretaryGeneral’s Report took note of the progress made in the key reforms designed to
enable the Ministry of Justice and Public Security to carry out its critical tasks.
The Government remains resolute and resilient in tackling the causes of social
inequality, corruption, poverty, food insecurity, economic challenges and lack of
access to health care. In the current global environment marked by multifaceted
crises, Haiti has identified several elements that are essential to its recovery efforts,
namely, political will, ambition, partnership, solidarity and substantial funding.
Financial aid and support for Haiti must be consistent with the specific needs of
the population, particularly those most vulnerable. It must also be consistent with
the critical need to strengthen the main national institutions. At this time, the
Government is in urgent need of additional resources, both technical and financial,
to address the numerous crises the country is facing all at once.
The Government has noted with interest the concerns expressed by the
Secretary-General in paragraph 3 of his report relating to the absence of a functional
legislature and the lack of details on the timetable for the next elections and for the
necessary constitutional and structural reforms.
While progress has undeniably been made in Haiti since the consideration
of the Secretary-General’s first report on the execution of BINUH’s mandate (see
S/PV.8729), much remains to be done to extricate the country from the rut of
instability and current crises. It is a fact that the slowness of progress is due to
persistent political divisions, the difficulties in establishing an authentic, transparent
dialogue focused on the national interest and, now, the spread of COVID-19 in
the country.
All sectors of the nation must resolve to make the sacrifices critical to
containing the spread of coronavirus disease, to contribute to the establishment of
a realistic electoral calendar and to set out together — with determination — on the
path towards the great transformations that are needed for the country’s stability,

20-0828619/21

S/2020/568

recovery and long-term development. In that regard, there is an urgent need for a
far-reaching national dialogue.
A meaningful national dialogue is not simply a political exercise; it is a
necessity imposed on the country by the regrettable unbridled polarization of the
nation’s stakeholders. It is within such a framework that the multiple links necessary
for national restoration and recovery must be rebuilt. Without question, that is the
spirit of the various initiatives launched by the President since he came to power.
Even today, the Government first calls out to all the nation’s political forces, then
requests reinforced support from the United Nations system and other international
partners in order to relaunch, on solid foundations, the essential dialogue on major
issues of national interest.
Nothing great and lasting can be accomplished outside the founding values
of the Republic of Haiti or the essential principles on which the democratic
regime established by the Haitian Constitution is based. There is a real need for
constitutional reform that takes into account the facts and reality in the country
so as to remove, once and for all, the oft-condemned ambiguities in some of the
Constitution’s provisions. Constitutional reform and the organization of free and
democratic elections for the renewal of the political leadership are critical elements
of the proper functioning of national institutions. The Secretary-General’s report
highlights, in paragraphs 7 and 8, the efforts made by the Haitian authorities, with
the support of international partners, to bring about constitutional reform and the
organization of the next elections. Unfortunately, it is not easy to move forward at
the desired pace during the COVID-19 pandemic.
The Government of Haiti welcomes the emphasis of sections VI and VII
of the report on the deterioration of Haiti’s socioeconomic situation and the new
emergencies arising from the COVID-19 pandemic. Today, more than ever, Haiti
needs to develop better awareness of the root causes of its people’s difficulties
and specific needs. Indeed, the country’s socioeconomic situation has deteriorated
considerably under the combined effect of the prolonged political crisis, the peyi lòk
strategy and recurrent natural disasters.
We must not lose sight of the fact that Haiti has been hit hard over the last
10 years by the devastating earthquake of 12 January 2010, cyclones, drought, floods,
the cholera epidemic — which we will never cease to deplore — and the inconsistency
of many national and international actors. It is in this challenging context that the
coronavirus disease pandemic broke out in Haiti. Its impact is already being severely
felt in terms of livelihoods, especially those of young people, women and other
vulnerable groups. The national economy is facing multiple simultaneous shocks,
including reduced tax revenues, increased spending to respond to the crisis, reduced
foreign direct investment and exports and reduced remittances and multifaceted
contribution of the valiant and generous Haitian diaspora. The informal sector is
already paying a heavy price.
The health crisis further weakens the country’s capacity to respond to the
humanitarian crisis and climate shocks, especially during the cyclone season, from
June to November, which is already upon us.
The number of confirmed cases of COVID-19 is increasing significantly. As
of 16 June, the overall toll stands at 4,688 confirmed cases of infection, including
141 new cases and 82 deaths, and the death rate is 1.7 per cent.
The Government has taken an extensive series of measures to combat the
spread of the COVID-19 pandemic in the country. They include the establishment of
technical and administrative structures to manage the pandemic, a vast prevention
campaign, capacity-building, the acquisition of medical equipment and supplies and
20/21

20-08286

S/2020/568

the significant increase in the budget allocated to the Ministry of Public Health and
Population. We note with encouragement that the several Member States and United
Nations entities cited in paragraphs 35 and 36 of the report, as well as some nongovernmental organizations, have expressed support for the new “early warning,
early action” approach. The Government has also taken a number of additional
measures for young people, the unemployed, professionals, businesses and so on.
The management of the coronavirus disease pandemic has demonstrated the
relevance of better preparing countries for shocks and of the recovery-development
continuum. It also reveals the essential changes, in both the governance of vulnerable
countries and the modalities of international aid. Aid to Haiti is now, more than ever,
a subject requiring attention and strategic reflection. We must not get lost in the
context of the response to COVID-19 and the humanitarian crisis. Let us bear in
mind the main lessons learned from the modalities and level of aid provided to the
country after the devastating earthquake of 12 January 2010. Let us not persist in
making the same errors all over again. I keep in mind the important maxim that to
err is human, but to persist in error is diabolical.
In the current context, Haiti is in urgent need of adequate, predictable resources
to overcome many challenges, namely, the health crisis and its consequences, the
humanitarian crisis, the living conditions of the population, the holding of democratic
elections, corruption and impunity, the spread of firearms and the proliferation of
armed gangs.
Finally, I would like to convey here the urgent call for greater solidarity and
flexibility made to bilateral and multilateral donors by the President Moïse on the
occasion of the recent high-level meeting on financing for development, held by
video-teleconference. It is requiring determination, solidarity and flexibility in
the funding of emergency responses, recovery efforts and sustainable development
initiatives that will allow us to win — together — the battle against the COVID-19
pandemic and its socioeconomic consequences and to take other decisive action to
overcome the current challenges in Haiti.

20-0828621/21
