United Nations

S/PV.9254

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9254th meeting
Monday, 6 February 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Frazier/Ms.Gatt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Malta)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Ishikane
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-03434 (E)
*2303434*

S/PV.9254

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Denmark, Estonia, Germany, Italy,
Poland and Ukraine to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, to participate
in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Silvio Gonzato, Chargé d’Affaires ad interim of the
Delegation of the European Union to the United Nations,
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

06/02/2023

This violence, as you know, Madam President,
shows no sign of abating. Only last week, air strikes hit
hospitals on both sides of the front line, causing death
and injury among dozens of civilians. I personally
saw evidence of that relentless violence when I visited
Ukraine in December. I saw the devastation in the
countryside around Mykolayiv, riddled with mines. I
saw agricultural land destroyed, entire communities
cut off from electricity and essential supplies.
But in the midst of that tragedy, I also saw the
remarkable drive for survival by the people of Ukraine.
In Mykolayiv, I visited a bakery led by women that
had continued working throughout the war, although
with reduced capacity. With help from the World Food
Programme, the bakery has increased production and
now produces thousands of loaves every day that are
distributed to people in Kherson, the neighbouring
oblast, as well as Mykolayiv. People went back to
work — eagerly, avidly — when the opportunity arose.
In Kherson city, I saw volunteers, municipal employees
and local authorities working hand in hand with
humanitarian partners to provide a command centre.

Mr. Griffiths: For almost a whole year, the SecretaryGeneral, I and many others have briefed the Security
Council repeatedly on the humanitarian situation in
Ukraine. We have warned about the toxic brew of death,
destruction, displacement and deprivation that the war
has caused. We have spoken about the psychological
trauma it has left behind. We have condemned its deadly
toll on civilians. Yet the tragedy continues to unfold
with no end in sight. As we near the one-year mark of
this war, allow me to remind the Council of some facts.

In short, the people of Ukraine have left the whole
world in awe of their resilience. Resilience despite the
deadly violence. Resilience despite the power cuts and
the damaged energy sector, in the middle of a savage
winter. Resilience despite the mines and explosive
remnants of war, which are driving displacement,
preventing safe returns, hindering humanitarian aid,
interrupting agricultural activities and delaying the
restoration of essential services. Resilience despite the
sexual violence, the trafficking, the sexual exploitation
and the abuse. The people of Ukraine have been spared
none of the horrors of war. And the humanitarian
community has been doing its best to help to mitigate
those horrors.

Almost 40 per cent Ukraine’s population — 17.6 million
people — need humanitarian assistance. More than 7,000
civilians have been killed. Those are only the figures
confirmed by the United Nations; I am sure that the true
figures are higher. Nearly 8 million Ukrainians have
fled to neighbouring countries. In addition, 5.3 million
people have become internally displaced, many seeking
shelter in collective centres. Countless numbers of
people have hunkered down in basements for days and
weeks on end to seek protection from bombs — a new
way of life. Homes, schools, hospitals and other critical
civilian infrastructure have been destroyed. Entire
cities, towns and villages have been heavily damaged.

Over the past year, we have provided 15.8 million
people with assistance, including more than 1.3 million
people who are in areas outside the control of the
Government of Ukraine. We have delivered winter
clothes — I saw it — heating appliances, albeit not
enough them, and solid fuel and building materials. Of
course, the Ukrainian authorities themselves — national,
provincial and local Government— are doing all that
and more. We have delivered generators to hospitals,
shelters, heating points, water pumping facilities,
schools and places hosting internally displaced people.
We have delivered life-saving aid to villages near the
front line in rural parts of Donetsk, Zaporizhzhya,

I give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.

2/25

23-03434

06/02/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Kherson and Kharkiv oblasts, using inter-agency
convoys, which are now increasing in numbers, to
provide a comprehensive package of support, facilitated
by our constructive partnership with a wealth of
national, regional and local authorities.
Our operations have expanded exponentially in
the past year. The 2023 humanitarian response plan
for Ukraine, which I will launch next week in Geneva,
requires $3.9 billion to bring assistance to more than
11 million people. We should remember, lest it be lost
in history, that before February 2022 humanitarian
partners were already delivering assistance mainly
in the east, on both sides of the front line in Donetsk
and Luhansk oblasts for many years. More than 650
humanitarian organizations are operating today across
all of Ukraine’s 24 oblasts. That is not to say that
we should not reach more people, more frequently.
Humanitarian access to areas under the temporary
military control of the Russian Federation has become
increasingly unpredictable and difficult to achieve.
Despite repeated attempts and negotiations, we have
been unable to launch cross-line convoys to go from
one area to another, from north to south.
At the risk of repeating myself, I would like to
remind everyone of some basic rules of war. All parties
in Ukraine or any other such context should take
constant care to spare civilians and civilian objects
throughout their military operations. They should
allow and facilitate the rapid and unimpeded passage
of humanitarian relief for civilians in need, wherever
they are. That is something we must continue to
staunchly advocate from all angles, and we must insist
on the prerogatives that are enshrined in the Geneva
Conventions and international law. And we need to
address the war’s profound global implications for
global food and energy prices, trade and supply chains
and questions of nuclear safety. We are making progress
where we can. The Black Sea Grain Initiative is enabling
food exports to continue to reach global supply chains,
helping to lower prices and maintaining an essential
source of the World Food Programme wheat supplies.
The extension of the Initiative beyond March, when it
comes up for renewal, is of critical importance. As part
of the package, the United Nations will also continue to
press for the facilitation of food and fertilizer exports,
including ammonia, from the Russian Federation,
which remain a key part of our broader effort to address
global food insecurity.

S/PV.9254

On the eve of this horrific one-year milestone, which
comes on top of the previous eight years of conflict, we
have a lot to do, we have a lot to do together and we
can do better. I therefore conclude by calling on us all to
remain in solidarity with the people of Ukraine, just as
we do all over the world, in their time of need.
The President: I thank Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
thank Mr. Griffiths for his briefing. As we approach
24 February, the tragic one-year anniversary of the war,
Russia has continued its strikes on Ukrainian civilian infrastructure. There was a new wave of bombings
on 26 January, during the visit of France’s Minister for
Europe and Foreign Affairs to Odesa, which as of Saturday still had no electricity. Before that, on 14 January,
Russian strikes led to the death of 46 people in Dnipro.
France condemns in the strongest terms this strategy
of systematically targeting civilians and civilian infrastructure, attacks that constitute war crimes. Ukrainians
will soon have been facing such suffering for a year. It
is high time that it stopped. According to the statistics
available to us, in one year the war has killed more than
7,000 Ukrainian civilians and injured more than 11,000.
The actual numbers are undoubtedly much higher.
The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
recently pointed out that the intensified fighting will lead
to a further increase in the number of refugees. Approximately 8 million people have already left the country, and
more than 6 million are internally displaced in Ukraine.
Russia has banked on using the winter to bring
the Ukrainian people to their knees. It is redoubling
their suffering and attempting to deprive them of heat,
electricity and water. We cannot allow that strategy
to succeed, and we will continue to support Ukraine’s
legitimate efforts to defend itself. The Ukrainian
people are not alone. The overwhelming support of the
international community is undiminished. We stand
by them and will continue to do so. In that spirit, on
13 December 2022 France organized the Standing with
the Ukrainian People conference, which raised more
than €1 billion to help Ukraine meet its most urgent
needs. We remain fully ready to help today. To name just
a few noteworthy projects, in the past few weeks France
has delivered 63 high-voltage generators and 5 million
LED bulbs. All of our commitments will be fulfilled by
mid-February and will have a concrete impact on the
daily lives of millions of Ukrainians.

23-034343/25

S/PV.9254

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

The consequences of Russia’s aggression extend far
beyond the borders of Ukraine. It has caused global food
insecurity whose severity has reached unprecedented
levels. We urge Russia not to hinder the renewal of
the Black Sea Grain Initiative next March. In the face
of this aggression, France will continue to stand by
Ukraine. We will never resign ourselves to a world in
which force prevails over law or in which a country
that is a permanent member of the Security Council
can violate the fundamental principles of the Charter of
the United Nations with impunity. We will continue to
support the investigations led by the Ukrainian justice
system and international courts to combat impunity,
as well as to provide the Ukrainian people with all the
humanitarian, economic and military support they need
to exercise their legitimate right to self-defence and
preserve their freedom.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Mr. Martin Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, for his briefing and for the valuable work
he and his team are doing on the ground.
As long ago as the 28 February 2022 meeting of
the Security Council (see S/PV.8983), only four days
after the military operation against Ukraine began,
Mr. Griffiths was already giving the Council a view of a
humanitarian landscape marked by horror, devastation
and death. He warned how brutal and protracted urban
warfare and bombing could be and therefore called
for an immediate cessation of hostilities. In just those
few days more than 500,000 people had already fled,
and thousands of African, Latin American and other
students from all over the world were affected, including
some from Ecuador, which provided services to and
evacuated nearly a thousand of them through a series of
humanitarian flights. Russia’s repeated denials that it
would carry out military strikes limited the possibilities
for their safe evacuation and exacerbated the impact on
the civilian population.
In condemning the constantly deteriorating
humanitarian situation, Ecuador was therefore one of
the 17 countries that called on 20 March 2022 for a
resumption of the eleventh emergency special session
of the General Assembly to advocate for efforts to
alleviate the serious consequences of what was then
a month-long siege, invasion and bombardment of
densely populated cities. Through General Assembly
resolution ES-11/2, on the humanitarian consequences
of the aggression against Ukraine, of which we were
4/25

06/02/2023

a sponsor, we demanded that civilians, objects vital
to their survival and the infrastructure necessary for
the provision of essential services be fully protected.
One year later, it remains incumbent on the Security
Council and its members to continue to comply with
and ensure others’ compliance with those provisions,
in line with the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and its
Additional Protocol I of 1977.
With more than 6 million people internally
displaced in Ukraine and almost 8 million refugees
in Europe, Ecuador is deeply concerned about the
situation of women and girls, who are most exposed
to violence and abuse, including sexual violence. We
are also saddened that criminal human trafficking and
smuggling organizations have taken advantage of the
risk environment created by the military aggression.
In accordance with the principles of responsibility and
accountability, none of that can go unpunished.
We condemn the continuing escalation in attacks
and bombings targeting critical infrastructure, which is
further jeopardizing access to basic services. Attacks
on energy infrastructure, hospitals, homes and schools
have particularly adverse effects women, children
and the elderly. The essential pillars of life are being
destroyed, in addition to cultural heritage, which is a
source of identity. The bombings are also poisoning
Ukraine’s fertile land, which is critical to global food
security. We reiterate that there is an obligation to
ensure humanitarian access and that the attacks on
civilian targets must stop.
More than 9 million people are in need of
humanitarian and livelihood assistance; nearly
15 million people in need of health care; and
16 million people are in need of water, hygiene and
sanitation — Ecuador’s population is 17 million people,
so that is the equivalent of my entire country being in
the same situation many Ukrainians are in today. Many
people are in also need of heating. And all of that
requires the continued mobilization of the international
community. We therefore welcomed the convening on
13 December in Paris of a conference to support civil
resilience, which must remain the priority of the United
Nations system.
How many more people must die? How many
more women and girls must be abused or raped? How
much more misery and hunger must occur for the
invasion to stop? The longer this war goes on, the more
destruction and pain it will cause. Therefore, the best
23-03434

06/02/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

way to honour the victims of this senseless tragedy,
including every one of the thousands of children who
have been orphaned or killed, is to put an end to the
military aggression in order to give way to dialogue and
enable the restoration of peace within the framework
of respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity
and political independence of Ukraine. That will also
enable progress towards reconstruction and reparations
in accordance with international law.
Ecuador supports and will continue to support
the work of the International Criminal Court and the
International Court of Justice. And we insist that the
International Court of Justice’s order for Russia to
immediately suspend its military operations that began
on 24 February 2022 in Ukraine be complied with.
Finally, in recognizing the Black Sea Grain
Initiative’s contribution to alleviating the global
consequences of food insecurity, we hope that the
Council will reaffirm its support for the work of the
Secretary-General and effectively crystallize the
Initiative. We believe that the Initiative should be
renewed automatically and that its implementation
should continue unhindered.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I would like
to express my compassion to the many people who are
working in the rubble of the earthquake that hit Türkiye
and Syria this morning and which has already claimed
thousands of lives.
I thank Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths
for his update on the humanitarian situation in Ukraine.
This February, we will mark 12 months since the
war in Ukraine began — 12 months of deadly war that
have shaken and posed serious challenges to the entire
international system; 12 months of humanitarian distress that have made death, destruction, fear and exodus
the backdrop of daily life for people in cities and in the
countryside; and 12 months during which humanitarian
personnel have shown remarkable courage in providing
assistance and protection and in meeting the urgent
needs of the population in terms of medical care, water,
food, electricity generators and other basic necessities.
In Ukraine and in the countries hosting refugees, humanitarian aid also includes cash donations and educational assistance to children with a view to mitigating
the effects of war on the schooling of young children.
In paying tribute to the valiant humanitarians who
risk their lives in the trenches and devastated ruins to
keep the flame of hope alive for the sake of humanity,

S/PV.9254

we once again call on the parties to the conflict to
strictly respect international humanitarian law and
urge them to grant unhindered access to those in need
of humanitarian assistance. Humanitarian assistance
must never be subject to politicization or bargaining.
We call on the parties to strictly adhere to their
international commitments to protect civilians,
especially children, women and vulnerable persons,
and to refrain from any attacks that target civilian
infrastructure. The allegations of sexual violence being
committed and used as a weapon of war are particularly
alarming. We condemn all such attacks and underscore
once again the obligations of the parties under
international law. My country also condemns the use
of weapons with indiscriminate effects, such as cluster
munitions, anti-personnel mines and guided weapons,
which primarily target civilians.
Despite the outpouring of solidarity shown since
the beginning of the war through the provision of
multifaceted assistance, the humanitarian needs in
Ukraine have yet to be fully addressed. The recent
visit to Kyiv by United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees Filippo Grandi demonstrated the magnitude
of the needs that have arisen because of the everincreasing bombings. There is also a need for everhigher funding, as Under-Secretary-General Griffiths
just confirmed in highlighting the scope of the funding
needed to meet the humanitarian response plan.
Many signs are signalling a trend towards a war of
attrition. The prospects for dialogue between the parties
are slow to emerge. Neither of the parties seem ready to
sit down at the negotiating table. On the contrary, each
side is sharpening its weapons, refining its tactics and
toughening its rhetoric.
Meanwhile, Ukraine is being torn apart, with tens
of thousands of refugees, in addition to internally
displaced persons and huge economic losses. In
just a few months, the cost of rebuilding the country
increased from $350 billion to $700 billion, according
to the latest estimates. The economic repercussions
of this war, which have an impact on most of the
world’s nations directly or indirectly, have exacerbated
pre-existing vulnerabilities.
It is time to envision an end to this war and to
stop its barrage of death and destruction. It is time to
activate the diplomatic channels and to silence the guns
in Ukraine.

23-034345/25

S/PV.9254

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

06/02/2023

Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I join the previous
speaker in conveying our deep condolences to the
Governments and the peoples of Syria and Türkiye in
the light of the death and destruction brought about by
an earthquake in their countries earlier today.

and 2000s to create a sustainable European security
architecture was a ticking time bomb, and we are now
seeing the consequences. Only a political solution agreed
by all can bring lasting peace to the region and offer both
sides an opportunity to coexist in harmony.

I
thank
Under-Secretary-General
Martin
Griffiths for his briefing, and I commend the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for the
professionalism with which it has conducted operations
in Ukraine under extremely difficult conditions and,
at times, with enormous risk to the personal safety of
humanitarian workers.

It is regrettable that transfers of arms and
ammunition are dominating the public debate on the
conflict in Ukraine. In the light of the report we just
heard about the deteriorating humanitarian situation, the
Council and the regional actors should be prioritizing an
immediate cessation of hostilities and the start of peace
negotiations. We renew the call for a ceasefire without
preconditions and reiterate our support and willingness
to participate in mediation efforts.

We welcomed the arrival in January of the first
humanitarian convoy to the Soledar region, one of
the hardest hit by the fighting. Those efforts have
been critical to the survival of a significant portion of
Ukraine’s population, which is threatened by bombings
and missile attacks in residential areas, as well as
the destruction of energy infrastructure and hospital
facilities amid the rigours of winter.
Brazil reiterates its condemnation of attacks on
civilian targets, in violation of international law and
international humanitarian law. We urge all parties to
allow and facilitate rapid, safe and unhindered access to
humanitarian assistance for those in need, and to protect
civilians, including humanitarian personnel and people
in vulnerable situations, especially children. There
must be no politicization of humanitarian assistance or
selective application of international humanitarian law.
We are particularly alarmed by the recent signs
of an escalation and are following with concern news
about the launch of a new military offensive at a time
when shipments of weapons and ammunition to the
region are also increasing. Reports have revealed the
use of anti-personnel mines in combat, in violation
of the 1997 Convention on the Prohibition of the Use,
Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel
Mines and on Their Destruction. Brazil condemns the
use of such destructive weapons. History has shown that
it has lasting consequences that Ukrainians will have to
deal with long after the war is over. The parties are still
operating based on the logic of a military solution to the
conflict, and Brazil is concerned about the possibility
that the conflict will become more deadly if more
weapons are sent to the battlefield. As President Lula
said, “Brazil is a country of peace. At this stage, we
must find those who want peace, a word that so far has
not often been used”. The unwillingness of the 1990s
6/25

Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
First, on behalf of the United Kingdom, I want to join
others in offering condolences to the people affected
by the earthquake in Türkiye and Syria. Our thoughts
are with the families in mourning on this sad day, and
our appreciation goes to the many who are contributing
to the rescue and relief efforts. The United Kingdom
is contributing immediate support and we are in
close touch with those responding on the ground.
Focusing on Ukraine, I would like to thank UnderSecretary-General Griffiths for his briefing today. As the
United Nations has set out in many briefings in the year
since Russia started the war, Russia’s invasion has been
devastating for the Ukrainian people. We receive daily
reports of families, children and elderly and disabled
people struggling to make ends meet while sheltering
from relentless firing. A staggering 17.6 million
people will require humanitarian assistance in 2023.
The ongoing insecurity across the front lines
has prevented humanitarian organizations from
establishing a sustained presence and access to those
who need it most. The United Kingdom’s support for
neutral, impartial humanitarian action in Ukraine is
clear. We commend the efforts of the United Nations
and humanitarian organizations, but we know that in
the territory controlled by Russia there is limited access
for humanitarian organizations and sometimes none at
all. The systematic denial of humanitarian access must
end. That ongoing attitude is consistent with Russia’s
behaviour throughout the war, including the deliberate
and callous targeting of civilian infrastructure and the
instrumentalization of access to food and energy, which
has had implications for vulnerable people in Ukraine
and across the globe.
23-03434

06/02/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

S/PV.9254

The Black Sea Grain Initiative has helped increase
vital supplies and reduce global food prices. The global
demand for Ukraine’s grain remains strong. And yet
in recent weeks, Russian inspections of ships have
slowed and the backlog of waiting ships has increased.
Exports under the Initiative have fallen. We join others
in calling on Russia to fulfil its commitments, in line
with the memorandum of understanding with the
United Nations to “facilitate the unimpeded export
of food” from Ukraine’s Black Sea ports. That means
renewing the Black Sea Grain Initiative next month and
scaling up inspections at a rate that better meets the
global demand.

The barrage of missiles and drone attacks has become
Russia’s signature punishment, aimed at instilling terror
in the civilian population. Where Russian missiles fall,
horrors follow and life ends. Protecting civilians is a
legal obligation that is solidly enshrined in international
humanitarian law. If observed, it would represent one
of the most important ways to help Ukrainians rebuild
their lives. It is not happening. When we hear claims
that Russian forces are not attacking civilians, we
wonder which reality they are referring to, since those
on the ground — humanitarian workers, reporters,
human rights activists and the Ukrainians who are the
victims — see the exact opposite.

The world needs just and sustainable peace in
Ukraine. Russia must stop seeking to shift blame
and face up to some very basic truths. First, it must
acknowledge the immense suffering its war is causing
its own people, the people of Ukraine and others around
the world. Secondly, it must recognize that there is
one clear solution to end the suffering — a unilateral
withdrawal of Russian troops in line with the Charter of
the United Nations, and an end to its futile war.

As highlighted many times, this war is having
a terrible impact on the most vulnerable, who are
precisely those we are legally and morally bound to
always shield and protect from any harm: the children.
Millions cannot attend school, as their schools have
been damaged or demolished — a courtesy from their
brothers on the other side of the border. Countless
children are going hungry and are continuously exposed
to the risk of depression, anxiety and post-traumatic
stress disorder. For 50 consecutive weeks, children in
Ukraine have not gone to sleep with bedtime stories.
Instead, they endure nightmares, traumatized by the
sounds of sirens announcing shelling and the fear of
death coming through the roof.

Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I would like to join my
colleagues in expressing our most sincere condolences
to all affected by the devastating earthquake in Türkiye
and Syria.
I thank Under-Secretary-General Griffiths for the
updated information and for the excellent work being
done to meet the humanitarian needs of the people
in Ukraine.
This is the 348th day of the Russian invasion of
Ukraine, an ongoing catastrophe made by one man,
which, as we heard and as we know, continues to
wreak havoc on an entire country, claim innocent lives
and keep the world in uncertainty. The data are as
depressing as the situation remains desperate. With no
end in sight, the bloody conflict is transforming by the
day into a horrifying war of attrition. The widespread
and repeated targeting of Ukrainian energy and other
civilian infrastructure continues to create victims
among some civilians and make life difficult if not
impossible for others. Millions of displaced people are
unable to return to their homes. Others are forced to
live in dire conditions, deprived of access to electricity,
water, heat and related vital services in the midst of a
very cold winter. Odesa, a city newly inscribed on the
World Heritage List, finds itself in darkness.

As we all know, the impact and ripple effects of the
war are not limited to Ukraine. According to UNICEF,
the economic downturn caused by the war and rising
inflation have caused child poverty across Europe and
Central Asia to increase by 19 per cent. Of course, those
estimates are always conservative and the actual data
may be far worse. Outside Ukraine, some 20 countries,
including my own, continue to pay the price. It comes as
no surprise that Russia itself has experienced the most
significant increase in the number of children living in
poverty during this time, with an additional 2.8 million
children now living in households below the poverty
line, according to UNICEF figures.
Where does that leave us? Nearly 5,000 children
may die before their first birthday, while close to
120,000 children have dropped out of school, leading to
severe learning losses. What a tragic conclusion: if you
do not die in the war, you will die because of the war.
We must not let ourselves become familiar with
the horrors of the war. We must not let ourselves be
impregnated by the so-called fatigue from continued

23-034347/25

S/PV.9254

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

exposure to endless human suffering, destruction
and loss, counting the number of victims. We must
not become victims of powerlessness because, for the
first time in modern history, a permanent member of
the Security Council and a nuclear Power is waging a
war — we now know why — to grab territory by force.
We must not tire or surrender to the aggression, but
continue our efforts to get Russia to come to its senses
and put an end to its war. We must continue to oppose
firmly, denounce openly and strongly and counter
resolutely that business of death.
We must continue to document, nationally and
internationally, every violation of international
humanitarian law and human rights law: the killing of
civilians; the illegal transfer of populations, including
children; the use of torture and sexual and gender-based
violence as a weapon; and the deliberate destruction or
damage of civilian objects to force an entire population
into submission. We must remind ourselves that we have
resolved, collectively, to live in the era of accountability,
not in the realm of impunity. The perpetrators must
know that they will be held accountable.
We will continue to support and to stand for
Ukraine, as we stand for fundamental rights and respect
for international law. We reiterate our call on Russia
to stop, to put an end to its war and to withdraw all
forces and military equipment from the entire territory
of Ukraine within its international recognized borders.
That is how life, which is being destroyed every day in
Ukraine, will be restored. That is how dialogue may be
possible, and that is how the peace we want will prevail.

06/02/2023

of the Ukrainian people. The humanitarian situation has
been aggravated by the harsh winter. Any continuation
of those attacks is completely unacceptable. We
recall that indiscriminate attacks on innocent civilian
populations constitute a war crime.
We condemn all violations of international
humanitarian law and violations and abuses of human
rights, and call upon all parties to the armed conflict
to strictly respect international humanitarian law. We
underline that there can be no impunity for war crimes
and other atrocities, including sexual and genderbased violence. The international community must
hold those responsible to account in accordance with
international law.
We commend the implementation of the Black Sea
Grain Initiative and urge all parties — the Russian
Federation in particular — to further facilitate grain
exports from Ukraine without any obstructions.
In response to the dire needs of the Ukrainian
people, Japan has been strongly pushing forward our
initiative to provide assistance to the people of Ukraine
with the international community. Specifically, we
have provided a total of $1.5 billion in humanitarian,
financial and food-related aid, including further
winterization assistance, to Ukraine and other countries
affected by Russia’s aggression. We have also warmly
accepted people who have fled from Ukraine and
provided assistance for a safe life in Japan.

It is truly regrettable that we have to state what
has already been said by the overwhelming majority of
Member States so many times, but Japan once again
reiterates our condemnation, in the strongest terms, of
Russia’s aggression against Ukraine, which is a clear
and flagrant violation of international law and the
Charter of the United Nations.

Going forward, the Government of Japan
continues to work with international organizations,
the Japan International Cooperation Agency and
non-governmental
organizations,
focusing
on
emergency humanitarian assistance, recovery and
reconstructing the livelihoods of Ukrainian people
from the viewpoint of ensuring human security. That
will include assistances in such areas as mine action,
debris removal, housing, hospitals, schools and
electricity, in addition to winterization assistance. In
order to implement further support, Japan welcomes
efforts by the countries concerned to coordinate their
assistance to Ukraine in a consistent, transparent and
comprehensive manner.

We also condemn Russian attacks against civilian
infrastructure and cities across Ukraine. Russia’s
deliberate attacks on hospitals, schools and energy and
other critical infrastructure threaten the lives and future

The suffering in Ukraine must end. Japan hereby
renews its firm commitment to providing our utmost
support and will continue to stand by the people
of Ukraine.

Mr. Ishikane (Japan): On behalf of the Government
of Japan, I also join my colleagues in extending our
heartfelt condolences and sympathy to the victims of
the huge earthquake that hit Türkiye and Syria.
I thank Mr. Martin Griffiths for his briefing.

8/25

23-03434

06/02/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): Mozambique wishes to
align itself with the remarks by other Security Council
members in expressing our deepest condolences
to Türkiye and Syria for the loss of human life as a
consequence of the terrible earthquake that took
place today.
We wish to express our thanks to Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, for his
useful briefing. We also welcome the participation
in this Security Council meeting of the Permanent
Representatives of Ukraine, Estonia, Italy, Poland,
Germany and Denmark, as well as the Chargé d’Affaires
ad interim of the Delegation of the European Union.
The recent developments in Ukraine are a matter
of great concern to Mozambique. We are witnessing an
increase in the intensity of the armed confrontation. We
are deeply saddened to see that this war has already
caused enormous destruction in terms of economic
and social infrastructure in Ukraine. The war has
claimed the lives of thousands of innocent people and
deprived people of their basic needs, such as food,
water, electricity and education. As in every war
situation, women and children are the greatest victims.
In that connection, the international community must
continue to pull together its efforts to extend muchneeded humanitarian assistance to the suffering people
of Ukraine.
We profoundly regret that, day after day, the logic
of war has been escalating and the prospects for a
negotiated settlement on the basis of the Charter of the
United Nations are dimming and even vanishing.
It is therefore our duty to call on the parties in
conflict to come to the negotiating table in order to
find a solution to this tragic situation. As members of
this organ mandated to maintain international peace
and security, we are obligated under the Charter to
cooperate and support efforts in that direction. We are
duty-bound to explore avenues that can lead the parties
to an understanding.
We know, from our own experience, the heavy costs
of war. We also know from our long and protracted
conflicts in Africa and elsewhere that humanitarian
problems can only have a political solution. We therefore
reiterate our call to the parties to show restraint and
engage in a frank and constructive dialogue conducive
to a negotiated and lasting settlement of the conflict.

S/PV.9254

We strongly appeal to the parties to bear in mind and
abide by their obligations under international law and
international humanitarian law.
We wish to conclude by reiterating our strong
support and encouragement for the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator and his team for their important work in this
challenging situation of war in Ukraine.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
expresses its deep condolences to the Governments and
the peoples of Türkiye and Syria for the heavy loss of
lives and properties caused by the powerful earthquakes.
We express our sympathy to the bereaved families and
the injured. China will provide emergency humanitarian
assistance based on the needs of the two countries, and
we sincerely hope that the peoples of Türkiye and Syria
will overcome the disaster and rebuild their homes.
Over the past year, since the Ukraine crisis broke
out, the humanitarian situation there has always tugged
at our heartstrings. Conflicts on the ground show no signs
of easing up, the logic of military solutions still prevails,
and a large number of heavy weapons keep pouring into
the battlefields. The international community deplores
the humanitarian cost of the conflict.
But the parties concerned have failed to demonstrate
their sincere desire to promote peace talks and their
determination to resolve the issue politically. China once
again calls on the relevant parties to bear in mind the
interests of the people, strive to promote peace and do
everything possible to push the parties to the conflict
to resume peace talks and end the war at an early date.
During armed conflicts, priority should be given
to humanitarian issues. China has always stressed
that parties to conflict must abide by international
humanitarian law, adhere to the humanitarian bottom
line of respecting life, refrain from attacking civilians
and civilian facilities and ensure the safe evacuation
of personnel and the smooth delivery of humanitarian
relief. We appreciate the enormous work by international
humanitarian agencies and neighbouring countries to
ease the humanitarian situation in Ukraine, especially
the help provided to vulnerable groups such as refugees
and displaced persons. We encourage the international
community to continue to uphold the humanitarian
spirit, scale up relief to all affected people and speed
up the repair of civilian infrastructure in order to
mitigate the impact of the conflict on people’s lives.

23-034349/25

S/PV.9254

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

The safety and security of nuclear facilities in
Ukraine leave no room for mistakes. Any accident could
result in a tremendous humanitarian and ecological
catastrophe. China calls for an immediate stop to the
shelling of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant, the
earnest implementation of the seven pillars for ensuring
nuclear safety and security proposed by the Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) and maximum efforts to stop the conflict from
escalating to a nuclear crisis. We welcome the fact that
the IAEA has sent experts to all nuclear power facilities
in Ukraine and appreciate the Agency’s efforts to ensure
the safety and security of Ukraine’s nuclear facilities.
We support the Agency’s efforts to remain engaged with
Russia and Ukraine on the issue of the Zaporizhzhya
nuclear power plant so as to reach meaningful
arrangements acceptable to both sides as soon as possible.
On issues related to global food, energy and
financial security, all parties should demonstrate their
humanitarian responsibilities and manage and control
the spillover effect of the crisis in a responsible manner.
In an era of increasing integration and globalization,
wilful sanctions and the artificial blocking of the flow
of the industrial and supply chains will only exacerbate
the ripple effect of the crisis and inflict a heavy cost
on the whole world, especially developing countries.
The continued implementation of the Black Sea Grain
Initiative is key to expanding the food supply and
stabilizing global food prices. At the same time, we
also hope to see practical results in removing obstacles
to Russia’s grain and fertilizer exports, and we support
the United Nations in stepping up its coordination role.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that on the
Ukrainian issue, China always stands on the side of
peace, dialogue and humanity. We are ready to work
with the rest of the international community to support
all efforts to resolve the Ukrainian crisis peacefully
and help all people trapped in the war to return to peace
at an early date.

06/02/2023

of the humanitarian crisis, the serious violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law and the
heavy toll being placed on the civilian population.
That is reflected in the massive humanitarian
needs. According to an assessment by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, nearly 18 million
people will need humanitarian assistance in Ukraine
in 2023. Thousands of people have been killed or are
severely injured, both physically and psychologically.
Millions of people have been driven from their
homes and have no access to basic infrastructure,
such as electricity, water or health services. The most
vulnerable people, such as the disabled and the elderly,
are particularly affected. For children, war causes
enormous mental distress. That is compounded by the
fact that, according to UNICEF, 5 million children no
longer have access to education. Their future plans
have been turned upside down overnight.
Attacks on civilian infrastructure, such as hospitals,
schools and homes, further worsen the situation
of the civilian population. Switzerland recalls that
international humanitarian law and human rights must
be respected. In this winter period, we are particularly
dismayed by Russia’s indiscriminate attacks on energy
infrastructure. We reiterate our call on Russia to
immediately de-escalate the situation, cease all combat
operations and withdraw its troops from the entirety
of Ukrainian territory without delay. Those responsible
for the aggression and all the crimes committed must
be brought to justice.
We commend the tireless work of humanitarian
actors in Ukraine. In order for them to continue to
meet the urgent needs of the population, safe, rapid
and unhindered humanitarian access must be ensured
throughout Ukraine, including in the areas occupied
by Russia. Nearly a year since the conflict started,
humanitarian access remains a priority.

Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
wish to join others in expressing our sincere condolences
to all of the victims of the devastating earthquake in
Türkiye and Syria. Switzerland is deploying rescue
teams to the affected zones and pledges to contribute to
humanitarian aid to the population in need.

Switzerland will continue its support to the
affected population with, among other things, the
delivery of winter supplies and the repair of housing
and energy infrastructure. In addition to meeting the
urgent humanitarian needs, it is now necessary to
move forward with the reconstruction process in an
inclusive and transparent manner, as provided for by
the Lugano principles.

I thank Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths
for his remarks and for the briefing following his trip
to Ukraine. His testimony underscores the magnitude

The humanitarian consequences of the war are felt
beyond Ukraine. The war must stop immediately. In the
meantime, diplomatic solutions such as the Black Sea

10/25

23-03434

06/02/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Grain Initiative, facilitated by the Secretary-General,
have helped to mitigate some of those impacts. We
encourage all parties to pursue all such efforts.
The protection of the civilian population is an
urgent humanitarian imperative. As members of the
Security Council, we must work tirelessly for a just
peace, consistent with international law, and for the
protection of civilians.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): At the outset, we would
like to join other delegations in expressing our deep
sympathies to the Governments and the peoples of
Türkiye and Syria over the devastating effects of
the recent earthquake, which led to the loss of many
lives and the destruction of a number of properties. I
thank the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Martin
Griffiths, for his extensive and informative briefing.
Ghana, like other members of the Security Council,
continues to be concerned by the extremely difficult
and worsening humanitarian conditions in Ukraine. We
reaffirm our complete commitment to upholding and
respecting the sovereignty, political independence and
territorial integrity of Ukraine. We reiterate our support
for all international efforts aimed at ending the war.
The aggression of the Russian Federation against
Ukraine, which begun in February last year, has
created one of the fastest-growing humanitarian crises
in Europe since the Second World War. It has entailed
extreme suffering, destruction and the loss of lives and
livelihoods for many Ukrainians.
Having closely followed the developments of the
war over the past 12 months, we are of the view that
peace efforts in Ukraine must be anchored on the
realities of the millions of Ukrainians affected by the
war. That is particularly important, as some 18 million
people, representing 40 per cent of the population,
stand in need of life-saving humanitarian assistance.
To date, more than 18,000 civilian casualties,
caused largely by the use of explosive weapons with
wide-area effects, have been recorded. Such an assault
on non-combatant, innocent civilians in any conflict
situation is morally unjustifiable. It also constitutes a
serious violation of the legal protections afforded to
civilians under international humanitarian law.
We reiterate the obligations of the warring parties
to take specific actions aimed at preserving lives and
upholding human dignity amid the irrationality of

S/PV.9254

war. We strongly urge all parties to grant unimpeded
humanitarian access and to refrain from further
targeted missile attacks on residential facilities, energy
installations and other civilian infrastructure. Respect
by the parties for the principles of proportionality and
distinction is crucial to saving lives and, in this case,
would help to keep hospitals, schools and markets open
and functioning.
The impact of violent conflicts on children, in
particular, is an indictment on the promise of the
United Nations to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war. The future of Ukraine’s children is
dependent on the actions that we take today to promote
international peace and security, and we must spare
no effort in helping to end the war and restoring the
promise of a peaceful tomorrow to the children.
We commend the several initiatives spearheaded by
UNICEF in the areas of delivering primary health care,
mental-health and psychosocial support, nutrition, safe
water, sanitation and hygiene support. We also note the
important measures being undertaken to safeguard the
rights of children through the strengthening of critical
support systems and essential services.
The multiplicity of the challenges presented by
the war demands a holistic and effective humanitarian
response, involving a multisectoral approach and
coordination among various United Nations agencies.
We are therefore appreciative of the efforts of the United
Nations and its partners as they continue to provide
much-needed assistance and protection for those
affected. The Security Council must remain supportive
of the work of all agencies operating in Ukraine in a
manner that ensures optimal assistance and protection
for all those in need. We also reiterate the calls made
by the various agencies for increased donor funding to
support the scaling-up of assistance to areas where they
are most needed.
Concerning the reports of gross violations of
international human rights law, including conflictrelated sexual abuse, human trafficking, “filtration”
processes, torture and summary killings, we maintain
the view that there must be accountability, established
through the thorough, transparent and independent
investigation of all claims. The international community
must work in a concerted and coordinated manner to
ensure accountability for such violations and the rights
of victims to remedy and to reparations through the
strengthening of the international justice system.

23-0343411/25

S/PV.9254

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

06/02/2023

We believe that diplomatic efforts in Ukraine must
be intensified to align with the growing complexity of
the war, and, in that regard, we call on the members
of the Council to work in a united manner to support
the de-escalation of tensions and work towards the
cessation of hostilities. We must intensify peace efforts
and help to bring the parties together to address their
concerns through dialogue and a negotiated settlement.

Nazis had not violated international humanitarian law
by using their own civilians as human shields. It is also
of course extremely repugnant for the Kyiv regime and
the collective West to try to ignore the long-standing
criminal actions of the Armed Forces of Ukraine
and the nationalist battalions against the residents of
Donbas and other areas that became part of Russia
following last September’s referendums.

Lastly, we wish to reiterate our call on the Russian
Federation to bring an end to its actions in Ukraine
with the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of its
forces from the internationally recognized borders of
Ukraine. We urge the Russian Federation, as a member
of the United Nations and the Security Council, in
particular, to conform its actions to the principles of
international law and the core values of the Charter of
the United Nations.

Evidence of violations of international humanitarian
law and deliberate attacks on civilian facilities by
Kyiv increases on a daily basis. On 28 January, an
American HIMARS multiple-launch rocket system
targeted a hospital in the town of Novoaidar in the
Luhansk People’s Republic. As a result of that tragedy,
14 people were killed and another 24 received injuries
of varying levels of seriousness. Needless to say, there
was no reaction to that crime from Western countries,
since at that moment they were busy trying to “groom”
the tragedies, first in Dnipro and then Kramatorsk,
where thanks to the emplacement of Ukrainian airdefence systems in residential areas, in violation of
norms of international humanitarian law, missiles fell
on residential buildings. The intentional shelling of
working civilian medical facilities and the deliberate
killing of civilians represent serious war crimes by the
Kyiv regime and its Western masters. The worst is that
children are dying as a result of the Kyiv regime’s artillery
strikes on the territory of the Donetsk and Luhansk
people’s republics and the liberated areas of Kherson
and Zaporizhzhya. Because of the actions of the Armed
Forces of Ukraine, in 2022 a total of 4,574 civilians died,
including 153 children, and 279 children were wounded.

Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, I would like to express our
deep and sincere condolences to the Governments
and the peoples of Türkiye and Syria with regard to
the numerous casualties as a result of the devastating
earthquake that has occurred in those countries. Our
rescuers have already flown to Syria, and we are ready
to provide the necessary support to our Turkish friends.
Today, at the initiative of a number of our
Western colleagues, we are once again discussing the
humanitarian situation in Ukraine. By raising that topic,
they clearly hope to present our actions in Ukraine in
as unflattering a light as possible, and they want to
highlight the suffering and deprivation of the civilian
population of this country, while keeping silent about
what the residents of Donbas have suffered during nine
years of Ukrainian shelling.
However, as the Ukrainian crisis develops, it is
becoming increasingly difficult for our former Western
partners to paint such a black and white picture. After
all, it is increasingly clear that the civilian population
of Ukraine would have long since ceased to suffer if
the Kyiv regime and its Western masters had been
interested in peace.
The former Israeli Prime Minister, Naftali Bennett,
told us all the other day how the Ukrainians had been
sidelined by Washington and London and prevented
from agreeing realistic peace terms a month after
the start of the special military operation. Efforts to
find a solution for peace would also have been more
successful today if the Ukrainian nationalists and
12/25

The Ukrainian forces are targeting not merely
civilian objects but the infrastructure that ensures
children’s lives and welfare. Schools and children’s
hospitals are being destroyed by the Kyiv regime’s
strikes. To cite some examples from just this past week,
school No. 66 in Donetsk was shelled and its interior
seriously damaged. In mid-January Ukrainian forces
shelled a Donetsk mother-and-child care centre. We
regularly send Mrs. Gamba de Potgieter, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, data on crimes committed by the
Armed Forces of Ukraine against children, particularly
killings, maimings and attacks on schools and hospitals.
The lack of a reaction from the United States and the
other NATO countries that are supplying Kyiv with longrange artillery and missile systems to Kyiv’s repeated
and monstrous trampling of international humanitarian
23-03434

06/02/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

law once again confirms their direct involvement in
the conflict and their complicity in the crimes being
committed. As to how that affects the prospects for
peace in Ukraine is something that we will discuss
separately and in detail at another Security Council
meeting that we will be convening on 8 February.
The selective blindness and cynicism of Western
countries in the face of indisputable facts was
particularly evident during the Arria Formula meeting
of the Council on the shelling of Donbas by Ukraine
that we held on 20 January. Council members had the
opportunity to see and hear from people who had just
been in Donetsk, those who live, or rather who survive
there, every day under the Ukrainian strikes, strikes
that began much earlier than last February — more than
eight years ago, in fact. One of those who specifically
addressed the Council was Maya Pirogova, whose
daughter died during one of those inhumane attacks by
the Ukrainian army with the help of American longrange weapons. And what did they find to say when they
looked her in the eye? Merely hackneyed mantras about
“Russian propaganda”. As far as our former Western
partners are concerned, the inhabitants of Donbas do
not exist, and they have been doing everything they
can to shamelessly consign to oblivion what has been
happening to them since 2014. But that will not work.
We want to once again affirm that every act of criminal
abuse committed by Ukrainian armed forces under the
auspices of the West will be carefully recorded and will
not go unpunished.
Given the scale of Kyiv’s crimes, it is becoming
increasingly difficult for international human rights
organizations with any claim to objectivity to ignore
them. For example, the most recent report from Human
Rights Watch, which can hardly be suspected of
sympathizing with Russia, confirmed what we have
stated repeatedly in this Chamber, which is that Ukraine
has been systematically using banned anti-personnel
“petal” butterfly mines against civilians in Donbas. As
the report indicates, the mines are deployed remotely,
using rocket projectiles, or by scattering mines from
aircraft or with special types of remote mining devices.
On the ground they are unnoticeable and can therefore
easily maim both adults and children, who can mistake
them for toys. We have demonstrated models of this
barbaric device a number of times. Another teenager
was blown up by a mine of this type in Donetsk
on 2 February, and there have been 89 such tragic
detonations altogether.

S/PV.9254

Kyiv’s shelling also is also threatening civilians
in Russia’s border regions. In the Belgorod, Kursk and
Bryansk regions, 700 houses have been destroyed and
dozens of civilians have been killed or injured as a result
of strikes by the Armed Forces of Ukraine. The Western
media is either deliberately ignoring it or hypocritically
presenting it as deserved revenge on the part of Ukraine.
However, we should not confuse civilian casualties
that occur as a result of the mistaken and sometimes
criminal actions of Ukrainian air-defence systems with
Ukraine’s intentional shelling of civilian infrastructure
that is nowhere close to military objectives.
We are also seeing the Ukrainian army target
infrastructure of significance for Europe generally. A
few days ago a Ukrainian missile hit the Druzhba oil
pipeline in the Bryansk region. A huge crater was left
at the site of the strike, but fortunately the pipeline was
not badly damaged. I should point out that this pipeline
system, one of the world’s largest, is still supplying
Europe with oil from Kazakhstan as well as Russia.
Europe’s politicians and taxpayers should consider
whose interests their Governments are serving by
covering up such crimes by the Kyiv regime.
Russia takes a responsible approach to issues
relating to the detention of prisoners of war and strictly
complies with its obligations under international
humanitarian law, ensuring their humane treatment,
among other things. The same cannot be said of
Ukrainian nationalists, whose horrific footage of torture
of Russian prisoners of war and killings of civilians has
been seen all over the world. In addition, we often hear
terrible admissions from captured Ukrainian soldiers
themselves, as well as their relatives, about their
conditions of service and how they are treated by their
commanders. People are used as cannon fodder as they
fight to the last Ukrainian. It has reached a point where
mothers and wives of Ukrainian soldiers are appealing
to the Russian human rights ombudsman for their loved
ones to remain in our country so that they will not be
forced back to the front again. It is revealing that as
soon as international non-governmental organizations
have the courage to advertise the clear facts of
Ukraine’s violations of international humanitarian law
they are immediately subjected to intimidation that
verges on harassment. We all remember how Amnesty
International was punished for telling the truth about
the torture of Russian prisoners of war.
For the people of many Member States, any mention
of Ukraine is associated with double standards, and
not only because of the terrible situations I have

23-0343413/25

S/PV.9254

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

06/02/2023

mentioned. After all, thanks to the generosity of those
same Western countries that are supplying arms to
Ukraine, the United Nations emergency response
plan for Ukraine for 2022 received 79.2 per cent of its
funding, substantially more than the funds received
by the United Nations for humanitarian assistance
for the long-suffering population of Afghanistan, at
62 per cent, or Syria, at 47 per cent, countries that have
suffered directly as a result of the actions of the United
States-led international coalition. In general, we never
cease to be amazed by the two-faced positions of the
major donor countries. Contributions for development
assistance, like those for the regular budgets of
United Nations agencies, have plummeted, while the
money for arms supplies to Ukraine is reaching ever
new heights.

One could consider those words to be nonsense and
just the position of a single Pole, if those ideas were not
constantly repeated in Warsaw, Riga, Tallinn, Vilnius
and a number of Eastern European capitals, and if the
European Parliament, one of the key structures of the
European Union, did not take action to promote the
collapse of Russia.

Anyone with common sense can see that the military
action that is now going on is not between Ukraine and
Russia but between Russia and the collective NATO
West, which is using Ukraine merely as a tool in its
geopolitical crusade against Russia — a crusade that
started at least nine years ago, in 2014, when as a result
of the anti-constitutional coup d’état in Kyiv, a hostile,
neo-Nazi, Russophobe hornet’s nest began to form on
Russia’s borders and almost immediately launched a
deadly attack on the Russian-speaking population of
the country, which the residents of Crimea and Donbas
immediately rose up against.

Therefore, with regard to Russia, it does not seem
to be a sin for sophisticated European audiences to
nurture plans of ethnic cleansing, just like German
fascists did with regard to our country in the past. These
are the same fascists whose descendants, in violation of
the Constitution of their country, which has repented
of its terrible sins against humanity, now once again
send tanks into Ukraine to kill Russians, as they did in
1941. Furthermore, some Ukrainian public activists are
asking those who are supporting Russians to wear a red
star in public. What should we think of that? What other
historical associations are going to crop up because of
all of this?

In the past few months we have come to believe
that the anti-Russian mindset of our former Western
partners is not going anywhere. The most zealous of
them are the young Europeans who surreptitiously want
to resolve the so-called Russian issue once and for all.
How else, for example, can we explain what was written
by Anna Fotyga, a Polish member of the European
Parliament, in an opinion piece that was published on
the EURACTIV.com website:
“There are no such things as Russian gas, oil,
aluminium, coal, uranium, diamonds, grain,
forests, gold, etc. All such resources are Tatar,
Bashkir, Siberian, Karelian, Oirat, Circassian,
Buryat, Sakha, Ural, Kuban, Nogai, etc;
“[w]e should discuss the prospects for the creation
of free and independent states in the post-Russian
space;
“[t]he rupture of the Russian Federation will bring
unquestionable benefits”.
14/25

What conclusions should we draw? What should
we think when, several days ago, live on a French
State television channel, inveterate commentators
fantasized about cleansing Crimea of ethnic Russians
after its future liberation, arguing that maintaining the
peninsula as part of Ukraine would involve repatriating
most or a significant part of the Crimean population
because people there are almost universally loyal to
Russia and support President Putin?

The answer is obvious. As we did 80 years ago,
we are once again facing a treacherous enemy that is
trying to destroy our country and our culture. Ukraine
is just a blind pawn in that enemy’s hands. We are
therefore obligated to stop the Kyiv regime for the
sake of our future, the future of our children and the
future of Ukrainian children whose fathers are being
sent by Zelenskyy’s criminal regime to certain death
as cannon fodder in this fratricidal war. It is our duty
to stop Kyiv’s terrible nationalist crimes — and most
Ukrainians understand that perfectly well.
How else can we explain that, according to the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, out of the 8 million who have left Ukraine,
allmost 3 million people have gone to Russia? Given the
fact that some more people went to Russia at the time
of the Maidan madness, their total now is more than
5 million people. This is neither the forced repatriation
nor the deportation that our former Western partners
23-03434

06/02/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

speak, unwilling to believe that millions of former
Ukrainian citizens, who were oppressed by the Kyiv
regime, have now chosen to align their future with Russia.
We also believe in that future, and we will do
everything in our power to make it a reality. Of course,
it is best if we use peaceful means. That is our preferred
approach, as is well known to everybody. But if the
collective West continues through its arms supplies to
hamper prospects for peace in Ukraine, then, of course,
the aims of the special military operation will have to be
achieved through military means, no matter how hard
our former partners from the West and their Ukrainian
minions try to prevent us from doing so.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I begin by
extending the heartfelt condolences of the United Arab
Emirates to Syria and Türkiye over the devastating
earthquake this morning; We have dispatched search
and rescue teams and field hospitals to both countries
and offer our full support at this difficult time. I also
thank Under-Secretary-General Griffiths for his
informative and sobering briefing.
This month marks one year since the war in Ukraine
began, and these meetings serve as an important
reminder of the price being paid. In that time, the war
has killed more than 7,000 civilians, and a third of the
Ukrainian population has fled their homes. Ongoing
strikes against critical infrastructure have damaged
Ukraine’s power system, making life particularly grim
as the country’s notoriously tough winter drags on.
The statistics paint an appalling picture: in 2023,
17.6 million people will rely on humanitarian assistance.
Nearly 14 million are displaced, 4.4 million returnees
need assistance, and 3.6 million are at risk of genderbased violence. These numbers are likely to grow amid
freezing weather conditions and severely damaged
electricity and heating infrastructure across the county.
It is therefore all the more necessary for Ukraine’s
neighbours, the United Nations, donor countries and
humanitarian actors to continue support for the response.
On the ground, aid workers are carrying out their vital
work in difficult and often dangerous settings. The
war has seen hospitals, aid convoys and distribution
centres damaged in military attacks. In this context, we
underscore the urgent need to ensure the respect and
protection of humanitarian personnel and operations.
As stated by Under-Secretary-General Griffiths, we
need to insist on respect for international humanitarian
law and, in particular, the special protections accorded
by the Geneva Conventions.

S/PV.9254

In addition, the conflict’s impact beyond Ukraine’s
borders is well documented, as it has exacerbated
an already acute global food crisis. Accordingly,
we reaffirm the importance of the Black Sea Grain
Initiative and the Memorandum of Understanding
between Russia and the United Nations to facilitate
the export of fertilizers. These efforts are alleviating
considerable pressure on global food prices and
supplies. In this context, we recall to this Chamber
the World Food Programme’s dire warning that failure
to address global food insecurity may result in mass
destabilization across the planet.
We strongly urge the Initiative’s swift renewal next
month. We also encourage the removal of any obstacles
to the full implementation of the Initiative and the
memorandum between Russia and the United Nations
to facilitate the export of fertilizers.
The United Arab Emirates recognizes the scale
of the humanitarian devastation in Ukraine. We are
working on the delivery of the $100 million assistance
package that we announced late last year. We remain in
close contact with Ukraine on support for post-conflict
stabilization and reconstruction.
We also strongly commend the international effort
aimed at alleviating the suffering of the Ukrainian
people, in particular Ukraine’s neighbours, who have
provided a vital lifeline to civilians affected by the
conflict. The remarkable international solidarity on
display since the outbreak of the war has sheltered and
saved millions, and it reminds all of us of the urgency,
consistency and generosity that all humanitarian crises,
without distinction, demand.
Nevertheless, we stress once again that there is
no alternative to a peaceful resolution to this conflict.
Ukrainian civilians will continue to bear the brunt of
this devastating war until the hostilities in Ukraine
cease, the pursuit of complete military victory by both
sides is abandoned and peace talks begin. To that end,
the United Arab Emirates reiterates its readiness to
continue offering its assistance through constructive
mediation efforts that produce tangible positive
outcomes — as has happened over the weekend, with
the most recent prisoner exchange. We must support all
efforts that put us on a path towards a just and lasting
peace — one that respects Ukraine’s sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity and establishes
sustainable regional security and stability.

23-0343415/25

S/PV.9254

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): Like others, let me also express our
condolences to Türkiye and the people of Syria who
have experienced today’s devastating earthquake. The
United States stands ready to provide any assistance
needed. Let me congratulate you, Madam, on presiding
over the Security Council, as this is the first time I
have spoken in the Council since Malta assumed the
presidency. I also thank Under-Secretary-General
Griffiths for his sobering briefing.
The humanitarian horrors of Russia’s unprovoked
war against Ukraine continue to cause massive human
suffering both in Ukraine and around the world. Within
Ukraine’s borders, more than 17 million Ukrainians are
in need of humanitarian aid. Nearly 6 million people
are internally displaced, forced to flee their homes
in search of safety and shelter. Russia’s forces have
launched barrage after barrage of missiles and drones
on Ukraine, hitting cities and infrastructure, killing and
injuring civilians and damaging roads, homes, schools,
medical facilities, farmland and power systems.
Millions of Ukrainians are now without food, power,
access to water or proper heating, even as temperatures
drop below freezing. That is unconscionable. On
his recent visit to Ukraine, United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees Grandi saw the destruction
and the attacks on civilian infrastructure for himself.
He called it appalling. And of course we have heard
similar condemnations from Under-Secretary-General
Griffiths today. Russia must stop bombing critical
infrastructure and killing innocent civilians. Until
then, global humanitarian donors must stand by the
Ukrainian people. We need to prioritize winterization
assistance to address the immediate humanitarian
needs and support the Government of Ukraine’s efforts.
Humanitarians from the United Nations and
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) are on the
ground right now trying to help. Sadly, even those
groups — just trying to help save lives — have not been
spared Russia’s attacks. On 24 January, Russia’s artillery
fire injured two local NGO employees while they were
transporting aid on the front lines. Fortunately, the very
next day, a United Nations convoy was able to provide
vital humanitarian aid to the town of Siversk in Donetsk,
marking the first successful United Nations trip to the
heavily damaged town near the front line. But that is far
from sufficient. Humanitarians must be allowed access
to those in need, unimpeded and unharmed. Russia has
also brought such horrors to the areas that it controls. It
16/25

06/02/2023

is engaging in extensive and unacceptable relocations of
Ukraine’s children to Russian-controlled and -occupied
territories of Ukraine. Imagine their terror. Russia is
also transferring and deporting Ukraine’s children to
Russia itself, giving children away to families in Russia
and attempting to separate them permanently from their
families. That is a violation of the principles of child
protection and it must stop. It is difficult to imagine
the cruelty of being forced to live in the country that
killed your parents or to have the propaganda that has
personally caused you so much suffering parroted back
to you. Mr. Grandi also noted and was appalled by the
practice of issuing Russian Federation passports to
Ukrainian children.
Beyond the borders of Ukraine and Russia,
President Putin’s war is devastating to so many others.
Nearly 8 million refugees from Ukraine, a majority
of them women and children, are sheltering all over
Europe. Countries across Europe have striven to
provide their Ukrainian neighbours with equitable
access to education, labour markets, social protection
and health care. Russia’s war has also greatly
exacerbated the global food security crisis. We support
the Black Sea Grain Initiative, which has helped meet
the urgent needs of the world’s most vulnerable and has
benefited middle-income countries by stabilizing world
grain prices. But unfortunately, thanks to Russia, the
movement of grain from Ukraine’s ports has slowed
and the backlog of ships waiting for grain is growing.
Russia signed an agreement with the United Nations.
It committed to facilitating “the unimpeded export of
food, sunflower oil and fertilizers” from Ukraine’s
Black Sea ports. Russia would have us believe that it
is the aggrieved party here, ignoring the fact that it
is the aggressor. Russia must fulfil its commitments
and allow the Initiative to work at the pace that meets
global demand. We cannot allow Russia to continue
its weaponization of food, energy and winter, which,
while it hurts us all, is killing Ukrainians. Russia’s
actions — deporting children, stalling ships with food
from leaving Ukraine and bombing civilians and critical
infrastructure — are not the actions of a country ready
for peace or that one would expect from a member of
the Council.
We have heard Council members’ compassionate
calls for negotiation and a cessation of hostilities.
That is in the hands of one person and one person
alone — President Putin. Putin started this war, and he
can end it today by pulling his troops out of Ukraine and
23-03434

06/02/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

genuinely allowing peace to take place. For Ukraine,
this is a matter of survival. Today’s meeting is an
opportunity to affirm the protections granted to civilians
and critical infrastructure. We have an opportunity to
help those whom Russia has harmed by stepping up
and reaffirming the Charter of the United Nations and
international law’s most fundamental principles. It is
an opportunity to support humanitarian actors and
their right to safely reach those in need without being
impeded or attacked. In the immediate term, we urge
all countries to support the 2023 humanitarian response
and regional refugee response plans of the United
Nations, which are expected to be unveiled in Geneva
next week to meet the growing demand. And in the
long term, we look forward to working with our fellow
members to hold Russia accountable for its appalling
actions against the people of Ukraine.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Malta.
I would like to start by joining others in expressing
our condolences to the people of Syria and Türkiye on
the death and destruction caused by today’s earthquake
and commending all who are providing humanitarian
assistance in this time of need. I also thank UnderSecretary-General Griffiths for his briefing today. As
always, Malta remains grateful for the work of his team
and the humanitarian partners on the ground.
This month we will mark one year since the start of
Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine, which has
created an acute humanitarian crisis and has brought
profound misery to millions. Every day we see images
that demonstrate the toll taken by Russia’s aggression,
which affects communities that had lived in peace but
are now seeing their lives virtually destroyed as a result
of the ongoing senseless bombing and violence. Today
17.7 million Ukrainians are in need of emergency
humanitarian assistance, 6 million have been internally
displaced and 8 million have sought safety in European
countries. Just a little more than a year ago those
statistics would have been unimaginable to nearly all
of us around this table. The constant attacks by the
Russian Federation on Ukrainian energy and civilian
infrastructure continue to disrupt the power supply,
leaving millions of Ukrainians without electricity,
water or heating as winter temperatures plunge below
freezing. The attacks, and the wide-scale blackouts
that they cause, are a blatant violation of international
humanitarian law, as is Russia’s use in populated
areas of indiscriminate munitions such as explosive

S/PV.9254

weapons with wide-ordnance effects, which have
levelled residential buildings and medical facilities and
caused death and catastrophic injuries for thousands of
civilians trapped in the fighting. Whether it be older
persons brutalized by soldiers in their homes, civilians
shot at while fleeing warzones or the many reports of
sexual violence perpetrated against Ukrainian women
and girls, civilians are being actively targeted in
this war.
Children have not been spared either, and a
generation boys and girls has been traumatized by
war. UNICEF estimates that, since 24 February
2022, 1,148 children have been killed or injured;
education for 5.7 million children has been disrupted;
and 1.5 million children face mental health issues.
Moreover, thousands of Ukrainian children have been
abducted, deported and forcibly adopted to the Russian
Federation, breaking family ties and placing children
in vulnerable situations while denying them the right
to family life. Malta reiterates that halting the war of
aggression against Ukraine is the only way to cease
that cycle of violence and horror. Nevertheless, all
those who have committed atrocities, including sexual
violence in conflict, must be held accountable for their
actions in accordance with international law.
It is essential that all those in need across the
country have access to humanitarian assistance. We
regret the insecurity and obstacles that continue to
restrict humanitarian access along the front lines and in
areas that are not under Ukrainian control. Such denial
of humanitarian assistance is unacceptable. Malta also
deplores the fact that the International Committee of
the Red Cross (ICRC) still does not have unimpeded
and repeated access to all Ukrainian prisoners of war.
Under the Third Geneva Convention, prisoners of war
are entitled to receive regular visits from delegates
of the ICRC. Notwithstanding the reports of recent,
modest progress in that respect, we call for the rights of
all prisoners of war to be swiftly realized by the parties
to the conflict.
In conclusion, we express our full support to
the United Nations, its affiliated organizations
and all humanitarian workers who are working in
extraordinarily challenging operational environments
and demanding circumstances on the ground. We
also extend our condolences to the families of those
humanitarian workers killed in Ukraine over the past
12 months. We reiterate our determined call on the
Russian Federation to stop this senseless war, withdraw

23-0343417/25

S/PV.9254

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

its military forces from the entire territory of Ukraine
and turn to dialogue and diplomacy. It is never too late
to turn back or to do what is right.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I express our sincere
condolences to the people of Türkiye and in the region
and to the friends and families of the victims of this
morning’s earthquake. Our thoughts and prayers are
with them at this difficult time. We are ready to provide
the necessary assistance to help them overcome the
consequences of that disaster.
I also recognize the presence of Putin’s regime, or
rather what is left of him, in the permanent seat of the
Soviet Union — an acolyte of two Josephs, Stalin and
Goebbels, who never let truth interrupt their endless
flow and prolixity of lies.
We appreciate the convening of today’s meeting,
given the fact that civilians, particularly women
and children, remain the most vulnerable to Russia’s
inhumane war against Ukraine. At the previous
meeting on this topic (see S/PV.9243), we briefed the
Security Council on the outcomes of a barbaric Russian
missile attack that killed 46 people in their apartments
in Dnipro on 17 January. What is most outrageous is
that the tragedy in Dnipro is not an isolated incident,
but rather part of the Russian army’s deliberate strategy
of targeting the civilian population in Ukraine.
A number of new shellings of residential buildings
have been registered in recent weeks. On 29 January, a
Russian missile hit a residential building in the central
part of Kharkiv. On the same day, Russian artillery
shelled a local hospital and residential areas Kherson.
On 1 and 2 February, Russian missiles targeted a
multi-story residential building and several private
houses in Kramatorsk. On 3 February, the same thing
happened in Donetsk. All those attacks left dozens of
civilians killed and injured. As of now, Ukrainian law
enforcement agencies have registered the damage or
destruction of 77,463 civilian infrastructure facilities.
More than 2.4 million Ukrainians have to live in
damaged or destroyed housing.
Russia’s missile and drone terror remains a major
threat to the civilian population throughout Ukraine.
On 26 January, another massive attack with 55 air- and
sea-based missiles killed 11 people and injured 11 more.
18/25

06/02/2023

Even if not followed by a strike, every single missile
alert is accompanied by air-raid sirens, which disrupt
the normal life of the civilian population throughout
the country. In 2022, a total of 14,870 sirens sounded
across Ukraine. Over the span of one year, the sirens
sounded for an equivalent of 55 days in the Kharkiv
region; 42 days in the Donetsk and the Zaporizhzhya
regions; 37 days in the Dnipro region; and 27 days in
Kyiv. Let me explain that. As soon as an air-raid siren
is activated, schools, public services and businesses
have to cease their operations and people must go to
the closest shelters. The detrimental impact that has
on both people’s activities and their mental health can
hardly be overestimated.
According to preliminary estimates by the State
Emergency Service of Ukraine, Russia’s war of
aggression has already resulted in the contamination
of about 30 per cent of the country’s territory. While
retreating in the north and south, the Russian forces left
Ukraine’s territories heavily mined, including fields,
roads, bridges and residential areas. The situation in
the east, where the violent hostilities are at their height,
is definitely even worse. However, the full picture will
only be seen after liberation.
Ukraine, in exercising its right to self-defence
in accordance with Article 51 of the Charter of the
United Nations, is fully implementing its international
obligations, while the Russian occupants are committing
war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide
against the Ukrainian people.
I would like to remind the Security Council that,
according to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use,
Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel
Mines and on Their Destruction — the Ottawa
Convention — which Ukraine has been a party to since
2005, we have destroyed 3 million anti-personnel mines,
including stockpiles of extremely hazardous POM-2
mines. In its attack on my country, Russia has used,
and continues to use, the whole spectrum of prohibited
mines, including a battalion with POM-3 mines, which
have seismic sensors and are highly dangerous for
civilians. The Armed Forces of Ukraine, the State
Emergency Service and other structures risk their lives
on a daily basis carrying out demining operations in
the liberated territories. However, the main part of
that work is still ahead of us and will begin after the
complete withdrawal of Russia’s troops from Ukraine.
23-03434

06/02/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

By turning fertile Ukrainian soil into minefields,
Russia further aggravates the global food crisis
already fuelled by its war against Ukraine. Russia
regularly resorts to cynical attempts to minimize the
detrimental impact of its aggression on global food
security and pose as a damaged party. In response to
that mockery, let me reiterate that not a single warship
has blocked the flow of Russian exports. Not a single
missile has targeted Russian seaports. However, those
problems are still a reality for Ukraine, and even the
Black Sea Grain Initiative, a temporary and very
limited solution for both Ukraine and those reliant on
Ukrainian food exports, is facing serious impediments
from the Russian side. In particular, we are concerned
about the fact that Russia has continued to hamper the
inspection procedures. Immediately after the exports of
Ukrainian foodstuffs began to increase, Russia reduced
the number of inspection teams from five to three and
artificially increased the length of each inspection. It is
also regular practice for Russian inspectors to refuse to
work on various pretexts while all the other parties are
ready to perform their duties.
As of 1 February, due to impediments from the
Russian side, 114 vessels were awaiting inspection
in Türkiye’s territorial waters, and the number of
departures from ports remains critically low, at no
more than three vessels per day. Those actions have
resulted in a drop in exports of almost 30 per cent
compared to the previous month. The solution to the
problem is quite simple — we just have to increase the
number of inspection groups and inspections per day.
I should point out that in November of last year, the
United Nations and Türkiye were able to carry out 86
inspections in just two days.
Ukraine’s tireless efforts have enabled 1,762 people
to return home from Russian captivity, with the most
recent exchange taking place on Saturday. However,
Russia is still holding thousands of Ukrainians
captive in terrible conditions. The Russian occupation
authorities have prevented United Nations officials
from visiting Ukrainian prisoners of war, while the
United Nations has documented facts of torture, poor
treatment and a lack of food, water, health care and
sanitation at the sites where they are held, as well as an
absence of contact with their families.
Another serious threat for the population in the
occupied territories of Ukraine continues to be their
deportation to remote regions of Russia, as well as the
forced adoption of Ukrainian children. The Ukrainian

S/PV.9254

authorities have identified 16,011 children forcibly
deported to date. Ukraine expects the United Nations to
pay more attention to the issue and calls for an all-forall prisoner-of-war exchange, as well as for the release
of all adults and children deported to Russia from the
occupied parts of Ukraine. That is one of the elements
of the 10-point peace plan that Ukraine has proposed to
ensure a peaceful resolution to the conflict based on the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. It is a
comprehensive plan aimed at laying a solid foundation
for a comprehensive, just and lasting peace. We
appreciate the positive reflections that we have heard
from many members on the plan and reiterate our hopes
for their active engagement in order to bring back peace
and restore respect for the Charter.
As we approach the anniversary of Russia’s launch
of a full-fledged war that plunged the centre of the
European continent into violence, bloodshed and
devastation, the needs and the suffering of people on
the ground should be our primary focus. To that end,
on 22 February Ukraine, together with more than
30 Member States, will initiate a high-level event
addressing the gross human rights violations resulting
from the aggression against Ukraine. We invite
members to take part in it and to take a resolute stance
on the urgent need to end the Russian aggression. We
urge Russia to withdraw its troops from Ukraine and
halt the enormous human suffering in my country
and abroad.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Estonia.
Mr. Tammsaar (Estonia): Let me start by offering
our heartfelt condolences to Türkiye and Syria and
to the families of the victims of today’s devastating
earthquake. We stand in solidarity with them and are
ready to provide assistance.
I speak today on behalf of the Baltic States — Latvia,
Lithuania and my own country, Estonia. I thank UnderSecretary-General Martin Griffiths for his briefing.
I also want to express our thanks to all the United
Nations agencies for their relentless work to ease the
immense suffering of the Ukrainian people caused by
Russia’s unjustified and unprovoked invasion, begun
nearly 12 months ago. It is hard to overstate the heavy
humanitarian toll inflicted on the Ukrainian people by
the full-scale war of aggression on Ukraine launched
by Russia and aided by Belarus. Month after month
we have witnessed appalling levels of destruction,

23-0343419/25

S/PV.9254

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

as Russia has indiscriminately attacked civilians and
civilian infrastructure and reduced entire cities, towns
and villages to rubble, causing death, displacement and
human suffering. The Russian forces are systematically
and deliberately shelling and destroying energy and
water supplies. Ukrainians have been left in freezing
cold, deprived of shelter, light, heat and safe drinking
water. Russia has caused the biggest humanitarian
crisis in Europe since the Second World War, forcing
millions to flee their homes, with more than 8 million
seeking protection across Europe.
The effects of Russia’s invasion on Ukrainian
children have been especially appalling and will be
long-lasting. Thousands have been separated from their
families and deported to Russia from the occupied
territories of Ukraine. We echo the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees when he says that
giving nationality to and opening avenues for the
formal adoption of children in a situation of conflict
are violations of international norms and practices.
Russia must stop those illegal practices immediately
and ensure that those children, some of whose parents
have been killed by Russian strikes or murdered by
Russian troops, are safely returned to Ukraine and to
their families and loved ones.
We are deeply troubled by the risks of sexual
violence and human trafficking to which unaccompanied
displaced children are exposed. Credible allegations
indicate that rape is being used as a weapon of war by
Russian forces in Ukraine, including against children.
We underline the need for the United Nations to continue
monitoring and reporting on conflict-related sexual
violence in Ukraine. For those who have suffered from
such crimes, we must redouble our efforts to provide
them with the necessary comprehensive services,
including physical protection and psychological support.
We remain highly concerned about the reported
mistreatment of Ukrainian prisoners of war by Russia’s
armed forces, as well as by the Russian paramilitary
Wagner Group. We demand that Russia stop those
illegal acts and treat Ukrainian prisoners of war in full
conformity with international humanitarian law. Russia
must provide the International Committee of the Red
Cross with immediate and unconditional access to all
Ukrainian prisoners of war.
It is imperative to continue documenting and
properly storing evidence of all atrocity crimes
committed throughout Ukraine. There can be no
20/25

06/02/2023

impunity for Russia’s crimes in Ukraine at any level. We
strongly support the establishment of an international
tribunal to prosecute the crime of aggression against
Ukraine that has unleashed all the war crimes and crimes
against humanity that have followed. The people who
decided to wage the illegal war against Ukraine cannot
go unpunished.
We approach the tragic one-year anniversary of the
start of Russia’s war of aggression in Europe in the hope
that it will also be the last and that in 2023 we will see
the end of this brutal war. The way to peace must be
just and based on respect for Ukrainian sovereignty and
territorial integrity, consistent with the Charter of the
United Nations and international law. What is at stake is
not just Ukraine’s existence and its status as a sovereign
nation, but the survival of the international rules-based
order and the Charter. If we let the aggression succeed,
the global consequences will be much worse. That is
why Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania strongly support
President Zelenskyy’s vision for peace contained in
his 10-point peace formula, which is based on the
Charter of the United Nations and international law. If
we want a just and sustainable peace, it is time for the
United Nations community to support that vision and
start implementing it.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Massari (Italy): Italy sends its deepest
condolences to the people of Türkiye and Syria, especially
the victims’ families, following today’s devastating
earthquake. Italy is sending rescue teams to Türkiye.
I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Griffiths for his sobering and alarming update. Let me
also express our sincere congratulations to Malta on its
assumption of the presidency of this important organ for
the month of February.
Sadly, February is also the month that will mark the
passing of an entire year since Russia began its brutal,
illegal, unjustifiable and unprovoked war of aggression
against Ukraine. Russia should understand that even
after a full year we will continue to stand together with
the Ukrainian Government and people, more united than
ever, to reaffirm our unwavering commitment to the
multilateral order, as recognized in the Charter of the
United Nations, to which we are all signatories. For that
reason, Italy fully aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union, to which I would
like to add some considerations in my national capacity.
23-03434

06/02/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

We condemn in the strongest possible terms
Russia’s inhumane attacks on critical infrastructure,
particularly energy and water facilities in cities across
Ukraine. Those are not military objectives but merely
indiscriminate attacks on the civilian population and
civilian objects that constitute war crimes and brutal
violations of international humanitarian law. Russia
will be held accountable for those crimes and will also
have to pay for reparations to critical infrastructure
damaged or destroyed in its brutal war. We emphasize
that there can be no peace without justice, and no
impunity for war crimes and other atrocities.
Russia’s aggression against Ukraine has left
roughly 40 per cent of the Ukrainian population in
need of humanitarian assistance. Italy has worked
promptly to bring support to Ukraine by contributing
to the humanitarian response, both through financial
allocations of tens of millions of dollars and tons
of in-kind donations. This very week we are also
distributing a significant number of generators to help
the Ukrainian population face the harsh winter, since
Russia’s shelling of their electrical system has left them
without the heating they need.
Looking at the bigger humanitarian picture, we are
also funding the Grain from Ukraine initiative launched
by the Ukrainian Government to provide vital food
directly to the most vulnerable countries, especially in
Africa. However, only the continued renewal of the Black
Sea Grain Initiative — for which we reiterate our support
for the outstanding work of the Secretary-General
and the Emergency Relief Coordinator — can ensure
that the world will not find itself in a serious famine
emergency. We therefore call on Russia to avoid any
disinformation or politicization of that beacon of hope.
At the end of the day, the only real way to alleviate
people’s suffering in Ukraine and tackle the global
humanitarian consequences of Russia’s aggression is
to end the war. To date, unfortunately, we have seen
no evidence that Russia is committed to genuine
and sustainable peace efforts. It can end the war
immediately by ceasing its attacks and withdrawing its
forces from the internationally recognized territory of
Ukraine. With a view to achieving a viable post-war
peace settlement, Italy welcomes Ukraine’s ideas and
vision for a just peace and remains ready to support
arrangements for sustainable security that can help
Ukraine defend itself, secure its free and democratic
future and deter future aggression, in line with its rights
as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.

S/PV.9254

The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Gonzato.
Mr. Gonzato: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States.
Let me start by congratulating Malta and you
personally, Madam, on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council. I would also like to express the
EU’s solidarity with all who have lost loved ones in the
devastating earthquakes that struck Türkiye and Syria
this morning. Our search-and-rescue teams are mobilized
to support first responders and we are coordinating
further support with the Turkish authorities.
It has been almost a year since the Russian
Federation launched its unprovoked and unjustified
attack on Ukraine. That blatant violation of international
law and the Charter of the United Nations has led to
senseless suffering for a sovereign and independent
nation that was simply looking for prosperity and
democracy. It threatens not only Ukraine, but the entire
rules-based international order. I want to emphasize
three points today.
First, Russia’s massive air strikes, often in densely
populated areas, are inflicting immeasurable suffering.
Those attacks are not only destroying critical civilian
infrastructure, they are destroying civilian lives. The
findings of the United Nations Commission of Inquiry
on Ukraine are shocking, documenting cases of sexual
violence, torture and other forms of cruel, inhumane
and degrading treatment as a tactic of war. The
perpetrators of such crimes must be held accountable
without delay. The EU welcomes all efforts to ensure
full accountability for war crimes and the other most
serious crimes in connection with Russia’s war of
aggression, including ways to secure accountability
for the crime of aggression itself. We also reaffirm our
support for the investigations of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court.
The vast majority of refugees have found safe haven
in EU countries. The EU’s humanitarian response has
already helped to alleviate the needs of almost 14 million
people. The key priority now is winterized shelter to
help the population survive the freezing temperatures.
We are assisting in the restoration of Ukraine’s energy
infrastructure and delivering equipment to keep the
electricity grid functioning.
Solidarity for Ukraine goes beyond Europe. At the
international conference held in Paris in December, 47
States pledged an additional €1 billion. We welcome

23-0343421/25

S/PV.9254

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

the humanitarian support mobilized from around
the world and call on all States to continue to stand
in solidarity with Ukraine. Russia must enable full
humanitarian access to the temporarily occupied
territories through the front lines. Human suffering
is inflicted not only through direct attacks but also by
purposely withholding aid from people in need. Our
humanitarian partners are ready to provide assistance
wherever aid is needed. We note the impressive efforts
by Ukraine’s Government and civil society, which
have provided a significant share of the humanitarian
response. We commend the United Nations for its
coordination work, despite the significant challenges
to the provision of aid, particularly in newly liberated
areas and those close to the front line that are subject
to constant shelling. Russia’s aggression has led to high
landmine contamination, which poses a major threat to
human security, limiting the delivery of relief aid and
preventing civilians from returning home safely.
We are gravely concerned about the Russian armed
forces’ continued attacks around Ukrainian nuclear
sites and the illegal seizure of the Zaporizhzhya nuclear
power plant. The EU fully supports the efforts of the
International Atomic Energy Agency to assist Ukraine
in ensuring nuclear safety and security, as well as to
maintain the implementation of safeguards pursuant to
Ukraine’s safeguards obligations.
Secondly, on a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace, the first step towards peace will be for Russia to
immediately cease all hostilities and unconditionally,
completely and immediately withdraw all of its forces
and military equipment from the entire territory of
Ukraine within its internationally recognized borders.
Until then, the EU remains committed to providing the
support that Ukraine needs to defend its population
from Russia’s indiscriminate attacks, as well as to
supporting its desire for a just peace in line with the
Charter of the United Nations. Ukraine is defending
not only itself and its people but also the fundamental
principles of the Charter. The General Assembly has
stated that clearly in successive resolutions, adopted
by an overwhelming majority of Member States. The
EU supports Ukraine’s initiative for a just peace and
President Zelenskyy’s peace formula, and will work to
garner the broadest possible international support for it.
Thirdly and lastly, I want to mention the continued
efforts to address the global consequences of Russia’s
war. We support the extension and full implementation
of the Black Sea Grain Initiative. The prolongation
22/25

06/02/2023

of this agreement beyond March 2023 is crucial to
stabilize prices and allow the continuous flow of grains,
including for humanitarian purposes. It is important
that Russia fully commit to its implementation and
scale up the inspections.
The EU-Ukraine solidarity corridors have already
allowed the export of approximately 23 million tons of
Ukrainian grains between May and December 2022.
The EU is also the world’s first provider of food and
development assistance. Together with our member
States, we have increased our financial support to
address the global food crisis, providing approximately
€18 billion this year.
We have stood by Ukraine since day one, and we
will remain steadfast in our support for as long as
it takes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland.
Mr. Szczerski (Poland): At the outset, I would like
to join others in expressing our sincerest condolences
to the families and loved ones of the victims of the
earthquake in Türkiye and in Syria. During this
difficult time, we also wish to provide our full support.
Polish rescue teams, comprising 78 people, aid dogs
and 22 tons of equipment from the special heavy urban
search and rescue team, have already been dispatched
to reach those in need.
I thank you, Madam President, for convening
this important meeting, and I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Martin Griffiths for his informative briefing.
It has been almost one year since Russia started
yet another attack on Ukraine and its people, this time
a full-scale war. Not a single day passes without new
crimes and deliberate actions further exacerbating
the humanitarian catastrophe in Ukraine. From day
one, the free world has provided those in need with
material assistance and political and moral support. Let
me use this opportunity to brief the Council on Polish
humanitarian efforts over the past 11 months.
However, before I delve into data and numbers,
I would like to reassure the Council that the Polish
Government and society will continue to stand firmly
with the people of Ukraine for as long as it takes. More
than 70 per cent of Poles believe that Poland should
support Ukraine in these dire circumstances of war,
according to a December 2022 opinion poll. And for
97 per cent of Ukrainians, Poland is a friendly country.
23-03434

06/02/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Poland has supported Ukraine since the very
beginning of the war on three fronts. First, we host and
provide support to the largest community of Ukrainian
refugees. Secondly, we operate as a hub for transferring
international humanitarian aid through our land border
with Ukraine. Thirdly, we deliver humanitarian aid to
Ukraine directly.
In 2022, Poland spent over $9 billion — that is 1.5 per
cent of our gross domestic product — on humanitarian
assistance to Ukrainian refugees, according to
recent estimates by the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development. That is an average of
over $5,600 per capita, making our country one of the
major donors to Ukraine.
We remain steadfast in our efforts to provide as
much support as possible in order to secure energy
supplies for the innocent civilian population suffering
from Russia’s attacks on critical infrastructure.
Ukraine has requested over 25,000 generators and
1,500 mobile thermal stations. A number of private
and public companies and the State Fire Service
of Poland have offered hundreds of generators and
energy-related equipment. And we have mobilized
more generators through our Governmental Agency for
Strategic Reserves.
Poland is in constant working contact with
Ukrenergo to coordinate the supply of energy
generators to Ukraine within the European Network of
Transmission System Operators. In January of this year,
a special logistics hub was established in Poland as part
of the European Union Civil Protection Mechanism in
the context of Ukraine’s needs related to the challenges
for the energy sector. The rescEU energy hub is being
used to facilitate the transport and storage of energy
equipment and assistance for delivery to Ukraine. That
is the third hub devoted to providing humanitarian aid
to Ukraine and its citizens after the establishment of
the logistics and medical rescue hubs.
More than 9.5 million people have crossed the
border to Poland from Ukraine since 24 February 2022,
of which more than 2.5 million have been evacuated.
Ninety-five per cent of the evacuated were women
and children, mainly Ukrainians, although more than
100,000 represented more than 190 nationalities.
There are more than 1.5 million Ukrainian
refugees registered for temporary protection in Poland,
according to the latest data from the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. They

S/PV.9254

were granted Polish personal identity numbers and
enjoy the same public services — schools, health care
and social benefits — as any other citizen of Poland.
Approximately 450,000 refugees have taken up work
in Poland, which represents 70 per cent of the eligible
group. In all, 14,000 companies were established. That
scale of economic activity for refugees is unprecedented.
Some 190,000 Ukrainian children and 400 Ukrainian
teachers are part of the Polish education system.
The Polish Government also delivers humanitarian
aid directly in Ukraine. We have provided assistance to
the health sector and to internally displaced Ukrainians
by constructing temporary modular towns for 20,000
internally displaced persons, at an estimated cost of
more than $81 million and by opening mobile medical
units. In 2022, Poland financed non-governmental
organization humanitarian projects, contributing
$2.7 million in the areas of food, health, shelter, water,
sanitation, hygiene, education and logistics.
Few know that Poland is the largest single payer for
the Starlink terminals, enabling Internet use in Ukraine,
both by the military and civilians. So far, the Polish side
has provided some 20,000 Starlink terminals — twothirds of those delivered — to Ukraine.
Poland will continue its support to Ukraine, as we
believe that this is the only right thing to do. We are
very proud to live up to our reputation as what some
people call the “solidarity super-Power”, and we will
not cease in our efforts until victory and a just peace
are achieved.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Ms. Leendertse (Germany): I would like to join
others in conveying our sincere condolences to the
people of Türkiye and Syria in these tragic times. We
stand ready to provide assistance as requested. Germany
aligns itself fully with the statement delivered earlier
by the representative of the European Union.
I am grateful for the opportunity today to deliver
some remarks in my national capacity.
At the outset, I would like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths for his sobering description of the
situation in Ukraine. Russia’s massive air strikes, often
in densely populated areas, are causing indescribable
human suffering in that they not only destroy critical
civilian infrastructure, but also kill innocent men
and women, boys and girls and leave others without

23-0343423/25

S/PV.9254

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

heating, electricity and water. Those facts have also
been corroborated by the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine. It is clear that
the perpetrators of such crimes must and will be held
accountable as soon as possible.
We stand steadfast behind Ukraine, and we will
continue our financial, humanitarian, diplomatic
and military support to Ukraine for as long as it is
needed. Since the beginning of the war, we have
welcomed more than a million Ukrainian refugees
into Germany. They join the 2 million refugees from
other countries already residing there. And we have
provided more than €12.5 billion in bilateral support
to Ukraine’s Government and its people. One of our
primary concerns in Ukraine is humanitarian access,
especially to its temporarily occupied territories. We
thank the United Nations, including the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, for their tireless
efforts to coordinate work to provide aid to newly
liberated areas and areas close to the front line.
Another issue that worries us deeply are reports
about the forcible deportations of children into Russian
territories. There is credible evidence that the Russian
Federation is infringing upon its obligations under
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law. That must stop now.
The people of Ukraine are not the only victims of
the war. The repercussions of Russia’s illegal invasion
of its neighbouring country are felt around the globe.
In that context, we welcome and financially support
Ukraine’s Grain from Ukraine initiative to supply
grain to those countries most in need. We also call on
Russia to stop delaying the ship inspections, as agreed
in the Black Sea Grain Initiative. In that vein, it is vital
that the Initiative be continued and broadened beyond
its March deadline so that crucial supplies can reach
world markets and, in particular, the most vulnerable
among us.
We once again call on the Russian Federation to
immediately cease all its hostilities and unconditionally,
completely and immediately withdraw all of its forces
and military equipment from the entire territory of
Ukraine within its internationally recognized borders
in order to find a diplomatic solution. Sadly enough,
this needless war might hit the upcoming one-year
mark. It has already been ongoing for too long, and
Russia must end it now.
24/25

06/02/2023

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Denmark.
Mr. Hermann (Denmark): Let me first congratulate
Malta on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council. We also extend our appreciation to UnderSecretary-General Griffiths for his briefing.
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the five
Nordic countries — Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden
and my own country, Denmark.
At the outset, I want to say that we join other
speakers in expressing our sincere condolences to the
people of Türkiye and Syria affected by the recent
devastating earthquakes.
Today marks 347 days of Russia’s war of aggression
against Ukraine — 347 days of Russia’s full-scale
invasion and war of aggression against Ukraine and
347 days of destruction and suffering for Ukraine’s
population as Russia continues its relentless attack.
The unjustified and unprovoked attack by a
permanent member of the Security Council is in blatant
violation of international law and the Charter of the
United Nations. In the wake of Russia’s full-scale
invasion, we have witnessed systematic and widespread
violations of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law.
The war is of grave concern to us all. Its
consequences are similarly felt far and wide, first
and foremost, of course, by the Ukrainian people and
Europe, but also in all corners of the world. In places
far away from the European continent, people have
suffered at the hands of Russia.
The list of concerns is long, but today the Nordic
countries would like to highlight the following three
areas of concern: first, Russia’s ongoing blatant
violations of international humanitarian law and
the need to provide full, safe and unhindered access
for humanitarian actors; secondly, the negative
consequences of Russia’s war of aggression for global
food prices and the important contribution of the
Black Sea Grain Initiative to mitigating global food
insecurity; and, thirdly and finally, the importance
of accountability.
Russia’s illegal war has imposed widespread human
suffering on the Ukrainian people. It has led to the
extensive destruction of critical civilian infrastructure
23-03434

06/02/2023

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

and shattered essential services. The human and
economic costs are immeasurable, as is the destruction
of the environment.
Currently, the greatest needs are felt in areas under
the temporary military control of Russia. We call on
Russia to respect its obligations as an occupying Power.
We also call on Russia to enable full, safe and unhindered
access for humanitarian actors to the people living in
those territories, including through the front line. The
obligations under international humanitarian law must
be complied with by all.
I also want to say that we strongly commend
international and national humanitarian responders for
their bravery in delivering humanitarian protection and
assistance to those in need. That includes the delivery of
aid to newly liberated areas and areas close to the front
line amid constant shelling.
As Russia’s illegal war rages on, the impacts of the
cost-of-living crisis induced by the war are felt across the
world. Countries that were already struggling to recover
from the negative economic effects of the pandemic
now face severe challenges to food and energy security,
commodity prices and public finances.
We risk seeing the effects lasting far into the future.
Last week, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations reported that severe war-induced impacts
in Ukraine are estimated to reduce the winter-wheat area
planting by about 40 per cent.
As a glimmer of hope, grain exports from Ukraine
and Russia have increased substantially since the
signing of the Black Sea Grain Initiative. Following
the agreement, we saw lower food prices globally and
improved access to food for humanitarian actors.
As we approach the agreement’s renewal date in
March, it is of the utmost importance that we see a smooth
extension of the Black Sea Grain Initiative. While we
must come together to prevent famine in the immediate
term, the war has brutally underlined the need to also
accelerate the transition to more sustainable and resilient
food systems.

S/PV.9254

Lastly, we would like to underline the critical
role of accountability for the crimes committed in the
context of the aggression. All reports of atrocities and
human rights violations must be properly investigated,
and perpetrators held to account through national or
international justice mechanisms. We are alarmed by
the very large number of war crimes reported since
Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukrainian territory. We
are highly concerned about the appalling reports of
conflict-related sexual violence committed by Russian
soldiers in Ukraine. The true scale of that violence is
not yet known. Russian attacks on civilian centres and
civilian infrastructure may also constitute war crimes.
Ensuring accountability does not only contribute
to justice and reparation for the crimes committed;
it is also key to prevention through the deterrence
of future atrocities. That is why we, the Nordic
countries, welcome important initiatives such as the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry on
Ukraine, established by the Human Rights Council,
and why we continue to fully support the International
Criminal Court (ICC). The work of the ICC is crucial to
justice everywhere.
The current situation is very bleak. But let us be
honest — the picture is also very clear. Russia must
cease its aggression against Ukraine and immediately,
completely and unconditionally withdraw all its
troops from Ukraine. Russia must comply with
the order on provisional measures, rendered by the
International Court of Justice on 16 March last year,
to suspend its military operation. Russia must respect
the independence and territorial integrity of Ukraine
within its internationally recognized borders. Only
Russia can end the war.
The Nordic countries will continue to stand with
Ukraine and the Ukrainian people, and we commend
Ukraine’s initiative for a just peace.
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

23-0343425/25
