S/2020/489

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
3 June 2020
Original: English and French

Letter dated 2 June 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefing provided by
Mr. Josep Borrell Fontelles, High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy of the European Union, as well as the statements delivered by the representatives
of Belgium, China, France, Germany, the Niger (on behalf of the three African
countries that are members of the Security Council — the Niger, South Africa and
Tunisia — as well as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines), the Russian Federation,
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States
of America, in connection with the video-teleconference on cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations in maintaining
international peace and security convened on Thursday, 28 May 2020.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter by the President
of the Security Council addressed to Permanent Representatives of Security
Council members dated 7 May 2020 (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light
of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic,
the enclosed briefing and statements will be issued as an official document of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Nicolas de Rivière
President of the Security Council

20-07393 (E) 100620 010720

*2007393*

S/2020/489

Annex I
Statement by the High Representative of the European Union for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Josep Borrell Fontelles
It is an honour to brief the Security Council on cooperation between the
European Union (EU) and the United Nations in the maintenance of international
peace and security. I congratulate Estonia on its presidency of the Council.
The outbreak of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is a test of our humanity,
but also of the multilateral system itself. This crisis demonstrates that global
challenges require collective action. COVID-19 and climate change are not problems
that any one country alone can solve. The rules-based international order, with the
United Nations at its core, must therefore be upheld and strengthened. There is no
other option.
The pandemic is shaking the very foundation of our societies and exposing the
vulnerabilities of the most fragile countries. It risks unravelling progress in recent
years towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals and pushing millions
back into poverty. In addition, the pandemic can exacerbate existing conflicts and
generate new geopolitical tensions. That is why the European Union was one of
the earliest and strongest supporters of the Secretary-General’s call for a global
ceasefire. We regret that only a few countries — two out of 43, according to the
Armed Conflict Location and Event Data Project report — have seen a reduction
in violence.
We also support the appeal by High Commissioner for Human Rights Michele
Bachelet to ensure that sanctions do not hinder humanitarian aid, as is currently the
case for the EU. At a time of global crisis, we need a Council that can make critical
decisions, not one that is paralysed by vetoes and political infighting.
The EU is doing what it takes to combat the coronavirus crisis. We know our
battle at home can succeed only if we defeat the virus around the world. That is why
the EU, its member States and European financial institutions pooled resources to
fund a €23 billion Team Europe package to support partner countries and the most
vulnerable. We fully agree with Secretary-General Guterres that socioeconomic
recovery packages must aim to build back better by investing in sustainable and
resilient societies.
In these troubled times, emergency measures are necessary, but they must be
proportionate, temporary and in compliance with the rule of law and international
obligations. Respect for human rights remains essential, especially for the
most vulnerable.
Even as others back away, the EU remains a staunch supporter of a strong
United Nations as the beating heart of the multilateral system. Secretary-General
Guterres is right to say that multilateralism is under threat precisely when we need
it most. We therefore support his efforts to advance the United Nations reform
process and to use the Organization’s seventy-fifth anniversary to work for a
rejuvenated United Nations. At a time of growing scepticism, we must demonstrate
the Organization’s added value and relevance. This is why the EU and its member
States support United Nations reform and are the largest financial contributors to the
United Nations system. We pay our dues in full and on time.
In the area of peace and security, the EU is also a generous, reliable partner. All
17 EU crisis management missions and operations cooperate closely with members
of the United Nations family. Indeed, 11 of those EU missions and operations are
located in the same area as a United Nations mission. In some cases we even share
barracks and camps.
2/21

20-07393

S/2020/489

We know that women play a crucial role in securing peace and security, and
we need to promote their role and contribution. That was the central reason for the
adoption, 20 years ago, of groundbreaking resolution 1325 (2000). We have made
progress since, but much work remains to achieve gender equality and women’s
empowerment. Let us therefore pursue this agenda with determination.
Africa is our sister continent and a major strategic priority for the EU. From
the Sahel to the Horn of Africa, from the Central African Republic to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the European Union is actively backing political processes,
providing financial support and contributing to peacebuilding, stabilization and
development. In that regard, we have but one motto: African solutions to African
problems. We work very closely with the African Union (AU), including Mr. Smaїl
Chergui, African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security. Nevertheless, we
cannot do all the work for our partners. Instead, we are supporting their efforts.
Today I would like to focus on the Sahel. It is a test case, with all the elements
of the modern foreign policy agenda at play. Security, extremism and terrorism,
governance, sustainable development, migration and climate change are all driving
the conflict dynamics and explain why we need an integrated approach.
Since 2014, the EU and its member States have provided massive financial
support — a total of €8,5 billion — to the Sahel region. The EU recently broadened
the scope of its work and has three missions deployed to help develop the capacities
of the military and security forces of the region. But the hard truth is that the situation
in the Sahel keeps deteriorating at an alarming pace. A total of 4,000 lives were lost
to terrorist attacks this year alone, there are 800,000 displaced persons in Burkina
Faso — seven times more than in February 2019 — and around 50 million people are
at risk of food insecurity due to terrorism and COVID-19.
We must therefore be ready to do more and better, which is what we — together
with the Group of Five for the Sahel and the AU — are doing. The same is true with
regard to the Horn of Africa, where EU cooperation with the AU and the United
Nations is also crucial. Our analysis of the situation is the same. Our commitment to
work jointly is strong. Together with our partners, we must stay the course.
Libya is a major crisis right on the European Union’s doorstep. We have
seen the absurd situation of fighters wearing masks to protect themselves against
COVID-19 while exchanging fire. The EU is working hard to create conditions for
a ceasefire; it is not easy and there are many agendas at play. There is no alternative
to an inclusive political solution. But in order to find a political solution, we need to
stop the flows of weapons into Libya and create a space for real dialogue.
With that objective in mind, we have launched the new European Union Naval
Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI. Its core task is to implement the United
Nations arms embargo through naval, aerial and satellite assets. Operation IRINI
builds on the achievements of Operation Sophia, which so far has been the only
operation actively implementing the United Nations arms embargo and reporting
back to the Organization.
Although it began its sea activities only a few weeks ago, Operation IRINI
has already proven its added value by sharing valuable information with the Panel
of Experts on Libya established pursuant to Security Council resolution 1973 (2011)
and by serving as a deterrent for oil smuggling. It is critical that the Council renew
the resolution authorizing inspections on the high seas.
We know that the broader Middle East has a major impact on European and
global security. We need to adopt an approach that addresses individual conflicts and
crises, including Yemen and the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, where unilateral action
20-073933/21

S/2020/489

could threaten the stability of the entire region and where the EU remains ready
to work with both parties and its partners on a solution based on internationally
recognized parameters.
We must also recognize the interconnected nature of the region’s conflict
dynamics. To that end, we must continue long-term efforts to achieve a genuine
regional, cooperative security framework.
In Syria, the situation in Idlib remains fragile. The ceasefire must continue to
hold and must extend all across Syria, in line with Special Envoy Pedersen’s appeal. It
is imperative that the Council renew the authorization of cross-border humanitarian
operations and deliveries into north-west Syria. I appeal to the Council to not play
political games with the lives of the Syrian people. Have they not suffered enough?
The fourth Brussels Conference on Supporting the Future of Syria and the
Region, to be held on 29 and 30 June, will be an opportunity to show our continued
support to the Syrian people. The humanitarian needs are enormous. We must
therefore maintain the same pledge level as that of previous years. The conference
will also aim to consolidate international backing for a political solution to the crisis
that is in keeping with resolution 2254 (2015).
Let me reiterate the enduring importance of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA) with Iran. It remains essential to ensure the peaceful nature of the
Iranian nuclear programme. This is why I regret yesterday’s decision by the United
States to not prolong the waivers for the JCPOA-related nuclear projects.
Finally, I will touch upon Europe itself, including the Western Balkans. Our
overall goal is to see the whole region advance on the path of reform, reconciliation
and integration into the EU. I recently appointed Miroslav Lajčák as EU Special
Representative for the Belgrade-Pristina Dialogue, which remains one of my
top priorities.
Staying on the topic of Europe, I would like to mention Ukraine, where Russia’s
illegal annexation of the Crimean peninsula and the unfulfilled Minsk commitments
have resulted in a major disruption in EU-Russia relations.
Respect for the national sovereignty and territorial integrity of countries
remains a key elements of the EU’s relationship with its Eastern partners. The
principles enshrined in Helsinki cannot be forgotten if we are to achieve a cooperative,
more secure and cohesive European continent.
I now turn to Venezuela, nestled in a continent close to my heart. There, the
political crisis, compounded by measures related to COVID-19, has turned into a
catastrophic economic and humanitarian emergency, affecting the stability of the
whole region.
Earlier this week, we mobilized €2.5 billion, with €595 million in grants
at a pledging event hosted by the EU and Spain to step up emergency assistance,
including to the displaced population in the region.
Finally, turning to very recent developments, I must express deep concern
about steps taken by China with regard to national security legislation in Hong
Kong. Such actions are not in keeping with international commitments or the basic
laws of Hong Kong.
There are many other specific situations I could mention. But allow me instead
to close with some broader, more strategic reflections.
The COVID-19 crisis has laid bare the fragility of a hyperglobalized and
interdependent world. We must learn the broader lessons and truly understand the
4/21

20-07393

S/2020/489

link between human and planetary health, and how existing inequalities are making
us more vulnerable.
If we want to build back better, we must recommit to the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change. The EU is
doing its part, and we count on others to also meet their obligations.
We also know that climate change is affecting global security by acting as a
threat multiplier. That is why we fully support Germany’s efforts to put the climate
and security nexus on the Council’s agenda.
My main message today is that the EU remains deeply attached to the rulesbased international order, to multilateralism and to the United Nations. We support
the United Nations, not only through words — although they do matter — but
through concrete actions and contributions across the three pillars of the United
Nations, especially peace and security.
We believe in multilateralism, which is precisely why we want the Security
Council to be able to act. All States should uphold the founding values of the
United Nations, starting with those bearing the special responsibilities of Council
membership. Multilateralism must deliver results for the people who need it most.
Otherwise, it loses legitimacy while unilateralism and power politics gain the
upper hand.
The world needs a revitalized multilateral system. But that will happen only
if we all invest in it, as the EU is doing. We count on those who sit on the Council
to do their part.

20-073935/21

S/2020/489

Annex II
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Belgium to the
United Nations, Marc Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Belgium welcomes this discussion in the Council on United Nations and
European Union (EU) cooperation. I would like to thank EU High Representative
Borrell for his excellent statement.
The EU and the United Nations share a goal of achieving an international
rules-based order with democracy, the rule of law and human rights at its core.
They are therefore natural partners in the search for sustainable solutions to global
challenges. Let me highlight some examples of how the United Nations and the EU
have joined forces to achieve lasting impact worldwide.
Turning first to the coronavirus pandemic, the EU launched Team Europe
with a financial package of more than €20 billion to help partner countries in the
fight against the coronavirus. The EU also strongly supports the Secretary-General’s
appeal for an immediate global ceasefire.
With regard to Syria, a conflict that remains high on the Council’s agenda, the
EU is the largest donor of humanitarian aid. In that respect, I am pleased to confirm
that next month we will host the fourth Brussels donor conference on Syria. We
underline that it is critical to find a political solution that is fully in keeping with
resolution 2254 (2015).
Turning to Iran, the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action constitutes a significant
and unique achievement of sustained multilateral diplomacy. It is a cornerstone of
the global non-proliferation architecture and an example of cooperation between the
EU and the United Nations. We stress the importance of keeping this vital agreement
in place through direct dialogue. We also regret the recent announcement by the
United States of America that nuclear-related waivers will not be renewed.
The launch of the new European Union Naval Force Mediterranean Operation
IRINI is the EU’s latest contribution to the implementation of the United Nations
arms embargo on Libya.
In the Sahel, the EU has a vibrant partnership with the Group of Five for the
Sahel. I would like to flag the unique and innovative arrangement in which the EU
reimburses actions performed by the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali in support of the Joint Force, even if it is a small part
of the vast support the EU is giving to the region. Furthermore, the European Union
capacity-building and training missions in the Niger and Mali have been expanded
to reach the entire region in order to train security forces and support the national
security sector reform agendas.
I would like to underline the role being played by the EU-led Operation
Althea for the provision of a secure environment in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
contribution of the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo to the rule of
law there.
Respect for human rights and international humanitarian law, including the
protection of children, is an important cornerstone of the partnership between the
United Nations and the EU. Currently, it is more crucial than ever for warring parties
to comply with international humanitarian law and guarantee unimpeded access for
humanitarian aid. I would also like to highlight the importance of upholding the
women and peace and security agenda, in particular with regard to the meaningful
participation of women in peace operations at all levels and in all areas of expertise.

6/21

20-07393

S/2020/489

The importance the EU and its member States attach to multilateral cooperation
and the United Nations is reflected by their financial backing: they are the singlelargest contributor to the United Nations system, making up around 30 per cent of
the peacekeeping budget. The EU is also the largest donor in terms of development
and humanitarian assistance. In addition, in collaboration with the United Nations,
the EU is pioneering the fight against climate change. Next to its own mitigation
efforts, the EU is the largest provider of international climate financing.
Looking ahead, it is important to pursue further partnerships, such as with
the African Union and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
Hopefully, the long-standing collaboration among the EU, the United Nations and
the African Union can be further expanded in future.

20-073937/21

S/2020/489

Annex III
Statement by the Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Zhang Jun
The European Union (EU) is the world’s largest regional integration
organization and an important partner of the United Nations and its Security
Council. China welcomes the efforts made by the European Union in maintaining
international peace and security.
As the world of today is undergoing profound changes, it is faced with growing
uncertainties and challenges. China supports the United Nations and its Security
Council in deepening their cooperation with the EU, in accordance with Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. Against this backdrop, the United Nations
and the EU should work closer on the following areas.
First, they should deepen their collaboration in order to firmly uphold
multilateralism. Multilateralism is a collective choice made by humankind to avoid
the cost of a world war. The founding and development of the United Nations and
the EU are examples of multilateralism. As unilateralism and populism are on the
rise, the United Nations and the EU need to jointly uphold multilateralism and
build a community of shared future, through promoting mutual trust, shouldering
responsibilities, ensuring equality and seeking win-win cooperation.
Secondly, the United Nations and the EU should work for a more secure global
environment. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic proves once again that
all countries are connected and interdependent. Facing every sort of complex and
severe risk and challenge, no country can stand alone. The United Nations and the EU
need to uphold the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter and jointly
promote global security governance in order to achieve common, comprehensive,
cooperative and sustainable security. We must stick to the peaceful settlement of
disputes through such diplomatic means as dialogue, consultation, good offices and
mediation, and we must respect the sovereign equality of all countries and their right
to independently choose their development paths.
Thirdly, the United Nations and the EU should actively promote sustainable
development. With its advanced economic development, the EU can work with the
United Nations to provide greater financial and technical support to developing
countries based on their needs, help them achieve the 2030 Sustainable Development
Goals, eliminate the root causes of conflicts and achieve sustained peace through
sustainable development.
China has always attached great importance to its relations with the EU. We
support the European integration process and are happy to see a united, stable and
prosperous Europe. This year marks the forty-fifth anniversary of the establishment
of diplomatic ties between China and the EU. We are ready to further deepen mutual
trust with the EU, enhance cooperation in the United Nations and other multilateral
forums and jointly make new contributions to world peace, stability and prosperity.
COVID-19 has taken a heavy toll both in China and many European countries.
Our European friends reached out to us with a helping hand, and we returned the
favour with medical and technical assistance as early as we could. We are ready
to work with the EU in fighting this battle together, and are firmly supporting the
United Nations and World Health Organization in playing a leading role. We will
join hands with European countries to continue to provide greater assistance to
regions and countries in need.

8/21

20-07393

S/2020/489

Annex IV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations, Nicolas de Rivière
Let me first thank the High Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, Mr. Josep Borrell, for his briefing.
The European Union (EU) and the United Nations share the same conviction
that cooperation among nations is the only possible way to meet common challenges.
Over almost 70 years of shared history, this conviction has been translated into a
multitude of concrete forms of cooperation and action.
With the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the world today is
facing an unprecedented challenge. The European Union has already demonstrated
its solidarity with the rest of the world in its mobilization against the virus. France
advocated strongly that sub-Saharan Africa should be viewed as a priority region in
the European response.
More than ever, we are convinced of our common obligation to, and interest
in, coordinating our actions under the leadership of the United Nations. In this
regard, the European Union has given clear support to the Secretary-General’s
call for a comprehensive ceasefire. Accordingly, France once again calls on all
Security Council members to live up to their responsibilities and adopt a resolution
establishing a cessation of hostilities and a humanitarian pause for all the situations
on the Council’s agenda.
Furthermore, the EU initiative of establishing a humanitarian air bridge
contributes to the United Nations efforts aimed at ensuring humanitarian access to
the most vulnerable countries, and it includes a strong focus on Africa. I want to
stress very clearly that European Union sanctions do not impede the fight against
the pandemic, as they include humanitarian derogations that allow for aid delivery.
In many crises, the European Union and the United Nations have demonstrated
the complementarity of their tools. Collectively, the EU is the leading financial
contributor to the United Nations. It is also the world’s leading donor of humanitarian
aid, while acting in close coordination with the United Nations. EU member States
are supporting peacekeeping operations in the context of the pandemic.
In the Sahel, the sharing of responsibilities between the EU, which trains the
local armies and local police, and the United Nations, which has a key role in the
peace process and protection of civilians, is a good one. The EU and the United
Nations also provide support to the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel.
In addition, EU member States have provided more than 1,000 peacekeepers to
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali.
Moreover, with regard to many other African crises, the trilateral cooperation
among the EU, the United Nations and the African Union is now a key instrument
for the prevention and resolution of conflicts and for the implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development.
I also wish to highlight the role that the EU is playing in the development and
implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) with respect to
Iran, which represents a key achievement of multilateral diplomacy. In that regard, I
would also like to echo the regret expressed by Mr. Borrell about the decision of the
United States not to renew the waivers for key JCPOA-related nuclear projects. The
JCPOA serves the non-proliferation interests of everyone and remains the best way
to ensure the exclusively peaceful nature of Iranian nuclear activities. This is why
we and the remaining participants in the JCPOA will continue to work towards its
preservation and full implementation.
20-073939/21

S/2020/489

In Syria, the EU is supporting the Syrian people through humanitarian aid
and stands ready to contribute to the funding of the reconstruction when a credible
political solution based on resolution 2254 (2015) is firmly under way.
With regard to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, the EU has voiced its strong
attachment to the internationally agreed parameters of the two-State solution based
on the 1967 lines, with Jerusalem as the capital of both States. Annexation of parts
of the West Bank by the Israeli authorities would be a violation of international law;
it would also not be without consequences for the relationship between the EU and
its member States and Israel.
With a view to resolving the conflict in Libya, the European Union has
decided to deploy the European Union Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI
, which will notably monitor the violations of the arms embargo on the high seas and
therefore be the main contributor to the implementation of resolution 2292 (2016).
In the Western Balkans, the European Union is playing a leading role in
facilitating dialogue between Serbia and Kosovo and is deriving benefits from the
stabilization groundwork carried out by the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo.
The European Union and the United Nations are also joining forces to provide
responses to global challenges. In the area of climate change, the EU and the United
Nations are working together to achieve the goals of the Paris Agreement and will
continue to raise their ambitions ahead of the twenty-sixth Conference of the Parties
to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. With regard to
biodiversity, the EU is one of the most ambitious players in the field, calling for
support of the United Nations in the preservation of marine wildlife and resources.
With regard to health, the EU is strongly committed to supporting a global
and effective response to the COVID-19 crisis and other potential crises to come.
Within the framework of the World Health Organization, the EU will push for a
renovated and more efficient multilateral health system.
The synergies between the EU and the United Nations in promoting and
protecting universal human rights and fundamental freedoms are essential. The EU
fully supports the action of the Secretary-General and all relevant United Nations
agencies in this regard. The EU and its member States will continue to promote the
highest standards when it comes to human rights across the United Nations system,
including in the Security Council. When it comes to gender equality and women’s
rights, we will continue to support the Secretary-General’s call to “push back against
the pushback”.
The EU and the United Nations share common values and promote the same
agenda for all the foregoing highly critical global challenges. It is in our mutual
interest that we cooperate more closely for the benefit of the entire international
community. In this regard, France supports greater interaction between the EU and the
United Nations and a stronger presence of the EU within the United Nations system.
The members of the European Union are not only the largest contributors to
the United Nations budget and firm supporters of the modernization efforts that have
been initiated, but together with the EU, EU member States are working concretely
in conjunction with the Organization in all areas of crisis to facilitate political
dialogue, maintain and build peace, and assist civilian populations. In this way, we
are contributing to building a strong and living multilateralism, which is the only
way to establish a stable and secure international order.

10/21

20-07393

S/2020/489

Annex V
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Germany to the
United Nations, Christoph Heusgen
I welcome Mr. Josep Borrell to the Security Council. To see him in the Council
triggers a bit of emotion for me because I had the pleasure of working for his first
predecessor, his countryman Javier Solana, between 1999 and 2005, as the head of
the policy unit. It was wonderful to work for the European Union (EU). Let me say
that I subscribe to everything that Mr. Borrell said in his briefing.
In his statement, José Singer Weisinger, Special Envoy to the Security Council
of the Dominican Republic, mentioned the Schuman Declaration, which was one
of the key moments of European unification after the Second World War. To see
where we stand today in Europe, 75 years after the Second World War, we have
to go back to 1870. In the 75 years between 1870 and 1945, there were three major
wars in Europe, two of which were world wars. The time since 1945 has been the
most peaceful period in European history. The European Union is therefore a truly
historic achievement.
The European Union was made strong by the rule of law and the strength
of the rule of law, not by the law of the strongest. Conflicts in Europe are resolved
peacefully at the European Court of Justice. This is how we want the United Nations
also to succeed. We are deeply convinced that the United Nations can achieve the
same results. What that means is that we actually do our job in the Security Council
to resolve conflicts through peaceful means and through respect for the rule of law,
the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
resolutions by the Security Council, which, according to the Charter, are legally
binding. It also means that we must respect the International Court of Justice, the
International Criminal Court, the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea, and
that we respect human rights.
Unfortunately, we have not yet fully achieved those goals, and we are in fact in
a very critical phase. Speakers before me mentioned that point. Russia’s invasion of
Ukraine in violation of the sovereignty of an independent country violates the United
Nations Charter and shows that the law of the strongest is still sometimes operative.
Unfortunately, over the last few years, we have seen a great deal of disrespect
for Security Council resolutions, particularly with regard to the Middle East
and Libya. As we discussed yesterday, countries flagrantly supply weapons and
mercenaries to Libya in violation of binding international law buttressed by Security
Council resolutions.
Let me now turn to one of the masterpieces of European diplomacy: the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) on nuclear proliferation. We greatly regret
that the United States has left the JCPOA. Furthermore, I would echo what Mr. Borrell
said with respect to regretting the non-renewal of the waivers for JCPOA-related
nuclear projects. Since the United States left the JCPOA, the region has not become
safer and the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons is not being more
closely observed. Violations of human rights and the rights of minorities persist. The
freedom of assembly and expression are being violated.
Similarly, when we look at Hong Kong, we see that the freedom of assembly,
the freedom of expression and the right to a democratic debate as guaranteed in the
Basic Law are now being put under pressure. We regret this.
Let me echo those who have discussed the participation of women: resolution
1325 (2000) still is not implemented.
20-0739311/21

S/2020/489

The EU is very interested in the United Nations and wants to strengthen
multilateralism and work together with other regional organizations. The European
Union and its member States are the strongest, largest and biggest supporters of the
United Nations when it comes to financial contributions. In the wake of coronavirus
disease, the biggest part of the socioeconomic package has been provided by the
European Union and its member States.
The close cooperation between the EU and the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations was also mentioned, and I would like to refer to what our colleague
from the Niger, speaking for the three African members and Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, said about the cooperation between the EU and the African Union. The
EU continues to be a very strong supporter, with three missions to support the Group
of Five for the Sahel.
Let me end by recalling what was said with regard to how we achieve peace
and security in the Sahel region. It is a matter of good governance, respect for
human rights and democracy. That is essential for peace and development. So, dear
colleagues, let us not use the Security Council for propaganda. Let us use the Security
Council to implement what is in the Charter and to work for the common good.

12/21

20-07393

S/2020/489

Annex VI
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Niger to the
United Nations
I have the honour to make this statement on behalf of the three African
members of the Council, namely, South Africa, Tunisia and the Niger, and of Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines.
Allow me first of all to thank Mr. Josep Borrell, High Representative of the
European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, for his comprehensive and
informative briefing.
Cooperation between the United Nations and the European Union in the area of
the maintenance of international peace and security, as envisaged in Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations, has for several years now been of great relevance.
Many modern threats to international peace and security, such as terrorism,
mass population displacement, climate change and health crises, such as the current
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, cannot be solved by individual States
but require collective action by the international community. In response to those
challenges, regional and subregional organizations play a crucial role in United
Nations efforts to ensure the collective security and development of Member States
by promoting better intergovernmental coordination.
Indeed, the COVID-19 pandemic the world is experiencing, which is
undermining the global health system and our common efforts to maintain
international peace and security, is proof of the relevance and necessity of
multilateralism and cooperation, not only among international organizations but also
between them and their member States. The value of collective action and solidarity
have emerged as the only way to deal with the pandemic and its irreversible impact
on socioeconomic sectors.
In Africa, that partnership manifests itself in the field of conflict resolution,
in political, technical and financial support and in European Union field missions
wherever a peace process or a peace and security operation is under way.
Thus, in Mali and the Sahel region, it supports the objectives and missions
of the United Nations, as defined in the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the
Sahel, through the action carried out by its training mission in Mali, in coordination
with the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali.
In Libya, the European Union is working closely with the United Nations, the League
of Arab States and the African Union to help Libyan actors make real progress
towards reconciliation through national dialogue and elections. We hope to see the
new European Union Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI contribute to the
fight against violations of the arms embargo on Libya and against the smuggling of
migrants in the Mediterranean Sea.
We also see the operational advantages for the African Union to play a more
active role in peace operations in a number of contexts, such as the African Union
Military Observer Mission and the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur. To that end, the three African members of the Council and Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines fully support the use of United Nations assessed contributions
for African Union peace support operations authorized by the Security Council.
In the Middle East, the European Union is firmly committed to comprehensive
peace and sustainable justice. Its essential contribution to the struggle and defeat
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in Iraq and Syria and to the IsraeliPalestinian peace process are worth mentioning.
20-0739313/21

S/2020/489

Cooperation between the United Nations and the European Union also
covers other areas of mutual interest. South Africa, Tunisia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines and the Niger recognize and support the role of both organizations in
strengthening the work of the United Nations in support of development cooperation
and the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms.
We also reaffirm our support for the European Union’s actions to protect
civilians in armed conflict, including its initiatives to protect women and children
affected by armed conflict, its commitment to the prevention and protection of
victims of sexual violence and its support for the crucial role played by women in all
peace and security initiatives, in particular those aimed at preventing, resolving and
mitigating the impact of conflict. The same applies to the partnership in the areas
of justice, the rule of law and respect for international law, which are essential to
promote the maintenance of peace, stability and development.
Since the European Union-African Union summit in Abidjan, a new approach
has been adopted that allows the two organizations to jointly define their priorities.
It is from that innovative approach that the United Nations-African-Union-European
Union trilateral group has emerged to address the dramatic situation of African
migrants in detention centres in Libya.
Regional organizations, such as the European Union, as well as the African
Union, the Arab League, the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) and the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), to name but a few, serve as bridges linking
global responses to the local contextual realities facing our regions. Regional and
subregional organizations are also the surest avenues for building national capacities
within States that meet international standards and obligations while respecting
cultures and realities on the ground. We are all witnessing the benefits of the African
Union’s operational guidance and policy frameworks in areas such as security sector
reform, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, and transitional justice
programmes, which are essential to building and maintaining peace.
The three African members and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines commend
the United Nations and the European Union for their continued support for the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action at a time when the integrity of the agreement is under
threat. The European Union’s role in the Iranian nuclear issue is a clear demonstration
of strong commitment to collective security based on a solid multilateral architecture
for non-proliferation and disarmament.
In conclusion, the three African members and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
strongly believe that, if we are to achieve a more peaceful and prosperous world for
all countries and peoples, the United Nations must explore new partnerships with
regional bodies, such as the Eurasian Economic Union, the Collective Security Treaty
Organization and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, and deepen existing
partnerships with the European Union, the African Union, CARICOM and ASEAN.

14/21

20-07393

S/2020/489

Annex VII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Vassily Nebenzia
We welcome the participation in the discussion with the Security Council of
the High Representative of the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, Mr. Josep Borrell, and took note of his remarks.
We completely concur with the task of strengthening multilateralism
in international affairs promoted by our European Union (EU) partners. We are
convinced that true multilateralism can succeed only with a central role for the
United Nations and through clear support for the Charter of the United Nations
and international law. We believe that there should be no ambiguity about that, and
therefore make a clear distinction between international law and the so-called rulesbased order promoted by many EU countries, which can be easily tweaked or even
hijacked by a closed circle of like-minded States to serve their collective interests
and not those of the international community as a whole. We hope that we are on the
same page with our EU partners when we discuss multilateralism.
The EU continues to be an important international actor that is very visible
from political and economic perspectives alike. That implies huge responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security. Even after Brexit, the EU
is well represented in the Security Council and has all the necessary tools and
means to influence the international agenda. We continue to count on our European
colleagues to address together the challenges of our times, from the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic to the peaceful resolution of various conflict
situations in the world. We all expect the EU to be an unbiased player, ready to help
and facilitate, and not to impose its agenda or conditions on those countries and
regions that need its help. We hope that our European partners will adhere to such an
approach, permitting us to work together in different country situations.
The Russian Federation has always advocated for developing and improving
cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations
in line with Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter. During our presidency of
the Security Council in September 2019, we initiated a discussion on cooperation
between the United Nations, the Collective Security Treaty Organization, the
Commonwealth of Independent States and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
(see S/PV.8626). Cooperation with them, as well as with the European Union and
other regional organizations, should be balanced and based upon the United Nations
Charter. One of the main priorities for such cooperation is collective response to
transborder crimes, first and foremost in the sphere of counter-terrorism. Russia is
ready to promote such cooperation.
I would stress specifically the global fight against the COVID-19 pandemic,
which we are waging together, individually and in coordination with United Nations
partners and structures, first and foremost the World Health Organization. That
being said, we regret to see that the EU still applies multiple restrictive and coercive
mechanisms. We repeatedly heard assurances from Brussels and other European
capitals that those mechanisms were targeted and carefully calibrated. However,
practice has proved the opposite: in reality, the application of such measures
considerably undermines the socioeconomic situation in the affected developing
countries, thus seriously reducing the living standards of innocent people. The
relevant appeal of the Secretary-General, issued at the beginning of the pandemic,
is a good signal to that end. We call on the EU to reverse its policies on sanctions,
reach out to the population of the countries in question and refrain from punitive and
coercive measures adopted beyond and outside the scope of the Security Council.
20-0739315/21

S/2020/489

The EU is expected to play a stabilizing role in the wider Europe, from
the Balkans and the Mediterranean to its eastern periphery. To live up to those
expectations, the EU should adhere to the principles of international law and refrain
from interfering in the internal affairs of its neighbours. We regret to recall that it
was the EU’s Eastern Partnership programme that led to widened divides in Europe,
triggered and detonated the so-called Maidan Revolution in Kyiv and led to ongoing
civil conflict in Ukraine. We expect Brussels not to cheapen European values
and principles when dealing with flagrant violations of the rights of the Russianspeaking population in Ukraine and some Member States, namely the Baltic States,
who continue to face discrimination and abuses. We also urge the EU not to turn a
blind eye to the rise of nationalism, far right and neo-Nazi movements in Ukraine,
xenophobia and anti-Semitism.
Today we heard appeals for dialogue from some EU members. But when it
comes to frank dialogue and to taking our concerns on board, somehow that does
not materialize.
We took note of the EU decision to launch the European Union Naval Force
Mediterranean Operation IRINI with the declared aim of supporting the United
Nations arms embargo on Libya. We expect the Operation to fully comply with
international law, resolution 2292 (2016) and its operational zone covering the
length of the Libyan coast. Any imbalance on such a delicate issue could undermine
international efforts to establish dialogue between the opposing Libyan parties.
Brussels should not be avoiding contact with any of the parties to the conflict either.
We will have to take all those factors into account when the time comes in June to
take a decision on extending the inspection regime on the high seas off Libya.
In conclusion, I want to reiterate that we value positive examples of cooperation
between Russia and the European Union at the United Nations. I am referring to the
situation with the Iranian nuclear programme, the Middle East settlement, the fight
against piracy off the coast of Somalia and the training of national security forces in
the Central African Republic, to name a few. I would specifically highlight the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action, which is currently facing tremendous challenges as a
result of the totally irresponsible behaviour of certain actors. We need to be firm in
defending what we have achieved.
I want to stress once again that the Russian Federation stands ready for and
would prefer to see full-fledged cooperation with the European Union. But that is
possible only on an equitable basis, when all interests and concerns are mutually
taken into account. We are ready for it and believe that the whole world would benefit
from such cooperation.

16/21

20-07393

S/2020/489

Annex VIII
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations, Jonathan Allen
Let me also welcome High Representative Borrell today and thank him for
what was a wide-ranging intervention. I will try to respond to some, if not all, of the
issues he raised.
The United Kingdom left the European Union (EU) on 31 January. We
continue to work closely with our European partners, and our outlook will always
be global. We recognize the mutual benefits of international cooperation across all
areas of the United Nations cross-cutting work to promote international peace and
security, sustainable development and human rights.
As the world grapples with coronavirus disease (COVID-19), it is clear
that pandemics do not respect borders. Saving lives around the world requires a
coordinated international response. To deliver a robust global response, we must all
continue to support the international system and the values and rules that underpin
it. Tackling this pandemic and its grave effects on our shared parity and stability
requires enhanced trust in national Governments, in international cooperation and
in international agreements.
High Representative Borrell and other speakers have raised the situation in
Hong Kong. The United Kingdom is deeply troubled by the decision of the National
People’s Congress of China to impose national security legislation on the people
of Hong Kong. If China follows through on this decision, it would clearly violate
Hong Kong’s high degree of autonomy and freedoms, as enshrined in the United
Kingdom-China Joint Declaration. I would like to draw the attention of all Council
members to the joint statement that Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab issued earlier
today with his United States, Canadian and Australian counterparts, which sets out
our concerns in more detail. We hope that China will now pause to reconsider, take
steps to rebuild trust and heal divisions across Hong Kong society and live up to its
responsibilities and obligations as a leading member of the international community.
In the meantime, the United Kingdom will remain in close contact with all our
international partners about the next steps.
To end the COVID-19 pandemic, we need to work with all our international
partners, including the EU and the United Nations. International collaboration keeps
supply chains functioning, supports finding and distributing a vaccine and guides
the vital health, humanitarian and development operations of United Nations funds,
programmes and agencies in the field. Demands on them will only grow as the
crisis deepens. Our response must include supporting the most vulnerable countries,
particularly those directly affected by ongoing conflict. In that regard, we welcome
the role of the African Union (AU) in the cooperative relationship among the EU, the
United Nations and the AU in supporting African leadership in States and regions
affected by conflict. As part of our global efforts to tackle the virus, the United
Kingdom will make a direct contribution of almost $25 million to the AU’s Africa
anti-COVID-19 fund to help efforts to slow the spread of the virus on the continent
and to save lives.
We must ensure we make a green, clean recovery from COVID-19 in order
to meet the challenge of climate change and ensure an ambitious, successful and
inclusive twenty-sixth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP 26). As President of COP 26, the
United Kingdom looks forward to working with the United Nations and the EU to
deliver the ambitious outcome the world so urgently needs. We consider our European
20-0739317/21

S/2020/489

partners as close allies in combating climate change and in leading the world in low
carbon transition.
Some colleagues have mentioned sanctions. Let me simply say that sanctions
are a targeted foreign policy tool used as part of a comprehensive and proportionate
strategy, with careful exemptions for humanitarian activity. The United Kingdom
strongly supported EU sanctions as a member of the European Union and now
continues to implement them nationally for the duration of the transition period.
Turning to some of the other points raised by the High Representative, on the
Western Balkans we join international partners in supporting the goal of a stable
region, continuing its progress towards Euro-Atlantic integration. We welcome the
decision to open EU accession negotiations with Albania and North Macedonia, the
political agreements in Bosnia and Herzegovina to work on the EU opinion, and
efforts to normalize the relationship between Serbia and Kosovo through the EUfacilitated dialogue. NATO remains the cornerstone of Europe’s collective defence,
and we were pleased to welcome North Macedonia to the alliance earlier this year.
Turning to Ukraine, the United Kingdom will continue to work with the
European Union and other partners in support of international law and the wider
rules-based international system to defend Ukraine’s territorial integrity. Alongside
our international partners, we will continue to make clear to Russia that we do not, and
will not, accept its illegal annexation of Crimea and Sevastopol. We also underline
our support for efforts through the Normandy process to facilitate a negotiated end
to the conflict in eastern Ukraine and for the work of the Trilateral Contact Group.
The High Representative mentioned the work of the European Union in Libya.
The EU and the United Kingdom have continued to work closely on Libya, including
through engagement with the Berlin process. We look forward to further cooperation
with our European partners to urge the Libyan parties and their backers to de-escalate,
commit to a lasting ceasefire, ensure unconditional access for humanitarian aid and
return to the United Nations-led process. We support efforts to enforce the United
Nations arms embargo led through the European Union Naval Force Mediterranean
Operation IRINI, and we recall that the tragic loss of life in the Mediterranean
continues to be a matter of deep regret.
On Iran, we are working urgently with all parties to use the dispute-resolution
mechanism to find a way forward on the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action. We
regard the agreement, which was the product of many years of painstaking diplomacy,
as a vital instrument in neutralizing the threat of a nuclear-armed Iran. We thank the
European Union for its ongoing role as coordinator. I want to acknowledge the points
made by the High Representative and my E-3 colleagues, France and Germany, on the
United States decision not to renew nuclear waivers, and I underline the importance
of continued engagement on the way forward. While we recognize the agreement’s
limitations, we continue to work closely with the remaining parties to the deal to
find a diplomatic way forward. We have always been clear over our concerns about
Iran’s destabilizing behaviour, including in Yemen, and are consulting partners on
the broader implications of the expiry of the arms embargo in October 2012.
Finally, we know that EU-United Nations cooperation can be particularly
effective in the field of peacekeeping. Collaboration through training, partnerships
and complementary security initiatives can multiply efforts to further stability,
allowing different actors to play distinct but supporting roles. In the Sahel, for
example, we value the work of the EU training mission in its efforts to train the
Malian armed forces, to which the United Kingdom continues to provide support. We
are proud to be partnering with France in Operation Barkhane and to be deploying
a 250-strong military contingent to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
18/21

20-07393

S/2020/489

Stabilization Mission in Mali later this year. This will provide situational awareness
and information provision for the benefit of all international actors on the ground.
An effective United Nations that is able to tackle so many global challenges is
in the interests of us all. The United Kingdom will continue to work constructively
with the European Union and all other United Nations Members to achieve this.

20-0739319/21

S/2020/489

Annex IX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Kelly Craft
I thank European Union (EU) High Representative Borrell for his remarks and
for joining us today. As the world grapples with the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
crisis, increased cooperation between the United Nations and the EU takes on a
heightened importance to ensure effective joint approaches to the current pandemic
and other crises we face.
Whether it is coordination between the United Nations and the EU in Europe,
the Middle East, Africa or Asia, the United States is deeply appreciative of the EU’s
efforts to promote peace, security and human rights in its own neighbourhood and
around the world. The United States welcomes expanded cooperation between the
United Nations and the EU, and we are hopeful that the strong, invaluable transatlantic
relationship between the United States and the EU provides a useful model to follow.
The strength of the relationship between the United States and the EU is
demonstrated by our cooperation on Ukraine. Ukraine is at an important point
in its history, striving to strengthen its democratic institutions, enact needed
reforms and deepen its Euro-Atlantic integration, while defending itself against
Russian aggression and malign cyberactivity. United States-EU cooperation is
critical to countering a Russian disinformation campaign designed to normalize
Moscow’s continued occupation of Ukraine’s Crimean peninsula and aggression in
eastern Ukraine.
The Trump Administration appreciates the EU’s cooperation on joint sanctions
actions against Russia. We share the EU’s conviction that we must continue to impose
costs on Russia until Ukraine has regained full control of all its territory. United
Nations Member States must remain firmly committed to Ukraine’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity.
The United States looks forward to continued cooperation with the EU on
holding the Iranian regime to account for the full range of its malign activities. We are
committed to maintaining restrictions on Iran’s ability to buy and sell conventional
weapons and to seeking to establish a new sanctions regime to take effect following
the expiration of the existing arms restrictions this October. We strongly urge the
Council’s support.
Cooperation between the United States and the EU on Syria is essential to
finding a political solution, in line with resolution 2254 (2015). The EU is a critical
ally in maintaining the position that there should be no reconstruction assistance
flowing to the Al-Assad regime or diplomatic normalization with the regime until
the violence ends and there is irreversible progress on resolution 2254 (2015). We
appreciate the EU’s efforts to closely coordinate our policies and synchronize further
steps commensurate with the political process.
We are also grateful to the EU for its humanitarian assistance and support for
stabilization programmes in north-east Syria. We must work together to ensure that
humanitarian aid reaches those who need it the most through the most efficient and
effective channels. The Council must renew resolution 2504 (2020) at the earliest
possible date, in the light of both the humanitarian and the COVID-19 crises. We
note the EU’s continued leadership in providing for the most vulnerable, and we
welcome the EU hosting a fourth pledging conference on Syria on 30 June.
The United States appreciates the significant contributions of the EU to
the Global Coalition to Defeat ISIS, which has been extraordinarily successful in
maintaining the hard-fought gains against the Islamic State of Iraq and the Sham
20/21

20-07393

S/2020/489

(ISIS) in Iraq and Syria. We look forward to continued cooperation to ensure the
enduring defeat of ISIS. We are also grateful for the EU’s close cooperation in Iraq.
Much like the Coalition to Defeat ISIS, the EU Advisory Mission provides vital
training to Iraqi security institutions.
In Libya, a United Nations-facilitated political solution is the only path to
long-term stability. External actors must stop fuelling the conflict. All United
Nations Member States must comply with the arms embargo, including by ceasing
all support for Libyan factions and withdrawing all mercenary personnel. Bringing
stability to Libya will require a sustained effort by the United Nations and steadfast
support from the United States and the EU. We value the European Union Naval
Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI and its contributions to implementing the
arms embargo.
The United States commends the EU for its support of efforts to apply
diplomatic and economic pressure to the North Korean regime to bring about the
final, fully verified denuclearization of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
It is important that the international community send a strong, unified message that
North Korea should halt provocations, return to negotiations with the United States
and abide by its obligations under Security Council resolutions.
In Africa, the EU has played a key role in counter-terrorism, conflict
prevention, security assistance and peacebuilding. We are especially grateful for the
significant financial support the EU provides for peace and security initiatives in
Africa. Through its African Peace Facility, the EU has provided significant support
for African-led security initiatives, including sending troop stipends for the African
Union Mission in Somalia and reimbursements to the United Nations peacekeeping
mission in Mali for its support of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel.
The EU and its member States play an active role in building capacity in
the Sahel and in supporting important initiatives to strengthen international
coordination. We welcome the EU Emergency Trust Fund for Africa, which provided
over $5 billion in development and humanitarian assistance to 26 African countries
to address the sources of instability, forced displacement and irregular migration.
As Venezuela faces increasingly dire conditions, the illegitimate Maduro
regime is destroying the country’s economy, obstructing humanitarian assistance
and repressing democratic actors, including journalists and medical professionals
attempting to provide accurate information on COVID-19. United States-EU
coordination in support of democracy there is more vital than ever. We welcome the
EU and Spain co-hosting a donor conference on 26 May to bridge the humanitarian
gap for Venezuelan refugees and migrants across the region.
Our efforts have sought to increase international and public support for a
peaceful, political resolution and financial pressure against the illegitimate Maduro
regime. More recently, they have focused on increasing momentum around a
framework offering an equitable path to a transitional Government and free and
fair presidential elections. Maduro has already stated that the 2020 parliamentary
elections are not a priority during the COVID-19 crisis, but we must prevent all
efforts by him to stonewall this legitimate democratic process.
Due to these many examples, and many more, the United States affirms
unequivocally the EU’s importance as a partner in the maintenance of peace and
security around the world. We look forward to furthering our collaboration in the
months and years to come.

20-0739321/21
